AIMS Biophysics, 9( 3): – .
Abstract: New digital technologies , like in other fields, have revolutionized the health care field and
orthodontic practice in the 21st century . They can assist the health care professionals in working more
efficiently by saving time and improving patient care. Recent a dvances in artificial intelligence (AI)
and 3D printing technology are useful for improving diagnosis an d treatment planning, creating
algorithms and manufacturing customized orthodontic appliances. AI accomplishes the task of human
beings with the help of machines and technology . In orthodontics, AI -based models have been used
for diagnosis, treatment planning, clinical decision -making and prognosis prediction. It minimizes the
required workforce and speeds up the diagnosis and treatment procedure. In addition, the 3D printing
technology is used to fabricate study models, clear aligner models, surgical guides for inserting mini -
implants, clear aligners, lingual appliances, wires components for removable appliances and occlusal
splints . This paper is a review of the future and scope of AI and 3D printing technology in orthodontics.
Keywords: orthodontics ; artificial intelligence ; artificial neural network ; 3D printing
1. Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a general term coined during a Dartmouth summer research project .
AI is the study of an equipment/machine that senses its environment and takes measures to increase its
chances of reaching its object ives [2 ,3]. AI accomplishes the task of human beings with the help of
AIMS Biophysics Volume 9, Issue 3, – . machines and technology . AI is currently being applied in health care, the automobile industry,
economics, video games, smartphones, etc . .
Orthodontics is a branch of dentistry that focuses on diagnosing malocclusions and other
irregularities of the dentofacial region and preventing and correcting them. So, it deals with the
parameters applied to biological systems. AI applications such as ma chine learning, artificial neural
networks (ANNs), convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and deep learning (DL) are used for
diagnosis and treatment planning, the prognosis of malocclusion in orthodontics with high accuracy ,
and to reduce human error . In addition, AI can document and send data to clinicians faster and
more efficiently than humans .
Three -dimensional (3D) printing, which is also known as additive manufacturing (AM), is a
fabrication procedure that empowers the layer -by-layer development of 3D objects from the computer -
aided design (CAD) data . The final product is obtained by the union of multiple subunits , instead
of via the subtraction of the material. This concept helps lower the consumption of raw materia ls and
provide high -quality products . The advantages of AM include lower time cost , reduced
financial costs, less human interaction and the creation of a product with any complex shape . In
orthodontics, 3D printing technology is used to fabricate study models, clear al igner models, surgical
guides for inserting mini -implants, clear aligners, lingual appliances, wires components for removable
appliances and occlusal splints .
Digital technology, like as in other fields, has revolutionized the orthodontic practice of the 21st
century . With the advances in 3D imagin g techniques, 3D printing and AI technology , the orthodontist
can improve diagnosis and treatment planning , and create algorithms for the manufacture of
customized orthodontic appliances. This article is a review of the scope of AI and 3D printing
technology in orthodontics.
2. Artificial intelligenc e and its applications in orthodontics
AI is a science concerned with the computational understanding of intelligent behavior and
creati ng artifacts that demonstrate it. AI permits accurate patient examination, organization of the
clinical data and treatment planning [14,15 ]. AI technology works by imitating human intelligence
through a machine that can think and act rationally. Many subfields of AI that have been commonly
used in different areas, mainly biological and medical diagnostics, including machine learning , ANNs,
CNN s and DL . Some of these subfields of AI have been widely used in various sectors, primarily in
biological and medical diagnostics . Machine learning combines factual and probabilistic tools,
and the machines learn from past models and progress their activities when new information is
presented . ANNs are numerical computing models that can re -enact human brain processes and
accomplish different tasks like classification, estimation, design acknowledgment , picture
coordinat ion, chance forecas ting and memory simulation .
New digital technologies have revolutionized the orthodontic practice . They can assist the health
care professionals with working more efficiently by saving time and in improving patient care. AIbased models have been used in orthodontic diagnosis, treatment planning, clinical decision -making
and prognosis prediction . It minimizes the required human resources and speeds up the diagnosis and
treatment proce dure .
AIMS Biophysics Volume 9, Issue 3, – .
. Applications of AI in orthodontics .
. Literature showing the applications of AI in orthodontics .
Year Article Applications AI technology Reference
Artificial neural network
modeling for deciding if
extractions are necessary prior
to orthodontic treatment Extraction and
non-extraction
therapy in
orthodontics Machine learning through a 2 -
layer neural network
New approach for the
diagnosis of extractions with
neural network machine
learning Extraction and
non-extraction
therapy in
orthodontics Machine learning through a 2 -
layer neural network
Moving towards precision
orthodontics: an evolving
paradigm shift in the planning
and delivery of customized
orthodontic therapy Diagnosis and
treatment
planning Fuzzy logic software was used for
the diagnosis and treatment
planning
Use of automated learning
techniques for predicting
mandibular morphology in
skeletal classes I, II, and III Mandibular
morphology An ANN with unidirectional and
basic elements of support vector
regression and support vector
machines w ere used
Continued on next page
AIMS Biophysics Volume 9, Issue 3, – .
Year Article Applications AI technology Reference
Artificial intelligent model
with neural network machine
learning for the diagnosis of
orthognathic surgery Orthognathic
surgery Neural network machine learning
with various cephalometric
software programs
A computer -assisted
optimization approach for
orthognathic surgery planning Orthognathic
surgery Neural network machine learning
with various cephalometric
software programs
Facial attractiveness of cleft
patients: a direct comparison
between artificial -intelligence -
based scoring and conventional
rater groups Cleft patients
and facial
attractiveness An algorithm consisting of a face
detector and CNNs with visual
cortex/vision processing was used
Deep learning and artificial
intelligence for the
determination of the cervical
vertebra maturation degree
from lateral radiography Growth and
development
determination
using cervical
vertebrae CNN and ANN methods, models
and algorithms were used
Usage and comparison of
artificial intelligence
algorithms for determination of
growth and development by
cervical vertebrae stages in
orthodontics Growth and
development
determination
using cervical
vertebrae CNN and ANN with DL methods
were implemented
Minimally invasive approach
for diagnosing TMJ
osteoarthritis Temporomand
ibular
disorders Deep convoluted neural network
Compliance monitoring via a
Bluetooth -enabled retainer: a
prospective clinical pilot study Orthodontic
retention AI with micro -sensor scanning
was used
Automated detection of TMJ
osteoarthritis based on artificial
intelligence Temporomand
ibular
disorders AI with a region of interest
A review of the use of artificial
intelligence in orthodontics Diagnosis and
treatment
planning Fuzzy logic software was used for
the diagnosis and treatment
planning
Determination of growth and
development periods in
orthodontics with artificial
neural network Growth
prediction ANN models were based on
cervical vertebrae algorithms like
scaled conjugate gradient back
propagation and tan -sigmoid
transfer function
Orthodontic retention: What's
on the horizon? Orthodontic
retention Smartphone -enabled temperature
sensor was incorporated
AIMS Biophysics Volume 9, Issue 3, – . AI plays an important role in orthodontics, and it is thought to have the most promising future in
diagnosis and treatment planning. Hence, the present paper was purposed to review the following
applications of AI technology in orthodontics ( and ).
2.1. Diagnosis and treatment planning
Diagnos is and treatment planning in orthodontics involve the data obtained from clinical
examination s, photographs, radiographs and study models. All of these investigations involve operator
skills and patient cooperation. AI facilitates the preparation of patients ' diagnostic records and helps to
understand th e etiology of malocclusion . AI converts the patient information to suit a natural
language processing -based of AI system, which stores the patient data and problems list in the order
of their treatment priority . The AI -based treatment prioritization models can obtain highperformance feature vectors for a more precise treatment plan.
2.2. Cephalometric landmark identification and automated cephalometric tracing
Cephalometry is the measurement of facial and skull bones and the soft tissue profile, and it is
important for diagnosis and treatment planning in orthodontics. Cephalometric tracing can be done
manually or by using computer software . Manual cephalometric tracing is time -consuming ,
and there is a risk of human error in the landmark identification and measurement of the cephalometric
parameter s. The major errors in manual tracing tend to involve radiograph unpredictability in the
landmark identification and measurements . Using computers for cephalometric tracing helps
to save time by reducing manual errors and increasing the diagnostic value of the cephalome tric
analysis [ 42]. Existing literature shows that AI-based automated cephalometric tracing has a high
success rate (over 90%) when applied for the differential diagnosis of c ephalometric landmarks using
computerized cephalometric software and web-based software .
To overcome these human errors and increase time efficiency, AI can identify cephalometric
landmarks via a DL method. The You Only Look Once algorithm is an AI-based systems for
identifying cephalometric landmarks .
2.3. Extraction and non -extraction therapy in orthodontics
Orthodontic extraction is a major and important decision that significantly impact s the p rognosis
and outcome of the treatment . It is based on the orthodontist's clinical experience and expertise, and the
correctness of the diagnostic test results . AI technology based on an ANN algor ithm produced
impressive results, ranging from 80% to 92% accuracy, and it was prove d to b e a useful tool for extraction
decision -making. This can be additional support for clinicians wit h relatively less clinical experience .
Literature reviews showed that the success rate of the AI models was 93% for the diagnosis of extraction
or non -extraction therapy , and 84% for the selection of extraction pattern s .
2.4. Growth prediction
The growth and development rate of the face is important for achieving good orthodontic therapy ,
as they play a crucial role in the treatment of skeletal discrepancies associated with growth spurts and
AIMS Biophysics Volume 9, Issue 3, – . physiological facial growth . The ANN has been created to be comparable to the biological
structure of the huma n brain , and it mimics the way nerve cells work in the human brain. The hand -
wrist and lateral cephalometric radiographs (for cervical vertebrae) are commonly used to predict
growth and development . Using ANN algorithms, AI technology accurately determines the growth
and development rate based on hand -wrist radiogra phs and the cervical vertebrae.
2.5. Orthognathic surgery
AI has tremendous potential for application in the diagnosis of dentofacial deformities and
treatment plan ning of orthognathic surgeries. A CNN algorithm revealed that orthognathic surgery
significa ntly improved most patients' profiles and facial attractiveness . AI intervenes at various
levels to optimize the data acquisition, processing and pre -analysis of maxillofacial imagery . AI
syste ms facilitate diagnostic precision for orthognathic surgeries , treatment planning using 3D
models (3D printing of surgical splints ) and enhanced therapeutic follow -up and image
superimposition . The use of AI in intraoral scanner software allows faster and more efficient
data procurement , which results in higher -quality images with lower radiation and is thus beneficial
for the 3D reconstructions of images .
2.6. Cleft patients and facial attractiveness
Although AI has not been broadly connected to assessing facial attractiveness, it enables the
single -face image assessment of attractiveness based on the attractiveness of facial attributes and
combinations . Using a CNN trained on large data and mirro ring relevant opinions may be useful
for objectively and reproducibly interpreting facial appearance . One of the most obvious
advantages of a single AI -based score would be eliminating the variability and subjectivity associated
with flexible panel -based ratings . The AI -based results are comparable, but they require further
improvement and refinement to distinguish facial cleft features , which negatively impact the human
perception of attractiveness .
Machine learning algorithms are also used to build predictive models with single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs). SNPs are the most common type of genetic variation among people. Therefore,
machine learning methods such as the support vector machine, logistic regression, naive Bayesian
class ification , random forest s, the k-nearest neighbor method , decision trees and ANN -based
methods are used to evaluate the genetic risk assessment in cleft lip and palate etiology .
2.7. Mandibular morphology
The mandible plays a key role in deci sions for occlusion, treatment planning and growth
prediction applications in orthodontics because its morphology influences facial aesthetics. In addition,
identification of the mandibular morphology becomes important in forensic dentistry when a facial
reconstruction is performed, as in the case of a missing person whose mandibular bone has been lost .
In the absence of the mandible, AI has significant pot ential in mandibular prediction because ANN
can be used in the facial reconstruction .
AIMS Biophysics Volume 9, Issue 3, – . 2.8. Growth and development determination using cervical vertebrae
In orthodontics, the right treatment timing and jawbone growth and development are important for
successful treatment. The stages of growth can be studied by using the cervical vertebr a maturation (CVM)
stages . AI technology, such as CNN and DL methods, models and algorithm s, can be used to
determine CVM stages . AI algorithms such as k -nearest neighbors , naive Bayes, decision trees , ANN s,
support vector machine s, random forest s and logistic regression are available for CVM determinatio n .
2.9. Temporomandibular disorders
Temporomandibular joint (TMJ) disorders constitute the second -most common musculoskeletal
condition ; they cause pain and disability and affect approximately 5% to 12% of the population . Using a
deep neural network model, AI can aid in automatically detecting TMJ osteoarthritis (TMJOA) . It
might as well be used to help clinicians diagnose and decide on the trea tment of TMJOA . In the future,
an AI model that incorporates data other than images, such as signs, symptoms and patient demographic
data, would tremendously increase diagnostic accuracy . Furthermore, AI -based TMJ images shed
light on the clinical phe notypes of TMJOA and their possible links to etiologic factors such as
biomarkers, genetic variations and immunologic responses.
2.10. Orthodontic retention
After the active phase of orthodontic treatment, retainers are passive orthodontic appliances that
maintain and stabilize the position of teeth . AI can help with retention monitoring, the fabrication of
different types of retainer materials and the digital workflow to design customized retainers . AI-based
DentalMonitoring (Paris, France) software has been introduced to monitor the retention protocol ,
including factors such as stability, retainer adjustment problems and oral hygiene maintenance. This
softwar e makes use of intraoral photographs captured by patients' smartphones . This is useful for the
clinician, as it reduces the chair time and preferences for patients and motivat es patients to maintain
and follow the instructions on using the retainer .
Advances in digital technologies made it possible to fabricate retainers by using a digital
workflow . An intraoral scan of the dentition can be used to plan the customized nickel -titanium
retainer digitally . It is then precision -manufactured by using a CAD -Computer aided
manufacturing (CAM) process, ensuring a close fit to the palatal and lingual surfaces of the teeth .
The clear plastic retainers were fabricated using 3D -printed models created from intraoral scans, and
they are just as the accurate as retainers made using traditional impressions .
3. Three -dimensional printing and its applica tions in orthodontics
Three -dimensional printing technology , also known as AM, is constructed by the addition of a
material layer -by-layer in a specific pattern using a CAD/CAM design . Charles Hull
invented 3D printing , and the standard tessellation language (STL) , or stereolithography , is the most
commonly used file format for editing and preparing objects for 3D printing . Additive techniques
enable the creation of complex and difficult structures and geometries with undercu ts or hollows
that would be impossible to create using traditional methods .
AIMS Biophysics Volume 9, Issue 3, – .
. Applications of 3D printing technology in orthodonti cs.
. Literature showing the applications of 3D printing in orthodontics .
Year Article Applications 3D printing technology Reference
Customized brackets and arch
wires for lingual orthodontic
treatment Custom -made lingual
orthodontic brackets,
wires An optical 3D scanner
was used
Rapid prototyping as a tool
for diagnosis and treatment
planning for maxillary canine
impaction Maxillary canine
impaction diagnosis and
treatment planning Computed tomography
(CT) scanning with rapid
prototyping software to
construct 3D models was
used
Herbst appliance in lingual
orthodontics Custom -made l ingual
orthodontic brackets,
wires An optical 3D scanner
with STL was used
Bone anchor systems for
orthodontic application: a
systematic review Surgical guides for the
placement of
orthodontic mini -screws
and miniplates Stereolithography with
CAD/CAM drill guide
was used
A digital process for additive
manufacturing of occlusal
splints: a clinical pilot study Occlusal splints
A laser -based AM
technique was used
Virtual techniques for
designing and fabricating a
retainer Customized orthodontic
retainers DICOM images with
selective laser sintering
Developing customized
dental miniscrew surgical
template from thermoplastic
polymer material using image
superimposition, CAD
system, and 3D Printing Surgical guides for the
placement of
ortho dontic mini -screws
and miniplates Stereolithography with
CAD/CAM drill guide
was used
Continu ed on next page
AIMS Biophysics Volume 9, Issue 3, – .
Year Article Applications 3D printing technology Reference
Accuracy of digital light
processing printing of 3 -
dimensional dental models Orthodontic study
models 3D printing and liquid
polyjet photopolymer
were used
Evaluation of the
effectiveness of a tailored
mobile application in
increasing the duration of
wear of thermoplastic
retainers: a randomized
controlled trial Approaches to enhance
removable retainer wear A micro -electronic
sensor was used to
evaluate the w ear of the
clear plastic retainer
Removable retention:
enhancing adherence and the
remit of shared decision -
making Removable orthodontic
retainers Shared decision -making
and motivational
interviewing were used
for removable orthodontic
retainers
Advantages of 3D printing include accuracy, high -quality production, full integration with a
digital workflow (utilization of intraoral scanners and di gital models), reduced manufacturing costs,
ability to detect and repair scanned faults before model printing, smaller required manual workforce
and cost savings on materials. The disadvantages include a large required initial capital investment for the
purchase of the 3D printer and post -processing hardware, the need for staff training to master new skills,
the need to process the scan file and manipulate the digital models before printing, the post -print
washing and curing phases and the need for an updat e of health practices and the safety guidelines for
the handling and storage of new materials [ 72].
Advances in 3D printing technology have been explored for automobiles, aviation, aerospace,
science and medicine. Various materials, such as gypsum, metal a lloys, glass, carbon fiber, resins,
organic materials, living cells and tissues, can be used to print objects with 3D printers. Some of the
materials mentioned above have widespread applications in dentistry and orthodontics.
Three -dimensional printing app lications in orthodontics ( and ) include the
fabrication of diagnostic and working orthodontic study models, surgical templates and guides for the
placement of mini -implants, clear aligners and lingual appliances, as well as wire components for
removable appliances and occlusal splints [ 73].
3.1. Orthodontic study models
Three -dimensional printing can fabricate orthodontic study models owing to its accuracy,
visualization and accessibility . It can convert a digital, virtual dental model of a patient's
dentition into a physical model , skipping the conventional steps of imp ression -taking and model
casting . The 3D -printed models are useful for fabricating removable orthodontic appliances,
expansion appliances, indirect bonding trays and thermo plastic aligners .
3.2. Removable orthodontic appliances
Several removable orthodontic appliances and other appliances such as the activator and sleep
apnea devices are manufactured using 3D printing techno logy. With the advancement of 3D printing ,
AIMS Biophysics Volume 9, Issue 3, – . the Hawley retainer can be fabricated using an intraoral scanner, eliminating the need for conventional
impression -taking and pouring study model s . At present, 3D printing technology allows the
manufacture of wire components, such as labial bows and clasps, as well as the incorporation of these
parts into the base plate of the appliance. Another important use of 3D printing is the fabrication of
custom -made soft silicone removable appliances . Although the literature mentioned earlier and
appliances are only case reports, they demonstrate the potential of 3D printing applications in
orthodontics . The procedures described by the article authors must be evaluated, parti cularly regarding
costs, workflow, accuracy and clinical efficiency .
3.3. Maxillary canine impaction diagnosis and treatment planning
Maxillary canine impaction is one of the most common dental anomalies in orthodontic patients.
Identifying the correct loc ation and angulation is crucial for the success of treatment. The 3D printing
of an anatomical model created from computed tomography images of an impacted maxillary canine
allows clinicians to thoroughly assess and visualize the anatomy, localization of t he impacted tooth
and surgical exposure procedure of the impacted tooth
3.4. Custom -made lingual orthodontic brackets and wires
Lingual orthodontic brackets can be manufactured using 3D printing . The d igital design enables
customization of the in-out, angulation and bracket torque for an individual bracket prescription
created for each patient. Wiechmann et al. presented 3D printing to make wax designs of lingual
brackets, permitting customiz ation of the bracket design . Making thicker and amplified bracket bases
on maxillary teeth, as well as starting with the molars and mandibular canines to make those brackets
as groups , was part of the digital design of lingual orthodontic brackets . Exact prototyping of the
planned machine is required and can be accomplished with 3D printing technology, allowing
customized fixed functional treatment in conjunction with lingual orthodont ic treatment .
3.5. Occlusal splints
Occlusal spli nts are used to treat t emporomandibular disord ers. The occlusal splints prepared
from the 3D printing were more accurate as the best fit for the patients. In addition, the printing
preparation is very reproducible and faster, and it significantly reduces fabrication time relative to that
for the conventional fabrication method of splints . One advantage of AM is that it allows one to
print a large number of individual splints in a short period using modern digital technology , thereby
eliminating manual working phases in a dental laboratory . This could reduce costs, technician working
time and chair -side time in the coming years.
3.6. Surgical guides for the pl acement of orthodontic mini -screws and miniplates
Miniplates and orthodontic mini -screws are used in a variety of orthodontic treatment procedures,
including those for the intrusion of molars, the correction of open bite, molar di stalization and
maxillary impaction or protraction . Hence, accurate placement of these mini -screws and
miniplates in patients is critical for the success of treatment. The material utilized to construct surgical
AIMS Biophysics Volume 9, Issue 3, – . guides should be firm and sufficient to stay stable during the mini -implant insertion procedur e. Three -
dimensional -printed surgical guides have become progressively popular because they offer
orthodontists a safe and simple method of placing mini -implants . They provide custom -made
adaptation, accuracy and precision for the placement of the final position of the miniplate, as well as
the utmost surface contact between the bone and the miniplate, stability and a lower risk of miniplate
failure .
3.7. Customized o rthodontic retainers
Three -dimensional printing opens a new avenue in orthodontics to fabricate custom -made
removable retainers . The procedure incorporates cutting -edge technologies such as cone -beam computed
tomography (CBCT), CAD and 3D printing . The first step is to use CBCT to scan the patient's dentition
and create a 3D model of the patient's dentition. The retainer is virtually designed after i mporting
the 3D model into dedicated software, and it is possible to print a clear plastic retainer di rectly by using
an additive 3D printing process .
4. Conclusion s
AI and 3D printing technology have revolutionized oral health care and the orthodontic practice
by addressing the weaknesses of conventional diagnosis and treatment planning procedures . With AI -
based algorithms , orthodontists can better diagnose and plan treatment, whereas 3D printing helps
manufacture customized orthodontic appliances with precision.
AI and 3D printing can solve various clinical problems, improve diagnosis , clinical decision -
making and prediction of failures, as well as reduce the chair side time, bypass various extra steps of
conventional methods and provide quality treatment with accuracy and precision. There is fascinating
literature evidence that AI and 3D printing broaden the scope of state -of-the-art technology in
orthodontics and can play a crucial role in sufficiently aiding practicing clinician s in delivering health
care in the 21st century.
Conflict of interest
All authors declare no conflicts of interest in this paper.
References
1. Negnevitsky M (20 11) Artificial intelligence: a guide to intelligent systems , 3 Eds., Canada:
Pearson Education.
2. Khanna S Artificial intelligence: contemporary applications and future compass. Int Dent
J 60: – . https://doi.org/10. /IDJ_2422Khanna04
3. Deshmukh SV Artificial intelligence in dentistry. J Int Clin Dent Res Organ 10: 47 –48.
https://doi.org/ 10. /jicdro.jicdro_17_18
4. Scerri M, Grech V Artificial intelligence in medicine. Early Hum Dev 20: .
https://doi.org/ 10. /j.earlhumdev. .
AIMS Biophysics Volume 9, Issue 3, – . 5. Ahmed N, Abbasi MS, Zuberi F, et al. Artificial intelligence techniques: analysis,
application, and outcome in dentistry —a systematic review. Biomed Res Int : .
https://doi.org / 10. / /
6. Hung HC, Wang YC, Wang YC Applications of artificial intelligence in orthodontics.
Taiwan J Orthod 32: 85 –92. https://doi.org/ 10. / - .
7. Bichu YM, Hansa I, Bichu AY, et al. Applications of artificial intelligence and machine
learning in orthodontics: a scoping review. Prog Orthod 22: 18. https://doi.org/ 10. /s40510 -
- -9
8. Schwendicke F, Samek W, Krois J Artificial intelligence in dentistry: chances and
challenges. J Dent Res 99: – . https://doi.org/ 10. /
9. Wong KV, Hernandez A A review of additive manufacturing. ISRN Mech Eng :
. https://doi.org/ 10. / /
10. Andonović V, Vrtanoski G Growing rapid prototyping as a technology in dental medicine.
Mech Eng Sci J 29: 31 –39.
11. Beguma Z, Chhedat P Rapid prototyping —when virtual meets reality rapid prototyping —
virtuelltrifftrealitä t. Int J Comput Dent 17: – .
12. Hofmann M 3D printing gets a boost and opportunities with polymer materials. ACS
Macro Lett 3: – . https://doi.org/10. /mz4006556
13. Mahamood S, Khader MA, Ali H Applications of 3 -D printing in orthodontics: a review.
Int J Sci Stud 3: – . https://doi.org/10. /ijss/ /99
14. Jiang F, Jiang Y, Zhi H, et al. Artificial intelligence in healthcare: past, present , and future.
Stroke Vasc Neurol 2: – . https://doi.org/ 10. /svn - -
15. Leonardi R, Giordano D, Maiorana F An evaluation of cellular neural networks for the
automatic identification of cephalometric landmarks on digital images. J Biomed Biotechnol :
. https://doi.org/ 10. / /
16. Schwendicke F, Golla T, Dreher M, et al. Convolutional neural networks for dental image
diagnostics: a scoping review. J Dent 91: . https://doi.org/ 10. /j.jdent. .
17. Gupta A, Kharbanda OP, Sardana V, et al. Accuracy of 3D cephalometric measurements
based on an automatic knowledge -based landmark detection algorithm. Int J Comput Ass Rad 11:
– . https://doi.org/ 10. /s11548 - - -7
18. Brickley MR, Shepherd JP, Armstrong RA Neural networks: a new technique for
development of decision support systems in dentistry. J Dent 26: – .
https://doi.org/10. /S0300 - (97) -4
19. Katne T, Kanaparthi A, Gotoor S, et al. Artificial int elligence: demystifying dentistry —
the future and beyond. Int J Contemp Med SurgRadiol 4: D6 –D9.
http://dx.doi.org/10. /ijcmsr. .4.4.2
20. Faber J, Faber C, Faber P Artificial intelligence in orthodontics. APOS Trends Orthod 9:
– . https://do i.org/ 10. /APOS_123_2019
21. Auconi P, Caldarelli G, Scala A, et al. A network approach to orthodontic diagnosis.
Orthod Craniofac Res 14: – . https://doi.org/ 10. /j. - . . .x
22. Xie X, Wang L, Wang A Artificial neural network modeling for deciding if extractions are
necessary prior to orthodontic treatment. Angle Orthod 80: – .
https://doi.org/ 10. / - .1
AIMS Biophysics Volume 9, Issue 3, – . 23. Jung SK, Kim TW New approach for the diagnosis of extractions with neural network
machine learning. Am J Orthod Dentofac : – .
https://doi.org/ 10. /j.ajodo. .07.
24. Jheon AH, Oberoi S, Solem RC, et al. Moving towards precision o rthodontics: an evolving
paradigm shift in the planning and delivery of customized orthodontic therapy. Orthod Craniofac
Res 20: – . https://doi.org/ 10. /ocr.
25. Niñ o -Sandoval TC, Pé rez SVG, Gonzá lez FA, et al. Use of automated learning te chniques
for predicting mandibular morphology in skeletal class I, II and III. Forensic Sci Int : .e1 –
.e7. https://doi.org/ 10. /j.forsciint. .10.
26. Choi HI, Jung SK, Baek SH, et al. Artificial intelligent model with neural network
machine learning for the diagnosis of orthognathic surgery. J Craniofac Surg 30: – .
https://doi.org/ 10. /SCS.
27. Weichel F, Eisenmann U, Richter S, et al. A computer -assisted optimization approach for
orthognathic sur gery planning. Curr Dir Biomed Eng 5: 41 –44. https://doi.org/10. /cdbme -
-
28. Patcas R, Timofte R, Volokitin A, et al. Facial attractiveness of cleft patients: a direct
comparison between artificial -intelligence -based scoring and conventional rater groups. Eur J
Orthod ont 41: – . https://doi.org/ 10. /ejo/cjz007
29. Makaremi M, Lacaule C, Mohammad -Djafari A Deep learning and artificial intelligence
for th e determination of the cervical vertebra maturation degree from lateral radiography. Entropy
21: . https://doi.org/10. /e21121222
30. Kök H, Acilar AM, İzgi MS Usage and comparison of artificial intelligence algorithms for
determination of growth and development by cervical vertebrae stages in orthodontics. Prog
Orthod 20: 41. https://doi.org/ 10. /s40510 - - -8
31. Shoukri B, Prieto JC, Ruellas A, et al. Minimally invasive approach for diagnosing TMJ
osteoarthritis. J Dent Res 98: – . https://doi.org/ 10. /
32. Castle E, Chung P, Behfar MH, et al. Compliance monitoring via a Bluetooth -enabled
retainer: a prospective clinical pilot study. Orthod Craniofac Res 22: – .
https://doi.org/ 10. /ocr.
33. Lee KS, Kwak HJ, Oh JM, et al. Automated detection of TMJ osteoarthritis based on
artificial intelligence. J Dent Res 99: – . https://doi.org/ 10. /
34. Akdeniz S, Tosun ME A review of the use of artificial intelligence in orthodontics. J Exp
Clin Med 38: – . https://doi.org/10. /omujecm.38.si.dent.13
35. Kö k H, Izgi MS, Acilar AM Determination of growth and development periods in
orthodontics with arti ficial neural network. Orthod Craniofac Res 24: 76 –83.
https://doi.org/ 10. /ocr.
36. Littlewood SJ, Dalci O, Dolce C, et al. Orthodontic retention: What's on the horizon? Brit
Dent J : – . https://doi.org/ 10. /s41415 - - -8
37. Jung SK, Kim TW New approach for the diagnosis of extractions with neural network
machine learning. Am J Orthod Dentofac : – .
https://doi.org/ 10. /j.ajodo. .07.
38. Hutton TJ, Cunningham S, Hammond P An evaluation of active shape models for the
automatic identification of cephalometric landmarks. Eur J Orthodont 22: – .
https://doi.org/ 10. /ejo/22.5.
AIMS Biophysics Volume 9, Issue 3, – . 39. Tanikawa C, Yagi M, Takada K Automated ceph alometry: System performance reliability
using landmark -dependent criteria. Angle Orthod 79: – .
https://doi.org/ 10. / -508R.1
40. Montú far J, Romero M, Scougall -Vilchis RJ Automatic 3 -dimensional cephalometric
landmarking based on active shape models in related projections. Am J Orthod Dentofac :
– . https://doi.org/ 10. /j.ajodo. .06.
41. Lee H, Tajmir S, Lee J, et al. Fully automated deep learning system for bone age
assessment. J Digit Imaging 30: – . https://do i.org/ 10. /s10278 - - -8
42. Kunz F, Stellzig -Eisenhauer A, Zeman F, et al. Artificial intelligence in orthodontics. J
Orofac Orthop 81: 52 –68. https://doi.org/ 10. /s00056 - - -8
43. Nishimoto S, Sotsuka Y, Kawai K, et al. Personal com puter -based cephalometric landmark
detection with deep learning, using cephalograms on the internet. J Craniofac Surg 30: 91 –95.
https://doi.org/ 10. /SCS.
44. Hwang HW, Park JH, Moon JH, et al. Automated identification of cephalometri c
landmarks: Part 2 —Might it be better than human? Angle Orthod 90: 69 –76.
https://doi.org/ 10. / - .1
45. Park JH, Hwang HW, Moon JH, et al. Automated identification of cephalometric
landmarks: Part 1 —Comparisons between the latest deep -learning methods YOLOV3 and SSD.
Angle Orthod 89: – . https://doi.org/ 10. / - .1
46. Ribarevski R, Vig P, Vig KD, et al. Consistency of orthodontic extraction decisions. Eur
J Orthodont 18: 77 –80. https://doi.org/10. /ejo/18.1.77
47. Bouletreau P, Makaremi M, Ibrahim B, et al. Artificial intelligence: applications in
orthognathic surgery. J Stomatol Oral Maxi : – .
https://doi.org/ 10. /j.jormas. .06.
48. Pascal E, Majoufre C, Bondaz M, et al. Current status of surgical planning and transfer
methods in orthognathic surgery. J Stomatol Oral Maxi : – .
https://doi.org/ 10. /j.jormas. .02.
49. Cevidanes LHS, Bailey LJ, Tucker J r GR, et al. Superimposition of 3D cone -beam CT
models of orthognathic surgery patients. Dentomaxillofac Rad 34: – .
https://doi.org/ 10. /dmfr/
50. Yu X, Liu B, Pei Y, et al. Evaluation of facial attractiveness for patients with malocclusion:
a machine -learning technique employing Procrustes. Angle Orthod 84: – .
https://doi.org/ 10. / - .1
51. Patcas R, Bernini DAJ, Volokitin A, et al. Applying artificial intelligence to assess the
impact of orthognathic treatment on facial attractiveness and estimated age. Int J Oral Max Surg
48: 77 –83. https://doi.org/ 10. /j.ijom. .07.
52. Harrar H, Myers S, Ghanem AM Art or science? An evidence -based approach to human
facial beauty a quantitative analysis towards an informed clinical aesthetic practice. Aesthet Plast
Surg 42: – . https://doi.org/ 10. /s00266 - - -7
53. Zhang SJ, Meng P, Zhang J, et al. ( ) Machine learning models for genetic risk assessment of
infants with non -syndromic orofacial cleft. Genom Proteom Bioinf 16: – .
https://doi.org/ 10. /j.gpb. .07.
AIMS Biophysics Volume 9, Issue 3, – . 54. Prescher A, Meyers A, von Keyserlingk DG Neural net applied to anthropolog ical material:
a methodical study on the human nasal skeleton. Ann Anat : – .
https://doi.org/ 10. /j.aanat. .01.
55. Al-Moghrabi D, Pandis N, McLaughlin K, et al. Evaluation of the effectiveness of a
tailored mobile application in incre asing the duration of wear of thermoplastic retainers: a
randomized controlled trial. Eur J Orthodont 42: – . https://doi.org/ 10. /ejo/cjz088
56. Cole D, Bencharit S, Carrico CK, et al. Evaluation of fit for 3D -printed retainers
compare d with thermoform retainers. Am J Orthod Dentofac : – .
https://doi.org/ 10. /j.ajodo. .09.
57. Dietrich CA, Ender A, Baumgartner S, et al. A validation study of reconstructed rapid
prototyping models produced by two technologies. Angle Orthod 87: – .
https://doi.org/ 10. / - .1
58. Mohd Tahir N, Wan Hassan WN, Saub R Comparing retainers constructed on conventional
stone models and on 3D printed models: a randomized crossover clinical study. Eur J Orthodont
41: – . https://doi.org/ 10. /ejo/cjy063
59. Ligon SC, Liska R, Stampfl J, et al. Polymers for 3D printing and customized additive
manufacturing. Chem Rev : – . https://doi.org/ 10. /acs.chemrev.7b00074
60. Dodziuk H Applications of 3D printing in healthcare. Kardiochir Torakochi 13: – .
https://doi.org/ 10. /kitp. .
61. Bhargav A, Sanjairaj V, Rosa V, et al. Applications of additive manufacturing in dentistry:
a review. J Biomed Mater Res B : – . https://doi.org/ 10. /jbm.b.
62. Liaw CY, Guvendiren M Current and emerging applications of 3D printing in medicine.
Biofabrication 9: . https://doi.org/ 10. / - /aa7279
63. Wiechmann D, Rummel V, Thalheim A, et al. Customized brackets and archwires for
lingual orthodontic treatment. Am J Orthod Dentofac : – . https://doi.org/
10. /j.ajodo. .08.
64. Faber J, Berto PM, Quaresma M Rapid prototyping as a tool for diagnosis and treatment
planning for maxillary canine impaction. Am J Orthod Dentofac : – .
https://doi.org/ 10. /j.ajodo. .12.
65. Wiechmann D, Schwestka -Polly R, Hohoff A (2 ) Herbst appliance in lingual orthodontics.
Am J Orthod Dentofac : – . https://doi.org/ 10. /j.ajodo. .09.
66. Tsui WK, Chua HDP, Cheung LK Bone anchor systems for orthodontic application: a
systematic review. Int J Oral Max Surg 41: – .
https://doi.org/ 10. /j.ijom. .05.
67. Salmi M, Paloheimo KS, Tuomi J, et al. A digital process for additive manufacturing of
occlusal splints: a clinical pilot study. J R Soc Interface 10: .
https://doi.org/ 10. /rsif. .
68. Nasef AA, El -Beialy AR, Mostafa YA Virtual techniques for designing and fabricating a
retainer. Am J Orthod Dentofac : – . https://doi.org/ 10. /j.ajodo. .01.
69. Wang YT, Yu JH, Lo LJ, et al. Developing customized dental miniscrew surgical template
from thermoplastic polymer material using image superimposition, CAD system, and 3D printing.
Biomed Res Int : . https://doi.org/ 10. / /
AIMS Biophysics Volume 9, Issue 3, – . 70. Sherman SL, Kadioglu O, Currier GF, et al. Accuracy of digital light processing printing
of 3 -dimensional dental models. Am J Orthod Dentofac : – . https://doi.org/
10. /j.ajodo. .10.
71. Al-Mog hrabi D, Barber S, Fleming PS Removable retention: enhancing adherence and
the remit of shared decision -making. Brit Dent J : – . https://doi.org/ 10. /s41415 -
- -x
72. Cousley RRJ Introducing 3D printing in your orthodontic practice. J Orthod 47: – .
https://doi.org/ 10. /
73. Bartkowiak T, Walkowiak -Śliziuk A 3D printing technology in orthodontics —review of
current applications. J Stomatol 71: – . https://doi.org/ 10. /jos. .
74. Lee KY, Cho JW, Chang NY, et al. Accuracy of three -dimensional printing for
manufacturing replica teeth. Korean J Orthod 45: – .
https://doi.org/ 10. /kjod. .45.5.
75. Kim SY, Shin YS, Jung HD, et al. Precision and trueness of dental models manufactured
with different 3 -dimensional printing techniques. Am J Orthod Dentofac : – .
https://doi.org/ 10. /j.ajod o. .05.
76. Martorelli M, Gerbino S, Giudice M, et al. A comparison between customized clear and
removable orthodontic appliances manufactured using RP and CNC techniques. Dent Mater 29:
e1–e10. https://doi.org/ 10. /j.dental. .10.
77. Al Mortadi N, Eggbeer D, Lewis J, et al. CAD/CAM/AM applications in the manufacture
of dental appliances. Am J Orthod Dentofac : – .
https://doi.org/ 10. /j.ajodo. .04.
78. Salmi M, Tuomi J, Sirkkanen R, et al. Rapid tooling method for soft cust omized removable
oral appliances. Open Dent J 6: 85 –89. https://doi.org/ 10. /
79. Anto szewska J, Papadopoulos MA, Park HS, et al. Five -year experience wit h orthodontic
miniscrew implants: a retrospective investigation of factors i nfluencing success rates. Am J
Orthod Dentofac : .e1 – .e10. https://doi.org/ 10. /j.ajodo. .03.
80. Liu H, Liu DX, Wang G, et al. Accuracy of surgical positioning of orthodontic miniscrews
with a computer -aided design and manufacturing t emplate. Am J Orthod Dentofac : .e1 –
.e10. https://doi.org/ 10. /j.ajodo. .12.
81. Hourfar J, Kanavakis G, Goellner P, et al. Fully customized placement of orthodontic
miniplates: a novel clinical technique. Head Face Med 10: 14. https://doi.org/ 10. / -160X -10-14
82. Neumeister A, Schulz L, Glodecki C Investigations on the accuracy of 3D -printed drill
guides for dental implantology Untersuchungen zur Genauigkeit 3 -D-gedruckter Bohrschablonen
fü r die dentale Implantologie . Int J Comput Dent 20: 35 –51.
83. Richert R, Goujat A, Venet L, et al. Intraoral scanner technologies: a review to make a
successful impression. J Healthc Eng : . https://doi.org/ 10. / /
© the Author(s), licensee AIMS Press. T his is an open -access
article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/ 4.0)
www.fdiworlddental.org Artificial Intelligence for Dentistry
1
WHITE PAPER
Artificial Intelligence for dentistry
FDI ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
WORKING GROUP
Falk Schwendicke, Markus Blatz, Sergio Uribe,
William Cheung, Mahesh Verma, Jina Linton, and
Young Jun Kim
www.fdiworlddental.org Artificial Intelligence for Dentistry
2 Table of contents
Executive S ummary 3
Section 1 Background and Objectives 5
Background of Artificial Intelligence 5
White Paper Objectives 5
Section 2 Dentistry for individual patients: better understand for better care 7
Image Analysis 7
Data synthesis and Prediction 8
Evidence -supported planning and conduct of therapies 9
Patient interaction 9
Section 3 Community & Public Health 10
Section 4 Education and the workforce 10
AI impacts 10
Section 5 Research 11
Section 6 Risks and limitations of AI 12
1. Bias and limited generalizability 12
2. Accessibility 13
3. Interoperability 13
4. Truthfulness 13
Implementation and Maintenance 14
Section 7 Governance 16
WHO’s Consensus Principles on AI 16
Implemented Governance Strategies 16
Conclu sions for Clinical Practice 18
Call for Action 18
References 19
www.fdiworlddental.org Artificial Intelligence for Dentistry
3 Executive Summary
Artificial intelligence (AI) is defined as machines
performing intellectual tasks , which usually were
assumed can only be performed by humans.
Based on an exploding amount of available digital
data, significant advances in hardware
performance , as well as progress in algorithmic
and software approaches, the current capacities of AI are unprecedented. In medicine and specifically
in dentistry, a growing number of AI applications
are being developed, and the number of research
studies published in the field grows exponentially at present.
FDI World Dental Federation (FDI) acknowledges
AI as one of the key technologies for the dental
profession for the future and how it may foster
FDI’s Vision strategy for delivering optimal
oral health for all.
The pres ent FDI White Paper on AI for oral and
dental care, public health, dental education and research has four objectives:
(1) To define AI and lay out the technology behind
it for the professional community .
(2) To systematize and comprehensively display case s where AI can benefit oral and dental
healthcare systems/delivery, education, and research .
(3) To identify areas where AI can facilitate FDI’s
Vision strategy .
(4) To highlight potential risks of AI and the need
for the community to engage and enfor ce
standards, regulations, and best practices of AI.
This White Paper describes the application of AI in
four domains of dentistry. First, applications of AI
in individual patient care (i.e., in dental offices) are
discussed, including image analysis, data
synthesis and predictive dentistry, evidence -
supported planning and conductive therapies, and patient communication and interaction. Second, the role of data analytics and AI in community and public health, including oral health surveillance and
the provi sion of care to those who cannot access traditional dentist services is described. Third, the
role of AI for workforce planning and monitoring,
the chances it offers for diversifying the workforce
and the impact i t may have on dental education are
displayed. In parallel, the need to increase data
and digital literacy of professionals is highlighted,
and the risks of automation and complacency are discussed. Fourth, the chances of AI for dental
research, particularly for analyzing complex and
big datasets, but also for enabling what is called
“Precision” or “Personalized” dentistry are described.
Notably, the White Paper also highlights the needs
to balance data protection and accessibility, and to
revise conventional peer review approaches when
dealing with AI and complex data analytics
research.
In addition to showing which applications are
available or conceivable, the current risks and
limitations of AI are discussed, including bias and limited generalizability of applications, the limited
accessibility and interoperability of the data
underlying AI , as well as the problems when
implementing and maintaining AI in clinical care.
This White Paper also describes how governance
and agreed principles are needed to ensure that AI
works to people's benefits.
Finally , this White Paper concludes with the
implications for clinical practice and a call -toaction: To make sure that AI applications acquire
maximal usefulnes s and generalizability, data
protection concerns need to be carefully balanced
against the potential benefit s of AI for patients and
society . Technological approaches supporting this
balance should be explored more in depth; data
harmonization for interoperability should be
actively pursued; AI applications with demonstrated benefit for patients, providers or the
healthcare system should be promoted and
incentivized; evidence supporting AI applications
for oral and dental care needs to be strengthened,
including evidence supporting true clinical utility ,
applicability and implementation of these
www.fdiworlddental.org Artificial Intelligence for Dentistry
4 applications; providers and healthcare decision -
makers need to acquire basic literacy about data,
digital applications and AI; the community should
engage into the w idespread activities around
standardization of AI. This White Paper will serve as source of
information and a basis for discussion within the
dental profession, but also as groundwork for
further activities of FDI in this direction.
www.fdiworlddental.org Artificial Intelligence for Dentistry
5 Section 1. Background
and Objectives
Background of Artificial Intelligence
Data is increasingly considered as a central
component for future societies to thrive. Data -
driven analytics is now seen as the fourth
paradigm to understand nature, besides the
experimental and theoretical sciences and simulation (Bell et al. ) . The excitement
around data science is facilitated by an exploding
amount of structured and unstructured available
data, but also by the software and hardware tools
at hand to leverage these data.
For many modern datarelated applications,
artificial intelligence (AI) is the technique to use
the data; it is the instrument to analyz e especially
large amounts of data and put them to use. The
term AI was coined in the mid1950s, and the
English Oxford Living Dictionary defines AI as “ the
theory and development of computer systems
able to perform tasks normally requiring human
intellige nce, such as visual perception, speech
recognition, decisionmaking, and translation
between languages” (Oxford Learners
Dictionaries ) .
Most AI applications involve machine learning, where machines repeatedly analyze datasets to identify (“learn”) an inherent pattern in the data,
such as detecting objects on images or predicting
events from tabular data. A specific subfield of machine learning, employed to analyze particularly complex data such as images or
speech, is deep learning, where prior - tested
multilayered networks of mathematical
operations are used to allow the representation of
features (LeCun et al. ) . By now, AI
encompasses a range of applications. These
include computer vision (for example face
recognition by smartphones or security cameras,
autonomous driving), natural language processing
(voice assistants or chatbots that can systematize
and link both structured and unstructured text and
similar tools), robotics, virtual reality and
simulation systems (for example in manufacturing or surgery but also drug development), and decisionmaking support (for example in medical
symptom checkers). AI is abundant in our
everyday world and with exponential growth of
data, hardware capacities, and new software
architectures has led to astonishing dynamics in
many of the described fields.
In healthcare and health sciences, the generation
of data, its digitalization and mining, have started
with a significant lag compared to other industries.
This is rooted in several aspects, data protection
being a major one, but also because health data
is generated and stored in silos and health data
interoperability is limited. The evolution of tested,
wearable sensors accelerated the need for AI for health applications. Only recently, data -driven
medical applications involving AI have reached
clinical maturity while the exploding numbers of
research studies indicate that medici ne will be
faced with a wealth of AI tools swamping the market soon. A similar development will be seen
in oral and dental healthcare and sciences
(Schwendicke and Krois ) .
White Paper Objectives
The present FDI World Dental Federation (FDI)
White Paper on AI for oral and dental care, public
health, dental education and research has the
following objectives:
1. To define AI and lay out the technology
behind it for the professional community; this
has already been covered above in brief.
2. Systematize and comprehensively display cases where AI can benefit oral and dental healthcare system s/delivery, education, and
research.
3. Identify areas where AI can facilitate FDI’s Vision strategy for delivering optimal
oral health for all.
4. Highlight potential risks of AI and the need for
the community to engage and enforce
standards, regulations, and best practices of
AI.
www.fdiworlddental.org Artificial Intelligence for Dentistry
6 We will cov er these aims along with the various
domains where we see that AI will impact
dentistry. These include clinical care provided by
dental professionals in dental offices, dental
community and public health, dental education,
and dental research ( ). W e will conclude
this FDI White Paper with a section on challenges
to allow AI to fulfil its promises and a call to action
for the oral and dental health community.
. Network of domains and subdomains of AI applications in oral and dental healthcare provided
by dental professionals to individual patients (blue), as part of community and public dental health (steel),
dental education and workforce management (turquoise), and oral and dental research (grey). Sources
of bias (data) and further determinants of AI applications in oral and dental healthcare (formats,
frameworks and infrastructure) are indicated in green.
www.fdiworlddental.org Artificial Intelligence for Dentistry
7 Section 2. Dentistry for
individual patients: better understanding for better care
Helping clinicians provide better care on a
consistent basis is one of the key goals of
integrating AI in clinical de ntistry. Data managing
and AI applications are applied at all stages of
the patient journey ( ) and in all dental specialty areas. Four areas are to be highlighted;
image analysis, data synthesis and prediction,
evidencesupported treatment planning and
conduct, and patient interaction, particularly during supportive care.
Image Analysis
Image interpretation in dental radiology is one of
the currently most visible applications of AI in
clinical dentistry. Most common pathologies
such as caries or apical lesions, periodontal bone loss, cysts or bony fractures are detected by AI on 2D and, increasingly, 3D images. Similarly, landmark identification on
cephalometric radiographs is a typical task
where AI can assist dentists (Schwendicke et al. 2021a; Schwendicke et al. ). Current AI -
supported radiograph interpretation is as
accurate or, in some cases, even more accurate
than interpretation by practitioners. In addition, it
saves time for the assessment and facilitates the generation of comprehensive and systematic reports.
. AI and data -driven applications are situated all along the patient’s dental journey. More details
are provided in th is section .
www.fdiworlddental.org Artificial Intelligence for Dentistry
8 Several products are already on the market,
while few have acqui red the status of a medical
product and are properly regulated. Dental
professionals should critically evaluate the
certification status of AI products before
employing them for patient care. Standardization
efforts are also most mature in this specific segment of AI applications as many
organizations have provided or are preparing
norms and guidance documents.
Similarly, the analysis of images has been widely
attempted for non -radiographic data, such as 3D
point cloud data from intraoral scans, photographs or near infrared transillumination
images, to support smile design, orthodontic
planning, preparation margin detection, restoration design or the detection of
pathologies, for example caries or oral mucosa
lesions.
Overall, future AI -based image analysis is likely
to yield superior accuracy at higher speed and
reliability than particularly unexperienced practitioners, supporting their decisionmaking
process and allowing more standardized high-quality care. Moreover, AI will be able to guide practitioners ’ attention towards particularly
difficult areas of an image, allowing for dedicated time for more indepth assessment of these
areas, and supporting them in communicating their findings with patients, for example via
overlaying the affected areas with col oured pixel
blobs (Kosan et al. ).
Data synthesis and Prediction
Clinical dentistry generates large amounts of
data every day. Besides imagery, clinical data,
historical data, claims, treatment data, and further data, for example from other diagnosti c
tests, are available. Given that many patients attend dentists regularly and repeatedly, there is
a wealth of longitudinal data on a broad part of
the population available, at least in many high-income countries. Currently, these data are
oftentimes compiled in isolated data silos,
remaining hidden from combined use, and are difficult to be assessed jointly when evaluating
the signs and symptoms of a patient or risks for future oral and dental conditions.
Making use of these data and leveraging them for better understanding of the patient, his or her risk profile and needs, is another promise of AI.
Modern approaches to access the available data
and merge and synthesize them, for example in
dashboards, aim to provide the practitioner with
the available dat a in more comprehensive and
useful ways. Allowing a more holistic view of
each patient with his or her individual history and
risks is expected to improve the quality but also
the efficiency of care, reducing the need for repeated and costly assessments.
Using data acquired over several visits and
years, like imagery, clinical assessments,
historical or data on medications or systemic
conditions, will help to overcome the current “one size fits all approach” towards managing, diagnosing, and treating patients and assist
moving to a more personalized, precise, and
preventive care. Also, data provided by patients, for example dietary or toothbrushing behaviour
collected by apps and mobile devices, will be
increasingly employed, and patients will
generally be m ore involved in the care process
(as data donor, but also via apps and continuous
support in the “virtual” practice). Hence, AI will
support a more participatory dental care, too.
The result is called P4 dentistry; a more
personalized, precise, preventive and
participatory dentistry (Flores et al. ).
Another unexplored data accumulation is
implantable and wearable sensors. With the
evolving biomedical sensor related technology,
miniature and nano -sized sensors could be
used, for example, to monitor sali va and,
indirectly, oral health or disease. Moreover, saliva diagnostics and the related data could
also be employed to assess other human
diseases given the close link between saliva and
overall health (Cui et al. ).
Notably, current AI towards risk p rofiling,
predicting the future risk of caries, periodontitis,
www.fdiworlddental.org Artificial Intelligence for Dentistry
9 progression of lesions, or tooth loss, is in its
infancy. Understanding associations within
larger datasets is often possible with AI, allowing
identification of risk factors or indicators.
Predicting risks, however, is far more difficult. In
many cases, today’s AI remains limited in its predictive power and generalizability, as outlined below (Schwendicke and Krois ).
Evidencesupported planning and conduct
of therapies
As AI allows synthesizing data and identifying
risk factors and patterns, it will further support
evidencebased treatment planning and
conduct. Providing more effective and efficient, individualized and personcentred care will not
only facilitate consideration of more pati entspecific aspects, but also incorporate external
evidencebased information, for example from
guidelines and standards of care. This will allow
clinicians to standardize and calibrate treatment
plans and foster reliable highquality care.
Recently, it has been highlighted that the clinical
benefit of an AI, in this case a diagnostic support AI, would even benefit from such treatment recommendations, curbing overtreatment and
allowing early intervention where needed
(Mertens et al. ). As such, AI can improve
the cost -effectiveness of oral health care
(Schwendicke et al. ).
An additional benefit of more datadriven care is
the option to regularly and objectively assess
treatment needs, treatments provided, and
outcomes yielded. Ultimately, this wil l foster
valuebased, but also more targeted care (for
example when referral pathways need to be
tailored for individual patients). Notably, it will mean that the quality of dental work will be objectifiable; insurance companies have already started to emp loy AI to detect subpar treatment
and fraudulent insurance claims.
Patient Interaction
Given that the linkage of data is a major aim of
datadriven care and AI tools for health, a more
continuous interaction with patients is also likely
to be facilitated. As many dental conditions are
behaviourally grounded, such a more intimate interaction instead of what is often referred to as the “onestop” approach in dental care may allow
addressing dental conditions where they are rooted: in people’s dai ly lives. A number of
possible examples come to mind:
- Evaluating the toothbrushing behaviour of
patients via their electronic toothbrush or assessing their dietary data via nutrition apps.
- Using symptom checkers or remote
monitoring during orthodontic tooth movements.
- Providing the option for synchronous
communication via mobile devices with a dental care professional or asynchronous
communication via symptom checker apps or
chatbots
In the future, one can expect patients to be more
informed when they enter the practice.
Conversely, dentists will know more about their
patients’ routines and the related risks. Moreover, many dental services, mainly around
advice and supportive care, will be translated
into the virtual room, increasing the efficiency of
care but also its sustainability as the main driver of the dental carbon footprint is patients’ travel to
and from the dental office (Duane et al. ).
Continuous monitoring will also allow regular feedback to facilitate quality improvements, patient engagement and empowerment, which
are the bases for health and behaviour
interventions. Lastly, AI will not only link patients
and providers but also allow closer interaction between different providers, fostering intraand
interprofessional integrated care .
www.fdiworlddental.org Artificial Intelligence for Dentistry
10 Section 3. Community
and Public Health
Besides being used by dentists to manage the
health of individual patients, AI and datadriven
tools will enrich and help to expand community
and public dental health services. For example,
AI-based applications will allow closer linkage of
outreach community -based services with the
practice setting using remote synchronous and
asynchronous communication and data
exchange. This will allow expansion of the reach
of traditional dental services to those with only
limited or no access at present, increasing affordability, accessibility, and equity of care.
Moreover, data -driven technologies including AI
will facilitate better information and decision-making on the dental public health level: Using standardized health indicators in oral health
surveys as well as a more systematic and
comprehensive reporting of the specific services
provided and the resulting outcomes yielded
within different health care systems or units will
allow a more detailed picture of the public’s
dental health, the associated needs and
demands, and the impact of services in terms of
effectiveness and efficiency (Riordain et al.
). Comprehensive surveillance of health will build on regular and likely automated data
generation. AI will allow lev eraging the yielded
large data pools for predicting health and
demands guiding targeted workforce development (below), informed setup of
services, benchmarking of healthcare
interventions and policy, and overall reducing wasteful processes and ensuring sus tainability
of oral care.
Lastly, employing mobile tools powered by AI will
enable more effective, individualized public
health communication, facilitating the general
public’s and patients’ involvement in oral and
dental health and fostering better health for all.
Section 4. Education
and the workforce
A major obstacle for delivering optimal care to all
in the future will be workforce shortages and a
maldistribution of the workforce. This will be true
for highincome countries where ageing of the
workfor ce comes in parallel with the feminization
of it, leading to mass -retirement of dentists and
reduced net availability for those who did not
retire, for a population with sustained oral
healthcare needs. However, it also applies to
lowand middleincome countries where a fast -
growing population’s oral health care needs will
exceed the workforce capacity but also the
capability to train workforce fast enough. The
oral and dental workforce is a key challenge
identified in FDI’s Vision .
AI Impacts
AI can have an impact on dental education,
expanding the workforce’s capacities and scope
of individual providers, but also workforce
planning and allocation:
(1) AI will support a needs -based dynamic and
adaptive workforce planning process. Integrating
and extrapolating data from various sources
such as oral health surveys, publicly available population, geostatistical and social data using
AI will allow to cap ture agegroup and spatially
specific oral health, its translation into needs and
demands and the required resources over time. It will allow workforce planning according to the
population, its health and needs, at small spatial
scale and in actionable uni ts.
(2) AI tools will further enable the delivery of
highquality services by a diversified workforce,
including dentists, other oral healthcare
professionals or even providers from other
professions or laypeople. AI -based support
systems will facilitate more modularized models
of care, with providers of different levels of
competency jointly and synergistically providing
care onpremises, but also at home or remotely.
www.fdiworlddental.org Artificial Intelligence for Dentistry
11 Such models will provide physically and
economically accessible basic services to all bu t
also joint decisionmaking for cases of high
complexity.
(3) Moreover, AI can be expected to have an
impact on dental education methods and scope.
Non-synchronous learning models, a more
learner -centric provision of educational content
as well as educat ion being increasingly based on
simulation including augmented or virtual reality -
based teaching and training are promises of AI for dental education (Joda et al. ).
A major challenge to be highlighted is that the current dental workforce shows only li mited
digital literacy. Admission to dental training programs requires competencies in biological
sciences, clinical and technical procedures, and
the training itself also focuses on these aspects.
Mathematical and informatics knowledge and
skills are rare ly required or reflected. Choosing
between different AI tools for a specific practice,
commissioning AI for community and public
health purposes, and appraising AI with regards
to its capacity and quality will require knowledge
about the way AI works. Sinc e data is an
indispensable component of AI, the pitfalls
around datasets underlying an AI application, but
also around measuring the performance of an AI
application must be known. Moreover, as laid out
below, research around the impact of AI on
dental providers, patients, and payers, is needed
to better understand possible risks, for example
of automation and complacency (Parasuraman
and Manzey ), and how to mitigate them.
Section 5. Research
AI is already widely used in oral and dental
research. The capabilities of AI to make use of
complex data have facilitated a rapid uptake of
various applications in the field, mainly for image
analysis using neural networks (deep learning),
but also for numerical data using a range of
shallower machine learning approaches. Employing AI allows to identify patterns in large omics datasets, but also routine or claims data with unprecedented accuracy. Notably, though, models from the AI realm do not consistently
outperform less complex model approaches
such as regress ion modelling , while the latter
comes with lower computational demands and high explainability. Especially on oral and dental
datasets of limited size, applying complex
modelling may not be needed and may even
come with limitations on its own.
Hence, to em ploy AI for oral and dental research
most effectively, breaking up dental data silos and pooling data from multiple sites, levels, and
modalities is required. Data pooling has been
successfully employed in recent research
activities around COVID -19 (Dayan et al. ),
and allows development of AI models with high
accuracy and, even more relevant,
generalizability. As data protection concerns and
regulations oftentimes hamper direct pooling, approaches like federated learning (where not
data, but model para meters are pooled) may be
needed (Bonawitz et al. ).
With the advent of the AI era in oral and dental
research comes the need to and difficulties of
appraising AI research. Many studies in the field
suffer from poor reporting and low
reproducibility. Even if sufficient detail is
provided to reconstruct the applied methods, data and code as well as the computing
environment are not regularly available, making
replication impossible. The oral and dental
research community is tasked with addressing
these aspects. Researchers should adopt
existing checklists and reporting standards for AI
research, and reviewers and editors should
contrast any submissions against these baseline
reporting expectations (Schwendicke et al.
2021b). Moreover, peer -reviewing AI r esearch
comes with specific challenges that need to be
addressed to ensure that the review process is
as effective for oral and dental AI research as it
is in other fields (Schwendicke et al. ).
Lastly, the oral and dental research community
is required to increase its digital literacy.
Researchers but also the recipients of research,
www.fdiworlddental.org Artificial Intelligence for Dentistry
12 dentists and other decision makers, need to be
able to appraise AI research and the developed
applications critically, as outlined.
Section 6. Risks and
limitations of AI
The emergence and development of new
technologies bring benefits and risks. For example, the development of the Internet has improved communication but problems such as
infodemics have arisen that were difficult to
foresee. The development of AI that allows
machines to make automated decisions that
humans previously made can significantly
impact the way healthcare is delivered to people.
While AI in dentistry could reduce human subjectivity in decisions and improve health, AI
may contain biases that result in incorrect or
discriminatory decisions in some population
subgroups. The risks and limitations of AI may
arise during the conceptualization stage of the
problem to be solved with AI, during the development, implementation or finally during
the evaluation of the AI model.
The fact that a specific technology exists does
not mean that it should be applied to any problem. During the conceptualization of the
problem to be solved by AI, it is required to first
answer whether the new tool is necessary and
what health problem it is intended to solve. To
minimize the risks of generating superfluous
tools for problems that already have a solution or
unethical ones to increase an existing health
inequity, it is best to involve all stakeholders, users, recipients, and payers of AI, in this phase,
with a particular emphasis on minority or marginalized groups. Moreover, a
comprehensive assessment of the available
evidence towards existing standard of care
solutions, their effectiveness, efficiency, and
safety is needed. Research on AI in healthcare
has in parts been decoupled from real -world
problem solving, focusing on metrics and not
clinical impact. The majority of AI for health interventions developed to date lack demonstrations of clinical or further benefit
compared with the standard of care (Wynants et
al. ; Zhou et al. ). Notably, this is also
true for other innovations in healthcare.
The development of AI for health applications
centres around the data used for training the AI.
Often, small, unbalanced or unrepresentative
datasets are employed, resulting in AI suffering
from limited accuracy and generalizability as well
as biases. This is rooted in data being siloed,
limitedly interoperable, not standardized, and
usually not available in sufficient breadth to yield
representativeness. Recent calls for scientific data management demand data to be detectable, accessible, interoperable, and
reusable by machines (FAIR principles)
(Wilkinson et al. ). Several challenges
during the development of AI for health
applications arise:
1. Bias and limited generalizability
As outlined, many datasets used to train oral and
dental AI lack inclusiveness and
representativeness, including systematic under -
representation of a specific gender, age group,
race and others. This often results in AI
replicating societal bias, for example
discriminating under -represented and
marginalized groups. Data may also suffer from
biases introduced during the data collection, for
example data collected by an insurer may reflect
insurance priorities and be unsuitable data for
developing and training AI for clinical purposes.
Biases may also arise from data being collected
from only a few populations. For example, in the
USA, the majority (71%) of AI for health applications were trained on data from three
states: California, Massachusetts, and New York
(Kaushal et al. ). Data generated in clinical
routine may itself suffer from confounding bias.
In a recent study on radiographs to classify the
severity of COVID -19 from chest radi ographs,
standing and lying patients were included.
Because lying patients by large suffered from
www.fdiworlddental.org Artificial Intelligence for Dentistry
13 more severe disease, the model erroneously
learned to classify severity according to the
patients’ position (Roberts et al. ).
2. Accessibility
Biases and limited generalizability are often
grounded in the overall limited and selective accessibility of data. In many cases, data is not
available due to data protection reasons. A
range of approaches to broaden the access to
health data, improving AI performance, fairness,
and generalizability, have been developed, for
example broad consent, opt -in for data sharing
rather than opt -out, or the conversion of health
data into nonfungible tokens, which would allow
patients to have control over who can access this
data and under what circumstances. A technical approach to pool data siloed in different data
lakes without sharing the data is federated
learning (Bonawitz et al. ).
3. Interoperability
Even if data are accessible for developing and
training an AI, limited interoperability of
healthcare data remains a significant hurdle. The
two major aspects to consider are syntactic and
semantic interoperability. Syntactic
interoperability defines the format and structure
of data. It is backed by the International
Standards Development Organizations such as
Health Level Seven International (HL7) and its
Fast Health Interoperability Resource (FHIR).
Semantic interoperability is ensured by agreed
terminologies, nomenclatures, and ontologies being employed, such as SNOMED CT, the
Logical Observation Identifiers Names and Codes (LOINC), or the identification of Medicinal Products for medicines (IDMP). In oral and
dental research, none of these concepts are
particularly popular or widespread. Even
terminologies and cl assifications defined by
dental experts themselves are not necessarily
adopted or interchangeably usable. An example
is differing the World Health Organization (WHO)
and the International Caries Detection and Assessment System (ICDAS) criteria for caries diagnosis. For omics data, the creation of a
global database repository with interoperable
microbiome sequences and annotated host
metadata would be similarly desired (Marcos -
Zambrano et al. ). Interoperability of oral
data and its collection in routine settings (e.g.
electronic health records) but also prospective
studies (e.g. national oral surveys) should be
aimed for, and agreed standards of captured data (for example outcomes in interventional studies) may assist (Riordain et al. ).
4. Truthful ness
The validity and quality of the data but also the
labelling (annotations) must be carefully
considered. Often, a hard gold standard such as
histological assessment is not available. Instead,
multiple human annotators provide the reference
test (label) , for example towards the presence of
pathology on an image. The qualification of
these annotators is critical to the eventual quality
of any AI as the AI will not supersede the joint
intelligence of the annotators. It remains unclear
how disagreements bet ween experts are best
mitigated. Current concepts include consensus
discussion and hierarchical reviewing.
In the implementation and maintenance stage,
clinicians and healthcare staff play a critical role as any AI is no longer appraised as a model but
as a healthcare intervention. Here, aspects
around usefulness, acceptability,
implementation, and maintenance of the resulting software product are relevant. Evaluation of the AI for its usefulness is critical
at this stage. For example, during the COVID -19
pandemic, hundreds of models were developed
to predict the risk for COVID -19 but none have
been found clinically useful by a recent
systematic review (Roberts et al. ). During
the evaluation of an AI application, a wider set of
performance metrics gener ated in clinical care
should be considered, and any reporting of these
metrics should follow established standards.
Notably, the metrics should be clinically relevant
www.fdiworlddental.org Artificial Intelligence for Dentistry
14 for decisionmaking, and the evaluation should
reflect the interaction between the user and the
AI software. Oftentimes, this interaction is a
source of performance decreases compared
with the performance determined by the AI itself.
Implementation and Maintenance
In the implementation and maintenance stage,
clinicians and healthcare staff pl ay a critical role
as any AI is no longer appraised as a model but
as a healthcare intervention. Here, aspects
around usefulness, acceptability,
implementation, and maintenance of the
resulting software product are relevant. Evaluation of the AI for its us efulness is critical
at this stage. For example, during the COVID -19
pandemic, hundreds of models were developed
to predict the risk for COVID -19 but none have
been found clinically useful by a recent
systematic review (Roberts et al. ). During
the evaluation of an AI application, a wider set of
performance metrics generated in clinical care
should be considered, and any reporting of these metrics should follow established standards.
Notably, the metrics should be clinically relevant
for decisionmaking, and the evaluation should
reflect the interaction between the user and the AI software. Oftentimes, this interaction is a
source of performance decreases compared
with the performance determined by the AI itself.
The generalizability of the AI should be
displayed, and the underlying logic of the AI to
come to a decision should be critically evaluated.
Many AI applications are inherent black boxes. “Unboxing” them (making them explainable) and
allowing clinicians to scrutinize the criteria the AI
used for its decision is relevant to increase trust, but also to identify biases (“explainability”).
Further aspects to consider are the derived long-term consequences of using an AI application
and its impact on the user, the recipient,
treatment pathways, and cost -effectiveness.
Misuse of AI applications beyond the intended
use should further be cautioned against. Currently, data on these aspects are extremely limited or fully absent in the oral and dental
arena. Given that technology has been identified
as major driver of increasing healthcare cost
(Nghiem and Connelly ), especially
economic analyses are warranted (Chandra and
Skinner ).
A summary of the risks and challenges is
provided in the .
www.fdiworlddental.org Artificial Intelligence for Dentistry
15 . Risks at different stages of AI application development for dentist ry.
Stage Examples Potential solution
Conceptualization • Non-ethical application (e.g., unfair, increasing
inequity)
• Application without scientifically grounded and
medically useful objective (e.g., solely to increase
revenue at patients’ health expense; AI solution
where the standard of care works close to
perfect)
Involve ethics experts in the conception of AI, consider
representativeness of datasets to be used for training .
Involve patients and minority groups in the
conceptualization and development of the model.
Critically assess the objective of the AI for patients,
providers, healthcare system .
Development • Usage of biased, inaccurate, or non -
representative data
• Limited data availability, accessibility and
linkability
Define minimal data selection criteria and evaluate data
quality.
Aspire to an open research culture in which data are
shared as openly as legal and ethical obligations permit .
Adherence to FAIR principles, to make data detectable,
accessible, interoperable and reusable by humans and
machines; enforce interoperability (semantical and
syntactical).
Employ federated learning approaches.
Creation of curated, high quality, heterogenous
benchmarking datasets .
Implementation and
maintenance
• AI performance is unexpectedly low.
• AI does have positive diagnostic effect, but not
health effect.
• AI performance is high in test dataset, but
unexpectedly low in external datasets.
• AI is not accepted by users, not properly
implemented or maintained longterm.
• AI is misused and hence does not generate
expected health or process gains. Assess a comprehensive set of core metrics before
deployment. Follow checklists for reporting of
development and outcomes of AI in oral and dental
research. Allow critical appraisal by third parties, e.g.
during peer -review, by providing input data, insights on
operational framework, or options to run the model (e.g.
API, minimal viable product) .
Evaluate performance in different populations and
population subgroups to gauge generalizability; continue
to observe performance during usage (post market
surveillance) .
Consider wider effects beyond diagnostic performance,
i.e., the effect on care processes, patient -provider
interaction, effects on treatment decisions and outcomes,
cost-effectiveness .
Employ explainable AI tools to assess AI reasoning and
identify potential biases.
Develop a core curriculum for oral dental staff to be able
to critically assess AI tools a nd appraise their quality, but
also to highlight risk of complacency bias, for example.
Have users trained, safeguard AI by incorporating
mitigation strategies against misuse, communicate
uncertainty of AI outcomes to users.
www.fdiworlddental.org Artificial Intelligence for Dentistry
16
Section 7. Governance
While there are opportunities and potential
benefits associated with the use of AI in
healthcare, there are the outlined risks (World
Health Organization (WHO) ) .
WHO ’s Consensus Principles on AI
The World Health Organization guidance
provides six consensus principles to ensure that
AI works for people's benefit:
1. Protect human autonomy: The use of AI or
other computer systems should not diminish
human autonomy, so humans should remain in
control of the healthcare system and medical decisions.
2. AI must not harm people: Regulatory
requirements and, generally, governance are
needed to ensure the safety, accuracy, and
efficacy of AI for health.
3. Ensuring transparency, explainability, and
intelligibility: AI-based technologies must be
understandable to developers, medical
professionals, patients, users, and regulators. AI
must be sufficiently documented prior to clinical implementation, and all methods or processes
should allow humans to understand and trust the
results.
4. Fostering responsibility and accountability:
Humans require clear, transparent specifications
of the tasks that an AI can perform and the
conditions under which the AI can achieve this
task. Humans should supervise the AI upstr eam,
and downstream accountability remains with the human user.
5. Ensuring inclusiveness and equity: AI for
health should ensure the widest possible appropriate, equitable use and access, irrespective of age, sex, gender, income, race,
ethnicity, sexual orientation, ability, or other
characteristics protected under human rights
codes. This is achieved by making AI -based technologies available to the most disadvantaged and marginalized groups. Also,
the inevitable power disparities that emerge
including providers, patients, policymakers,
governments and companies that occupy,
develop, and implement AI -based health
technologies must be minimized by assessing
and monitoring any disproportionate effects that
may maintain or increase a disproportionate
share of power between providers, patients,
policymakers, governments, and companies.
6. Promoting responsive and sustainable AI:
Responsiveness requires adequate continuous, systematic, and transparent monitoring of AI technologies during their real -life use. The
environmental impact of AI should be carefully
and comprehensively assessed, including the
data generation, training, implementation,
inference, and maintenance associated with the AI application, and should be transparently communicated to the involved st akeholders.
Sustainability also requires governments and companies to anticipate and address the disruptions caused by the implementation of AI
technologies, for example their impact on users
and recipients, the healthcare process, or wider
policies needed to be implemented alongside an
AI.
Implemented Governance Strategies
Reflecting these principles, various governance
strategies have been developed and
implemented globally. For instance, the EU
Commission carved out seven requirements towards AI applications in general: (1) Human
agency and oversight, including fundamental
rights, human agency and human oversight; (2)
Technical robustness and safety, including resilience to attack and security, fall back plan and general safety, accuracy, reliability, and
reproducibility; (3) Privacy and data governance,
including respect f or privacy, quality and integrity
of data, and access to data; (4) Transparency, including traceability, explainability and
communication; (5) Diversity, nonwww.fdiworlddental.org Artificial Intelligence for Dentistry
17 discrimination, and fairness, including the
avoidance of unfair bias, accessibility and
universal design, and stakeholder participation;
(6) Societal and environmental well -being,
including sustainability, and environmental friendliness, social impact, society, and
democracy; (7) Accountability, including auditability, minimization, and reporting of
negative impact, trade -offs and redress. All
requirements are equally important, support
each other, and should be implemented and evaluated throughout the AI system`s lifecycle.
For regulation, the EU lawmakers set criteria
differentiating “low risk” from “ high risk” AI
applications. They propose “a risk -based
approach, according to which a given AI
application should be considered high risk if both
the target sector (e.g. healthcare) and the
intended use involve significant risk (e.g. injury,
death)“. It was proposed “that operators of a highrisk AI system be subject to strict liability for
any harm or damage caused by a physical or
virtual activity, device or process driven by that AI system and be subject to a mandatory
insurance regime...AI systems not lis ted as a
highrisk AI system would, in principle, remain
subject to fault -based liability, unless stricter
national laws and consumer protection
legislation is in force...”(4). The EU “Medical
Devices Regulation” (MDR) operationalizes this
risk-based approac h, with medical devices being
divided into different risk classes. Depending on
the risk class of the product, a different
conformity assessment procedure is foreseen before the product can be placed on the EU
market. Low -risk medical devices are not subject
to a pre -market authorization by a regulatory
authority. Medium - and highrisk devices require
a conformity assessment procedure, involving
an independent third party as “notified body”.
In the United States, two different authorities regulate AI for health technologies; the Center s
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Both
are supervised by the US Department for Health
and Human Services (HHS). HSS issued the
Health Insurance Portability and Accountabilit y Act (HIPAA) in , a federal law “that required the creation of national standards to protect
sensitive patient health information from being
disclosed without the patient’s consent or
knowledge”. HHS issued the HIPAA Privacy
Rule to implement the requirements. The Privacy
Rule standards address the use and disclosure of individuals’ health information and is regulated
by the CDC. The FDA is responsible, among
others, “for protecting the public health by
ensuring the safety, efficacy, and security of human and veterinary drugs, biological products,
and medical devices”. Beyond that the FDA is
“responsible for advancing the public health by helping to speed innovations that make medical products more effective, safer, and more
affordable”. In , the FD A proposed a
regulatory framework for modifications to AI/MLbased “Software as a Medical Device (SaMD)”,
and in January , the FDA published a
“SaMD -Action Plan” that includes; a proposed
regulatory framework, a harmonized development of “Good Machine Learning
Practice (GMLP)”, a patient -centred approach
on the role of transparency to users of AI/ML
devices, a support of regulatory science efforts
to develop a methodology for evaluation and
improvement of ML algorithms concerning
robustness and resilience, and an advance of real-world performance pilots. FDA’s vision is
that, with appropriately tailored total product
lifecycle -based regulatory oversight, AI/MLbased SaMD will deliver safe and effective
functionality that improves the quality of care. FDA described a “Predetermined Change
Control Plan” in premarket submissions. In this approach, FDA expressed an expectation for transparency and real -world performance
monitoring by manufacturers that could enable FDA and manufacturers to evaluate and monito r
a software product from its pre -market
development through post -market performance.
With “Good Machine Learning Practice (GMLP)” the FDA describes a set of AI/MLbased best
practices - data management, feature extraction,
training, interpretability, eval uation, and
documentation – that are akin to good software
www.fdiworlddental.org Artificial Intelligence for Dentistry
18 engineering practices or quality system
practices.
Conclusions for clinical
practice
Overall, AI has implications for clinical practice
today, but more so in the future:
1. Current applications focus on diagnostic
support, mainly image analysis. Users should
critically appraise the accuracy of diagnostic
support systems, the data underlying the trained
model and its testing as well as the resulting generalizability. Explainability of any applicatio n
should be demanded, as the final responsibility
for any decisions emanating from using a
diagnostic support system remains with the user, i.e. the oral healthcare provider.
2. Emerging applications which may enter
the practice soon employ speech analysis
(natural language processing), facilitating
speedbased reporting in clinical care, but also
allowing rapid and comprehensive mining of
electronic health records etc. Such analyses
may form the backbone of health information
systems (dashboards) and support integrated
care models.
3. Personalized, precise, preventive, and
participatory care (P4 dentistry) (Hood and
Flores ) will need to employ data from a
range of sources and relies heavily on predictive modelling. Current predictive models are of
limited accuracy and generalizability, oftentimes
as the datasets used for training them are small
and stem from one or few sources. P4 dentistry remains a promise of the future for now.
Call for action
Based on the outlined four application areas and
the associated challenges, the oral health
community will need to actively engage in a
number of areas: • To make sure that AI applications acquire
maximal usefulness and generalizability, action
is needed to improve access to data and foster
its usage for training and testing. Data protection
concerns and reservations against the commercial use of healthcare data need to be carefully balanced against the potential benefit of
AI for patients and the society. Technological
approaches like federated learning s hould be
actively applied to dental AI tasks, and harmonization of data to improve interoperability
should be actively pursued.
• AI applications with demonstrated benefit
for patients, providers or the healthcare system
should be actively promoted, and its uptake
incentivized. Notably, the impact of these
applications on all stakeholders should be critically appraised.
• Generally, the evidence supporting AI
applications for oral and dental care needs strengthening. The active development of AI
should be complemented by research into the
true usefulness, applicability and implementation
of these applications.
• This evidence needs to be utilized by the
community; providers and healthcare decision
makers need to acquire a basic literacy around
data, digital applications and AI. For providers, the decision to use or not use an AI application should be taken on an informed basis – similar
to the decision to use or not use an adhesive
system, for example. An international core
curriculum should be developed and adapted to
national needs, and educators should be actively
trained to teach such curriculum in graduate or
postgraduate training.
The community should engage into the
widespread activities around standardization.
The development of standards towards AI will
serve as safeguards, and active engagement of
oral and dental stakeholders is indispensable if
these standards are expected to serve the oral and dental health community.
www.fdiworlddental.org Artificial Intelligence for Dentistry
19 References
1. Bell G, Hey T, Szalay A. . Beyond the
data deluge. Sc ience. : .
2. Bonawitz K, Eichner H, Grieskamp W, Huba
D, Ingerman A, Ivanov V, Kiddon C,
Konečný J, Mazzocchi S, McMahan HB.
. Towards federated learning at scale:
System design. arXiv preprint
arXiv: .
3. Chandra A, Skinner J. . Tec hnology
growth and expenditure growth in health
care. Journal of Economic Literature.
50(3): .
4. Cui Y, Yang M, Zhu J, Zhang H, Duan Z,
Wang S, Liao Z, Liu W. . Developments in diagnostic applications of saliva in human
organ diseases. Medicine in Novel
Technology and Devices. 13: .
5. Dayan I, Roth HR, Zhong A, Harouni A, Gentili A, Abidin AZ, Liu A, Costa AB, Wood
BJ, Tsai C -S et al. . Federated learning
for predicting clinical outcomes in patients with covid -19. Nature Medicine. 27(10): -
.
6. Duane B, Taylor T, Stahl -Timmins W, Hyland
J, Mackie P, Pollard A. . Carbon
mitigation, patient choice and cost reduction-
-triple bottom line optimisation for health care
planning. Public Health. (10): .
7. Flores M, Glusman G, Brogaard K, Price ND,
Hood L. . P4 medicine: How systems
medicine will transform the healthcare sector
and society. Personalized medicine.
10(6): .
8. Hood L, Flores M. . A personal view on
systems medicine and the emergence of
proactive p4 medicine: Predictive,
preventive, personalized and participatory. N
Biotechnol. 29(6): .
9. Joda T, Gallucci GO, Wismeijer D, Zitzmann
NU. . Augmented and virtual reality in
dental medicine: A systematic review.
Comput Biol Med. : . 10. Kaushal A, Altman R, Langlotz C. .
Geographic distribution of us cohorts used to
train deep learning algorithms. Jama.
(12): .
11. Kosan E, Krois J, Wingenfeld K, Deuter CE,
Gaudin R, Schwendicke F. . Patients'
perspectives on artificial intelligence i n
dentistry: A controlled study. J Clin Med.
11(8).
12. LeCun Y, Bengio Y, Hinton G. . Deep
learning. Nature. : - .
13. Marcos -Zambrano LJ, Karaduzovic -
Hadziabdic K, Loncar Turukalo T, Przymus P, Trajkovik V, Aasmets O, Berland M,
Gruca A, Hasic J , Hron K et al. .
Applications of machine learning in human
microbiome studies: A review on feature
selection, biomarker identification, disease
prediction and treatment. Frontiers in
Microbiology. 12.
14. Mertens S, Krois J, Cantu AG, Arsiwala LT,
Schwendicke F. . Artificial intelligence for caries detection: Randomized trial.
Journal of dentistry. : .
15. Nghiem SH, Connelly LB. . Convergence and determinants of health
expenditures in oecd countries. Health Econ
Rev. 7(1):29.
16. Dictionaries. .
https://www.oxfordlearnersdictionaries.com/d
efinition/english/artificial -intelligence;
[accessed].
17. Parasuraman R, Manzey DH. . Complacency and bias in human use of
automation: An attentional integration. Hum
Factors. 52(3): .
18. Riordain RN, Glick M, Mashhadani S,
Aravamudhan K, Barrow J, Cole D, Crall JJ,
Gallagher JE, Gibson J, Hegde S et al. .
Developing a standard set of patient -centred
outcomes for adult oral health - an
international, cross -disciplinary consensus.
Int De nt J. 71(1):40 -52.
19. Roberts M, Driggs D, Thorpe M, Gilbey J,
Yeung M, Ursprung S, Aviles -Rivero AI,
Etmann C, McCague C, Beer L et al. .
www.fdiworlddental.org Artificial Intelligence for Dentistry
20 Common pitfalls and recommendations for
using machine learning to detect and
prognosticate for covid19 using chest
radiographs and ct scans. Nature Machine Intelligence. 3(3): .
20. Schwendicke F, Chaurasia A, Arsiwala L,
Lee JH, Elhennawy K, Jost -Brinkmann PG,
Demarco F, Krois J. 2021a. Deep learning
for cephalometric landmark detection:
Systematic review and metaanalysis. Clin
Oral Investig.
21. Schwendicke F, Golla T, Dreher M, Krois J.
. Convolutional neural networks for
dental image diagnostics: A scoping review.
Journal of Dentistry. .
22. Schwendicke F, Krois J. . Data dentistry: How data are changing cli nical
care and research. J Dent Res. .
23. Schwendicke F, Krois J. . Precision
dentistry -what it is, where it fails (yet), and
how to get there. Clin Oral Investig.
26(4): .
24. Schwendicke F, Marazita ML, Jakubovics
NS, Krois J. . Bi g data and complex
data analytics: Breaking peer review?
Journal of dental
research. .
25. Schwendicke F, Rossi JG, Göstemeyer G,
Elhennawy K, Cantu AG, Gaudin R,
Chaurasia A, Gehrung S, Krois J. .
Cost-effectiveness of artificial intelligenc e for
proximal caries detection. Journal of dental
research. .
26. Schwendicke F, Singh T, Lee JH, Gaudin R,
Chaurasia A, Wiegand T, Uribe S, Krois J.
2021b. Artificial intelligence in dental
research: Checklist for authors, reviewers,
readers. J Dent. .
27. Wilkinson MD, Dumontier M, Aalbersberg IJ,
Appleton G, Axton M, Baak A, Blomberg N,
Boiten J -W, da Silva Santos LB, Bourne PE
et al. . The fair guiding principles for
scientific data management and
stewardship. Scientific Data. 3: . 28. Ethics and governance of artificial
intelligence for health. .
https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/
; [accessed].
29. Wynants L, Van Calster B, Collins GS, Riley
RD, Heinze G, Schuit E, Bonten MMJ, Dahly
DL, Damen JA, Debray TPA et al. . Prediction models for diagnosis and
prognosis of covid -19: Systematic review
and critical appraisal. BMJ. :m1328.
30. Zhou Q, Chen Zh, Cao Y -h, Peng S. .
Clinical impact and quality of randomized
controlled trials involving interventions
evaluati ng artificial intelligence prediction
tools: A systematic review. npj Digital
Medicine. 4(1): .
Textbooks in Contemporary Dentistry
Carlos/uni00A0Rocha/uni00A0Gomes/uni00A0Torres/uni00A0 /uni00A0/uni00A0Editor
Modern
Operative
Dentistry
Principles for/uni00A0Clinical Practice
Textbooks in Contemporary Dentistry
This textbook series presents the most recent advances in all fields of dentistry, with the aim of bridging the gap
between basic science and clinical practice. It will equip readers with an excellent knowledge of how to provide
optimal care reflecting current understanding and utilizing the latest materials and techniques. Each volume is
written by internationally respected experts in the field who ensure that information is conveyed in a concise,
consistent, and readily intelligible manner with the aid of a wealth of informative illustrations.
Textbooks in Contemporary Dentistry
will be especially valuable for advanced students, practitioners in the early stages of their career, and university
instructors.
More information about this series at http://www. springer. com/series/
Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres
Editor
Modern Operative
Dentistry
Principles for Clinical Practice
Editor
Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres
Institute of Science and Technology
São Paulo State University – UNESP
São Paulo, Brazil
The Work is based on a Portuguese language edition that has been first published in by Santos
Editora, São Paulo with the following title: Odontologia Restauradora Estética e Funcional: Princípios para a
Prática Clínica
ISSN - ISSN - (electronic)
Textbooks in Contemporary Dentistry
ISBN -3- - -3 ISBN -3- - -0 (eBook)
https://doi.org/10. / -3- - -0
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of the material is
concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on
microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication does not imply,
even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations
and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors, and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book are believed to
be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or the editors give a warranty,
expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been
made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, Cham, Switzerland
V
To my wife, Adriana Cristina de Mello Torres, and to my daughter, Letícia de Mello Torres, who participated on
my daily battle to finish this work, being always by my side, giving me support at all moments and strength to
persevere.
To my parents, Alfredo Gomes Torres Filho (in memoriam) and Josepha Rocha Gomes Torres, who always
motivated me to study, to work, and to never give up. You were always an example to be followed.
To my sister, Sonia Rocha Gomes Torres, the person who introduced me the dentistry and inspired me to
follow this path, which brought me lots of satisfaction and professional fulfillment. Thank you for your support
on many important moments of my life.
Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres
Foreword
The discipline of Operative Dentistry on São José
dos Campos Dental School was created in
and is now more than 45 years. During this time,
its growth and consolidation are evident, which
resulted from the hard work of its pioneers, who
with different personal characteristics, on hard
times and with rudimentary technology, were able
to conduct and improve it. In relation to that, it is
important to highlight the names of these distinguished professors: Newton José Giachetti, Delcio
Pasin, José Benedicto de Mello, and João Cândido
de Carvalho.
Many difficulties were overcome, but the lemma of
the discipline has always been the dedication to
the students, offering them quality of knowledge,
modern approaches, and evidence based on the
dental research results. Other differential from the
discipline, which prevails until today, is the respect
and harmony among professors and staff, maintaining a pleasant and favorable environment.
Since , the discipline has a postgraduation
program in Restorative Dentistry, which has
already prepared hundreds of masters and doctors
who now occupy important positions in Brazilian
and international universities. To write the foreword of this book, created by the current professors of the Operative Dentistry discipline, makes
me very proud, because it is an example of great
professional work.This book, edited by Prof. Carlos Rocha Gomes
Torres and contributors, comes to improve the
available dental literature, adding new points of
view, with chapters correlating important dental
specialties. Some chapters talk about classic topics
like cariology, diagnosis, prevention, instruments
and equipment, restorative techniques with differ -
ent materials, and dental hypersensitivity, besides
principles of ergonomics, so essential to the clinical practice. The content is based on a vast literature and the experience of the professors. The
chapters are illustrated with schematic drawings
and pictures of the clinical cases, allowing the
readers a better understanding about the techniques and procedures described on the text.
I consider that this book assembles valuable infor -
mation for the dentists. It represents the competent work from a group of professors from the
Institute of Science and Technology of São José dos
Campos, School of Dentistry, that with great care
share their knowledge.
Before ending, I would like to mention part of a
poem from Dom Helder Camara that says:
»More important than gain roads, cross seas or
reach supersonic speed, it is important to
open yourself to the others, discover them
and go toward their direction.
Maria Amélia Máximo de Araujo
Full Professor of Operative Dentistry
Institute of Science and Technology,
São Paulo State University – UNESP ,
São Paulo, Brazil
VII
Preface
Perhaps, the work of an educator is one that can
bring more satisfaction to a human being. The
opportunity to transmit what we have learned to
many people, who will use that information
throughout their lives, makes us feel that we are
doing something meaningful. Since the beginning of my career as a university professor, I tried
to improve the assimilation of knowledge by the
students, using different strategies in several
ways, to teach specific subjects of dentistry, some
of which are extremely complex. Despite the content of my lectures, at the end, I was frequently
asked by the students the same question: “Professor, which book should I use to study that subject?” However, the topics and content presented
in a lecture come from many different sources,
such as those we learned from our own professors, from several books and papers we read, and
even from our own professional experiences.
Therefore, the answer to that question was always
very hard. That inspired me to start creating this
book.
On my everyday professional life, I have the oppor -
tunity to follow students from their first contact
with Operative Dentistry discipline. It is necessary
to transmit them from basic knowledge about
nomenclature of cavities and principles of tooth
preparation to the most advanced information,
such as aesthetics analyses and restorative techniques. The idea of this book is to offer, in a single
place, all the basic information necessary for a student, which is starting his studies about Dentistry
to perform different types of direct dental restorations. The content of this book also aims to help
the clinicians who desire to update their knowledge, improving the quality of the treatments they
perform.The diagnosis of different dental problems is presented, teaching how to create an accurate treatment plan for the patients. The cariology is
discussed, in a way to give the reader a broad
knowledge about the etiology of caries disease, as
well the invasive and noninvasive treatment indication. The dentist must keep in mind that success
in Operative Dentistry is only possible if associated with the preventive dentistry. In other words,
the restorations should be considered part of the
caries disease treatment and not the treatment by
itself.
The ergonomics principles for dentistry were
added, because it is on the Operative Dentistry
discipline that students start to practice dental
treatments and should learn how to sit and work in
a healthy way. Lack of information at this moment
can lead to acquisition of deleterious habits, which
will negatively affect the dentist ́s health. The noncarious-related tooth sensitivity, mainly dentin
hypersensitivity and cracked tooth syndrome,
were also approached, trying to help the dentists
on the difficult diagnosis of those conditions.
This book would not be possible without the partnership of many colleagues, professors, and experts
from the Institute of Science and Technology of
Sao Paulo State University (UNESP) and from
other 19 dental schools around the world, of 13
different countries, who joined the project and
make it possible.
With the support of all, several years of intensive
work, awaken nights, and extra work on weekends
and holidays, the book was concluded. I hope that
it can contribute for the professional life of all
readers.
Carlo Rocha Gomes Torres
São Jose dos Campos, São Paulo, Brazil
Acknowledgments
To the Institute of Science and Technology of São
Paulo State University (UNESP) at São José dos
Campos City, which welcomed me with open arms
and gave me all the opportunities and support to
obtain my bachelor and PhD degrees.
To the current and retired professors of São José
dos Campos School of Dentistry, who throughout
the years, with hard work and a lot of devotion,
created and developed this renowned school that I
am honored to belong and always with willingness
transmitted their knowledge for hundreds of students graduated as dentists.
To the secretary and technicians of the Restor -
ative Dentistry Department, Rosângela da Silva
de Melo, Liliane Marques Franchitto, Fernanda
Maria de Brito Cunha and Josiana Maria Alves
Carneiro, for their daily support on my professional activities.
To my colleagues’ professors of Operative Dentistry, Sergio Eduardo de Paiva Goncalves, Maria
Filomena Rocha Lima Huhtala, José Roberto
Rodrigues, Cesar Rogério Pucci, Clóvis Pagani,
Claudio Hideki Kubo, Taciana Marco Ferraz
Caneppele, Karen Cristina Kazue Yui, and Eduardo Bresciani, for the constant support during the
years dedicated to the preparation of this book.
To my colleague’s professor, Alessandra Buhler
Borges, whose support and encouragement were
essential to conclude this book.
To the retired professors of Operative Dentistry,
Newton José Giachetti, Delcio Pasin (in memoriam), José Benedicto de Mello, João Candido de
Carvalho, Regina Célia dos Santos Pinto Silva, and
Rosehelene Marotta Araújo. I hope that this book
is consistent with the legacy left by you.
To the librarians of the Institute of Science and
Technology for their support to this work, specially to Maria das Dores Nogueira, who was
always willing to help me, since my days as under -
graduate student.
To our former undergraduate and graduate students, who contributed to obtain some pictures
used in many chapter ́s illustration.To the patients of Operative Dentistry Clinic, who
kindly permitted to use those pictures obtained
during their treatment in this book.
To the contributors from other universities, Doctors
Ali Ibrahim Abdalla (University of Tanta, Egypt),
Ana Carolina Botta (Stony Brook School of Dental
Medicine, USA), Andrea Baldi (University of Turin,
Italy), Anna Greta Barbe (University of Cologne,
Germany), Ana Raquel Benetti (University of
Copenhagen, Denmark), Annette Wiegand (University of Göttingen, Germany), Anuradha Prakki
(University of Toronto, Canada), Azam Bakhshandeh (University of Copenhagen, Denmark), Deepak
Mehta (V . S. Dental College & Hospital, India), Edoardo Alberto Vergano (University of Turin, Italy),
Eliel Soares Orenha (Sao Paulo University, Brazil),
Falk Schwendicke (Charité University Berlin, Ger -
many), Graziela Ribeiro Batista (A.T. Still University,
USA), Jukka Pekka Matinlinna (University of Hong
Kong), Michael J. Noack (University of Cologne,
Germany), Michael J. Wicht (University of Cologne,
Germany), Nadine Schlueter (University of Freiburg,
Germany), Nicola Scotti (University of Turin, Italy),
Pekka Vallittu (University of Turku, Finland), Rayssa
Ferreira Zanatta (University of Taubate, Brazil),
Satoshi Imazato (University of Osaka, Japan), Shankargouda Patil (Jazan University, Saudi Arabia),
Shilpa H. Bhandi (Jazan University, Saudi Arabia),
and Thomas Attin (University of Zurich, Switzer -
land), experts on their field, who shared their knowledge to improve the different chapters.
To Professor Rayssa Ferreira Zanatta for her outstanding work on the bibliography organization of
all chapters.
To Professor Shankargouda Patil for his inestimable partnership and support, since the first idea of
translating and publishing this book into the English language.
To Professor Maria Amelia Maximo de Araujo,
who inspired me to become a professor and was
my advisor during undergraduate and postgraduate training. Without her presence in my life, I
certainly would not be a professor and have the
privilege to teach others what I learned. Thanks for
the friendship and support during all these years.
IX
Contents
1 Diagnosis and Treatment Planning .......................................................... 1
Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres, Anna Greta Barbe, Michael Johannes Noack, and Michael Jochen Wicht
2 Ergonomics Principles Applied to the Dental Clinic ........................................ 43
Karen Cristina Kazue Yui, Cristiani Siqueira Barbosa Lencioni, Eliel Soares Orenha,
and Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres
3 Cariology ...................................................................................... 77
Taciana Marco Ferraz Caneppele, Alessandra Bühler Borges, Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres,
José Roberto Rodrigues, and Thomas Attin
4 Instruments and Equipments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sergio Eduardo de Paiva Gonçalves, Cesar Rogério Pucci, Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres,
and Anuradha Prakki
5 Nomenclature and Classification of Cavities and Tooth Preparations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres and Ana Carolina Botta
6 General Principles of Tooth Preparation and Carious Tissue Removal ....................
Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres and Falk Schwendicke
7 Isolation of the Operating Field .............................................................
Alessandra Bühler Borges, Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres, Ana Raquel Benetti,
and Azam Bakhshandeh
8 Matrix and Wedge Systems ..................................................................
Cesar Rogério Pucci, Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres, and Ali Ibrahim Abdalla
9 Protection of the Dentin-Pulp Complex .....................................................
Adriana Cristina de Mello Torres, Ana Paula Martins Gomes, Claudio Hideki Kubo,
and Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres
10 Tooth Preparations for Amalgam Restorations .............................................
Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres and Deepak Mehta
11 Amalgam Restorations .......................................................................
Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres, Shankargouda Patil, and Graziela Ribeiro Batista
12 Extensive Amalgam Restorations ...........................................................
Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres, Shilpa Hanamaraddi Bhandi, and João Cândido de Carvalho
13 Light-Curing Units ............................................................................
Nicola Scotti, Andrea Baldi, Edoardo Alberto Vergano, Claudio Hideki Kubo,
and Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres
14 Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth ..................................................
Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres and Rayssa Ferreira Zanatta
15 Composite Restoration on Posterior Teeth .................................................
Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres, Marcelo Balsamo, and Satoshi Imazato
X
16 Preventive Measures and Minimally Invasive Restorative Procedures ...................
Alessandra Bühler Borges, Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres, and Nadine Schlueter
17 Aesthetic Veneers: What Are They and How to Handle Them? ............................
Maria Filomena Rocha Lima Huhtala, Clovis Pagani, Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres,
Pekka Kalevi Vallittu, and Jukka Pekka Matinlinna
18 Dentin Hypersensitivity and Cracked Teeth ................................................
Eduardo Bresciani, Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres, and Annette Wiegand
Supplementary Information
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Contents
XI
Contributors
Ali Ibrahim Abdalla
Department of Restorative Dentistry
Faculty of Dentistry, Tanta University
Tanta, Egypt
ali_abdalla79@yahoo.com
Thomas Attin
Clinic of Conservative and Preventive Dentistry
Center of Dental Medicine, University of Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
thomas.attin@zzm.uzh.ch
Azam Bakhshandeh
Department of Odontology, Section of Cariology
and Endodontics & Section of Oral Radiology
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences
University of Copenhagen
Copenhagen, Denmark
azamba@sund.ku.dk
Andrea Baldi
Department of Cariology and Operative Dentistry
Dental School Lingotto, University of Turin
Turin, Italy
andrea.baldi.od@gmail.com
Marcelo Balsamo
Private Practice in Esthetic Dentistry
Technical consultant of Voco GmBh Dental materials
São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil
balsamo@uol.com.br
Anna Greta Barbe
Department of Operative Dentistry and Periodontology
University Hospital, University of Cologne
Cologne, Germany
anna.barbe@uk-koeln.de
Graziela Ribeiro Batista
Missouri School of Dentistry and Oral Health
A.T. Still University
Kirksville, MO, USA
grazielabatista@atsu.edu
Ana Raquel Benetti
Department of Odontology, Section of Dental Materials
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences
University of Copenhagen
Copenhagen, Denmark
arbe@sund.ku.dkShilpa Hanamaraddi Bhandi
Department of Restorative Dental Sciences
Faculty of Dentistry, Jazan University
Shwajra, Jazan, Saudi Arabia
shilpa.bhandi@gmail.com
Alessandra Bühler Borges
Department of Restorative Dentistry
Institute of Science and Technology of São Jose dos
Campos, São Paulo State University – UNESP
São Jose dos Campos, São Paulo, Brazil
alessandra.buhler@unesp.br
Ana Carolina Botta
Division of Operative and Dental Materials
Department of General Dentistry
Stony Brook School of Dental Medicine
Stony Brook, NY, USA
anacarolina.deoliveira@stonybrookmedicine.edu
Eduardo Bresciani
Department of Restorative Dentistry
Institute of Science and Technology of São Jose dos
Campos, São Paulo State University – UNESP
São Jose dos Campos, São Paulo, Brazil
eduardo.bresciani@unesp.br
Taciana Marco Ferraz Caneppele
Department of Restorative Dentistry
Institute of Science and Technology of São Jose dos
Campos, São Paulo State University – UNESP
São Jose dos Campos, São Paulo, Brazil
taciana.caneppele@unesp.br
João Cândido de Carvalho
Department of Restorative Dentistry
Institute of Science and Technology of São Jose dos
Campos, São Paulo State University – UNESP
São Jose dos Campos, São Paulo, Brazil
jccarvalho901@gmail.com
Adriana Cristina de Mello Torres
Department of Restorative Dentistry
Institute of Science and Technology of São Jose dos
Campos, São Paulo State University – UNESP
São Jose dos Campos, São Paulo, Brazil
adrianacrismt@gmail.com
XII
Sergio Eduardo de Paiva Gonçalves
Department of Restorative Dentistry
Institute of Science and Technology of São Jose dos
Campos, São Paulo State University – UNESP
São Jose dos Campos, São Paulo, Brazil
sergio.e.goncalves@unesp.br
Ana Paula Martins Gomes
Department of Restorative Dentistry
Institute of Science and Technology of São Jose dos
Campos, São Paulo State University – UNESP
São Jose dos Campos, São Paulo, Brazil
paula.gomes@unesp.br
Maria Filomena Rocha Lima Huhtala
Department of Restorative Dentistry
Institute of Science and Technology of São Jose dos
Campos, São Paulo State University – UNESP
São Jose dos Campos, São Paulo, Brazil
mf.huhtala@unesp.br
Satoshi Imazato
Department of Biomaterials Science
Graduate School of Dentistry, Osaka University
Osaka, Japan
imazato@dent.osaka-u.ac.jp
Claudio Hideki Kubo
Department of Restorative Dentistry
Institute of Science and Technology of São Jose dos
Campos, São Paulo State University – UNESP
São Jose dos Campos, São Paulo, Brazil
chkubo@gmail.com
Cristiani Siqueira Barbosa Lencioni
Department of Restorative Dentistry
Institute of Science and Technology of São Jose dos
Campos, São Paulo State University – UNESP
São Jose dos Campos, São Paulo, Brazil
cristianisbarbosa@yahoo.com.br
Jukka Pekka Matinlinna
Dental Materials Science, Applied Oral Sciences &
Community Dental Care, Faculty of Dentistry
The University of Hong Kong,
Prince Philip Dental Hospital
Sai Ying Pun, Hong Kong SAR, China
jpmat@hku.hk
Deepak Mehta
Department of Conservative Dentistry and Endodontics
Vokkaligara Sangha Dental College and Hospital
Bangalore, India
drdeemehta@gmail.comMichael Johannes Noack
Department of Operative Dentistry and Periodontology
University Hospital, University of Cologne
Cologne, Germany
michael.noack@uk-koeln.de
Eliel Soares Orenha
Department of Pediatric Dentistry,
Orthodontics, and Community Dental Health
Bauru School of Dentistry, Sao Paulo University – USP
Bauru, São Paulo, Brazil
eliel@usp.br
Clovis Pagani
Department of Restorative Dentistry
Institute of Science and Technology of São Jose dos
Campos, São Paulo State University – UNESP
São Jose dos Campos, São Paulo, Brazil
clovis.pagani@unesp.br
Shankargouda Patil
Department of Maxillofacial Surgery and Diagnostic
Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry, Jazan University
Shwajra, Jazan, Saudi Arabia
sbpatil1612@gmail.com
Anuradha Prakki
Dental Research Institute, Faculty of Dentistry
University of Toronto
Toronto, ON, Canada
a.prakki@dentistry.utoronto.ca
Cesar Rogério Pucci
Department of Restorative Dentistry
Institute of Science and Technology of São Jose dos
Campos, São Paulo State University – UNESP
São Jose dos Campos, São Paulo, Brazil
cesar.pucci@unesp.br
José Roberto Rodrigues
Department of Restorative Dentistry
Institute of Science and Technology of São Jose dos
Campos, São Paulo State University – UNESP
São Jose dos Campos, São Paulo, Brazil
jroberto@ict.unesp.br
Nadine Schlueter
Division for Cariology, Department of Operative
Dentistry and Periodontology
Medical Center-University of Freiburg, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Freiburg
Freiburg, Germany
nadine.schlueter@uniklinik-freiburg.de Contributors
XIII
Falk Schwendicke
Department Operative and Preventive Dentistry
Center of Dental Medicine, Charité University Berlin
Berlin, Germany
falk.schwendicke@charite.de
Nicola Scotti
Department of Surgical Sciences
Dental School Lingotto, University of Turin
Turin, Italy
nicola.scotti@unito.it
Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres
Department of Restorative Dentistry
Institute of Science and Technology of São Jose dos
Campos, São Paulo State University – UNESP
São Jose dos Campos, São Paulo, Brazil
carlos.rg.torres@unesp.br
Pekka Kalevi Vallittu
Department of Biomaterials Science
Institute of Dentistry, University of Turku
Turku, Finland
pekka.vallittu@utu.fi
Edoardo Alberto Vergano
Department of Cariology and Operative Dentistry
Dental School Lingotto, University of Turin
Turin, Italy
edoardo.vergano@gmail.comMichael Jochen Wicht
Department of Operative Dentistry and Periodontology
University Hospital, University of Cologne
Cologne, Germany
michael.wicht@uk-koeln.de
Annette Wiegand
Department of Preventive Dentistry,
Periodontology and Cariology
University Medical Center, University of Göttingen
Göttingen, Germany
annette.wiegand@med.uni-goettingen.de
Karen Cristina Kazue Yui
Department of Restorative Dentistry
Institute of Science and Technology of São Jose dos
Campos, São Paulo State University – UNESP
São Jose dos Campos, São Paulo, Brazil
karenyui@hotmail.com
Rayssa Ferreira Zanatta
Department of Restorative Dentistry
School of Dentistry, University of Taubaté – UNITAU
Taubaté, São Paulo, Brazil
zanatta.rayssa@gmail.comContributors
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG
C. R. G. Torres (ed.), Modern Operative Dentistry, Textbooks in Contemporary Dentistry,
https://doi.org/10. / -3- - -0_11 1
Diagnosis and Treatment
Planning
Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres, Anna Greta Barbe, Michael Johannes Noack,
and Michael Jochen Wicht
1.1 Introduction – 2
1.2 Subjective Exam – 3
1.2.1 Chief Complaint – 3
1.2.2 Medical History – 4
1.2.3 Dental History – 6
1.3 Objective Exam – 7
1.3.1 General Aspects and Vital Signals – 7
1.3.2 Extraoral Exam – 7
1.3.3 Intraoral Exam – 7
1.3.4 Esthetic Evaluation – 23
1.4 Evaluation of Caries Risk – 28
1.5 General Treatment Plan – 29
1.6 Planning Restorative Treatment – 31
1.7 Interdisciplinary Aspects – 32
1.8 Oral Health Records – 32
References –
2
1Learning Objectives
After completion of this chapter, the reader is competent to:
5Understand the importance of unfolding the patient’s chief
complaint
5Use open-ended questions and periodical summaries as
communication tools during the medical interview
5Apply active listening as a stylistic means to keep patients
talking
5Recognize medical conditions that may interfere with dental
treatments
5Identify indications of antibiotic prophylaxis in risk patients
to prevent bacterial endocarditis
5Identify medicinal product interactions and most prevalent
diseases in a patient
5Describe challenging conditions when treating elderly
patients
5Structure the dental assessment in different sections, i.e.,
anamnesis, self-reported complaints, extraand intraoral
examination
5Highlight the most important criteria when assessing caries
and non-carious lesions, periodontal and endodontic
conditions
5Differentiate between pathologic and within biological
variation conditions
5Differentiate assessment criteria for different types of
restorations
5Identify biological risks and discriminate harmful from
harmless conditions
5Explain the multifactorial genesis of non-carious lesions and
know operative and non-operative treatment options
5Explain conditions that lead to extrinsic and intrinsic staining
5Reproduce basic knowledge about occlusion concepts and
function in general
5Understand the basics of dental esthetics
5Identify risk factors that promote the onset or progression of
oral diseases and calculate the individual caries and periodontal risk
5Come to a patient-centered personalized treatment plan
according to shared decision-making concepts
5Apply ASA classification to categorize patients according
their general state of health
5Differentiate stages within the treatment concept and stick
to them
5Create a patient file and know about the importance of
detailed documentation
1.1 Introduction
Diagnosis describes the process of determination and judgment of variations from what is normal . Abnormal situations can bring up discomfort, pain, and loss of function
and may compromise esthetics. Therefore, diagnoses of
alterations from what is normal in the stomatognathic system is fundamental to execute an efficient dental treatment,
aiming the re-establishment of the patient’s health. However,
abnormal situations may also be a biological variation and not harmful to the patient’s health. Based on the most probable diagnosis, a treatment plan can be compiled in close collaboration with the patient . Planning the clinical
procedures is crucial since mistakes both in treatment planning and in the practical execution of such plan will lead to a
result that is far from the ideal [17, 66].
In modern dentistry, treatment planning should be
guided by patients’ wishes and demands in the first place.
Based on patients’ chief complaints and findings of the clinical examination, a list of diagnoses is formulated. One by
one, the problems are analyzed regarding options for treatment, each one with their inherent advantages and disadvantages. The best solution for each problem is chosen and
written in sequence; so, this list of solutions will lead to the
treatment plan .
The process to reach a treatment plan is primarily driven
by dental problems presented by the patient. However, comprehensive evaluation of the patients’ general health, socioeconomic status, and individual preferences is mandatory to
reach consent about the most suitable and personalized treatment option.
Items included on the treatment plan can be classified by
topics, as endodontic, periodontal, restorative, etc. The list is
dynamical and can be modified if new problems occur or the
patient changes his or her opinion during the course of treatment . The treatment for each individual problem has
the objective to reach the idealized final result, in other
words, the individually desired oral rehabilitation of the
patient. If the proposed treatment for any individual problem conflicts with the proposed general treatment, the individual or general plan has to be modified until it coincides to
each other .
The patients’ interview should usually begin with the
evaluation of the chief complaint and patients’ expectations
relative to the treatment outcome. Next, a medical and dental
history has to be recorded. On the medical history, the presence of systemic diseases including allergies and medications
that affect the patient and more importantly the subsequent
dental treatment has to be investigated. On the “dental history, ” previous treatments should be evaluated as well as the
degree of success that was obtained.
Actually, most dental patients are anxious to a certain
degree. Agitation is usually observed especially during the
first appointment. As dental professionals, we have to know
that agitation can lead to speechlessness, and frightened
patients tend to forget about what they really want to explain.
Therefore, we need to be trained in professional interviewing
and how to get to the core of patients’ demands and expectations.
The objective part of the evaluation begins with the analysis of the patients’ general aspect followed by the vital signs
checking such as blood pressure among others, an extraoral
exam of head and neck region, visually or by touch. Then, the
dentist follows to the intraoral exam, checking the soft tissue,
gingiva, and tooth structure. The goal of the exam is to distinguish the normal from the abnormal, determining which
abnormal findings are a problem and require treatment or it
C. R. G. Torres et al.
3 1
will influence the treatment. The nonclinical part of the exam
is performed by the analysis of radiographies, plaster models
on articulators, and photographs .
Nowadays, the clinical approaches should be based on a
so-called evidence-based clinical practice, on which the clinician guides their decisions related to the patient’s health on
published findings on scientific researches. Therefore, this
approach can be defined as the conscious, explicit, and
insightful use of the best available scientific evidence when
taking decisions about the care of the patients. This vision
allows the integration among individual clinical quality of
the dentist, the patient’s preferences, and the best basis found
on scientific researches [17, 43].
1.2 Subjective Exam
The data from the so-called subjective exam, also called
anamnesis, come from the interview with the patient. It
derives from the Greek words, ana (open) and mnesis
(memory ). In a medical context, anamnesis means recordation, reminiscence, that is, the group of information that is
part of the clinical history of the patient up to the moment
of the exam . On this exam, crucial information is gathered to determine the patient’s desires and the causal factors of many oral diseases, as well the safety of dental
procedures.
1.2.1 Chief Complaint
The chief complaint is the motive why a patient consults the
dentist. The answer should be registered on the file, preferably using the exact patient’s wording ( . Fig. 1.12). During
discussion and registration of the chief complaint, the
patient will notice that his problem was acknowledged.
Focusing on the chief complaint and paraphrasing it with
our own words ensure that patients would feel correctly
understood and dentists do not lose sight of the major concerns. Concomitantly it positively affects the doctor-patient
relation showing that we listen carefully and really want to
get to the core of a patient’s complaint [54, 66]. If the dentist
too quickly interrupts the patient or tries to focus on other
problems, omitting the discussion of the chief complaints,
patients may question the dentist’s professional competencies. The patient should be encouraged and guided to discuss
all the aspects of the problems in that matter including location, duration, and quality of symptoms, as well as any
related factors. These information are called the history of
the present illness.
It is advisable to start the interview with an open-ended
question that allows the patient to explain their chief complaints. “How may I help you” and “what can I do for you
today?” are very nice opening questions since patients
desire opportunities to present concerns in their own
time . In contrast to closed-ended questions (“I under -
stand you have an aching tooth”), patients will provide sig-nificantly longer problem presentations when the doctor
initiates the interview with an open-ended question.
Thereby a patient is respected as an autonomous person
rather than a passive, confirmative authority. Patients
should not be interrupted when presenting their chief complaint but rather be encouraged to provide as much pertinent information as possible.
Active listening is a communication competency that
helps health-care professionals to deeply reveal the patients’
concerns, ideas, and explanations about a given disease .
In the first step, it is important to present our undivided
attention to the patient and encourage them to talk. Nodding
and any other open nonverbal communication, including eye
contact and an open posture, will help to make the patient
feel comfortable and welcome. Telephone calls, ambient
noises, or distractions of any other source should be avoided
at any time. Just as well, taking notes on a file or in the computer may unsettle the patient while talking. In case there is
an urgent need to do so, we should comment on that beforehand and explain to the patient that it is inevitable to take
down notes, but we pay full attention notwithstanding. Active
listeners avoid interrupting at all costs. After the patient has
explained the chief complaint, it is wise to rephrase it with
our own words to ensure we have fully understood the central point. We may encourage the patient to correct or add
something whenever appropriate.
Perception of verbal and nonverbal cueing plays a central
role when we try to disclose hidden messages from another
person. Signal words like “painful, ” “expensive, ” “timeconsuming, ” etc. might be a hint for worries a patient does
not want to unfold straight away. Observing a person’s body
language will help us to get a vision about their mental and
emotional state.
Addressing a patient’s feelings is the third step that in
most cases will lead to a trustful and overt doctor-patient
relationship. Potential longer lulls in a conversation may feel
awkward for both of the interlocutors. It is not wise to bridge
that break immediately nor to pose a second question when
the answer is not given immediately. Allowing pauses is a
rhetorical device that can inspire a patient to disclose further
information. We should always keep in mind that most
patients feel tense at least which can cause confusion or
short-term oblivion.
At the end of medical interview, it is highly recommended
to summarize the essential points and ask the patient whether
there is anything they would like to address or which has
been stated incorrectly. A final summary appears highly professional and marks the end or a new phase within the conversation. In longer consultations, intermediate summaries
will help the professional to structure the interview and highlight the most relevant points not only to the patient but also
to himself or herself.
> The chief complaint is the motive why a patient
consults the dentist. The answer should be registered
on the file, preferably using the exact patient’s
wording.Diagnosis and Treatment Planning
4
1 > It is advisable to start the interview with an
open-ended question that allows the patient to
explain their chief complaints. “How may I help you? ”
and “what can I do for you today?” are very nice
opening questions since patients desire opportunities
to present concerns in their own time.
> Patients should not be interrupted when presenting
their chief complaint but rather be encouraged to
provide as much pertinent information as possible.
> Perception of verbal and nonverbal cueing plays a
central role when we try to disclose hidden messages
from another person.
> At the end of medical interview, it is highly
recommended to summarize the essential points and
ask the patient whether there is anything they would
like to address or which has been stated incorrectly.
1.2.2 Medical History
Before planning an oral examination or dental treatments,
the general medical history of the patient has to be checked
thoroughly; general health problems or medication may
influence therapeutic decisions or the results of dental treatment and may even threaten the patient’s life. Also, dentists
have the responsibility of guaranteeing that the dental treatments do not produce systemic consequences by interacting
with previous diseases or medication intake. Initially, the
patient or legal guardian should answer a comprehensive
questionnaire concerning the patient’s medical history
(. Figs. 1.12 and 1.13), preferably in a quiet environment
such as the waiting room. Some dental institutions either
send these forms to the patient or offer an online version to
be completed prior to the first appointment. During the visit,
the dentist will check the answers and address any open
question directly with the patient . The form helps to
identify conditions that may interfere, complicate, or contraindicate dental procedures . Questionnaires should be
modified according to the specialty of the clinician and the
category of patient (i.e., elderly, children, etc.), and additional
surveys may be added if necessary. Patients or legal guardians should sign the questionnaires. This information needs
to be updated on a regular risk-adapted basis .
The clinician may identify infectious and contagious diseases of compulsory notification, allergies, current and past
medication that may interact with drugs prescribed or
injected by the dentist, or systemic diseases (i.e., endocarditis) that may demand preoperative antibiotic treatment .
A meticulous record of the medical history should avoid lifethreatening incidents and identify conditions that require
medical consultation. In individuals who present with several
systemic diseases and take many medications, the dentist
should closely collaborate with a general practitioner to minimize the overall health risk during dental treatment . > Before planning an oral examination or dental
treatments, the general medical history of the patient
has to be checked thoroughly; general health
problems or medication may influence therapeutic
decisions or the results of dental treatment and may
even threaten the patient’s life.
1.2.2.1 Compulsory Notification of Infectious
Diseases
When reviewing the medical history, the dentist may identify
clinical manifestations of infectious and contagious diseases
that put the life of a patient at risk or which involve a delay in
dental treatment. It may be that the dentist is the first health
professional to identify patients with those diseases. Apart
from arranging medical consultation followed by medical
treatment, the governmental health system has to be notified
of some of these cases, following the rules established by each
country. Often, the general health practitioner will take care
of the procedures, but the dentist should confirm these
actions. The disease control system requires certain infectious and contagious diseases to be reported, so that they can
trace a map with the number of cases within a specific region
and check the risk of an epidemic, enabling initiation of public health measures, such as vaccination to ameliorate the
spread of the disease. The list of compulsory notification diseases is frequently revised and changes according to each
country.
> When reviewing the medical history, the dentist may
identify clinical manifestations of infectious and
contagious diseases that put the life of a patient at
risk, or which involve a delay in dental treatment.
1.2.2.2 Systemic Diseases
Patients with systemic diseases may require special care,
especially those with cardiac disorders. Dental procedures
that cause bleeding may allow oral bacteria to penetrate the
bloodstream (bacteremia) and establish themselves on
abnormal or damaged valves, thus increasing the risk of bacterial endocarditis. According to the guidelines, patients with
prosthetic cardiac valves or prosthetic material used for car -
diac valve repair, and those with a previous infective endocar -
ditis, are at high risk of bacterial colonization. Other patients,
who should receive an antibiotic prophylaxis prior to highly
invasive dental procedures [1 ], include those with congenital
heart diseases involving unrepaired cyanotic defects (including palliative shunts and conduits), completely repaired
defects with prosthetic material or devices during the first 6
months after the procedure, and repaired defects with residual defects at or adjacent to the site of the prosthetic patch or
device. These procedures comprise extractions and periodontal treatments, probing, scraping, gingival surgeries,
implants, reimplantation of displaced teeth, and routine dental prophylaxis when bleeding is likely. Patients who have
taken a combination of fenfluramine and phentermine, as an
appetite suppressor to lose weight, are more susceptible to
C. R. G. Torres et al.
5 1
cardiac valve diseases. Patients that have a joint prosthesis are
also at high risk of developing problems associated with bacteria, because they may establish themselves up to 2 years
after they have entered the bloodstream . However, in
general administration of prophylactic antibiotics cannot be
recommended prior to dental procedures to prevent prosthetic joint infection , because of the risk of antibiotic
resistance; a careful risk-benefit analysis remains necessary.
Therefore, antibiotic prophylaxis is not indicated for procedures that present low bacterial incidence, such as dental restoration procedures, placement of a rubber dam, local
anesthesia, removal of sutures, radiographies, post cementation, installation of prosthesis, impressions, etc. .
Tip
Take your time and try to keep the patient’s medical history
comprehensive and up to date. It might save lives.
1.2.2.3 Medications
A patient’s medication may have a broad impact on the stomatognathic system or, in the case of polypharmacy, lead to
substance interactions. Certain drugs are known to change
the salivary composition or flow rates, increase tissue bleeding, produce lichenoid reactions, lead to gingival hyperplasia, or change the overall appearance of the soft tissues [54,
66]. The reduction in salivary flow is associated with the prescription of over medications, including anticholiner -
gics, adrenaline blockers, antipsychotics, antihistamines,
diuretics, and antihypertensives. A reduced salivary flow
increases the risk of developing (root) caries, some alterations of the mucosa, an increase in biofilm retention, and
reduced quality of life due to xerostomia [10, 54, 65]. Dentists
should recognize the use of medications that increase the risk
for xerostomia and hyposalivation and should initiate corresponding treatment concepts. Close communication with
the general practitioner and the use of alternative medications that have fewer adverse effects on salivary flow may be
helpful, accompanied by treatment of the dry mouth symptoms [ 9]. Tricyclic antidepressants can sensitize patients to
epinephrine, a very common vasoconstrictor on local anesthesia. Antiepileptic agents can predispose to gingival hyper -
plasia in the presence of bacterial biofilm, and antibiotics can
reduce the effectiveness of contraceptives .
There are restrictions on the use of dental anaesthetic solutions that contains sympathomimetic amine vasoconstrictors
(i.e., adrenaline, noradrenaline, levonordefrin, phenylephrine) in patients having hypertension and serious cardiac
problems, uncontrolled diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism,
pheochromocytoma, sensitivity to sulfites, use tricyclic antidepressants, phenothiazine compounds or non-selective beta
blockers or are crack and cocaine users [4 , 54]. Medication
for hypertension that contain propranolol, when associated
with adrenaline-containing anesthesia, may cause a sudden increase in arterial blood pressure and induce a serious hypertensive crisis. In such cases, it is recommended to use a
non-adrenergic vasoconstrictor such as felypressin. However,
its use is contraindicated in pregnant women because it
may lead to uterine contractions. The anesthetic substance
prilocaine, when used in patients with cardiac arrhythmias
who use antiarrhythmic medications such as tocainide, can
increase the toxicity of the antiarrhythmic drugs. Prilocaine
must not be used in patients with anemia or pregnant women
because of the risk of methemoglobinemia [4 ].
Retraction cords with adrenaline used as vasoconstrictors have been abandoned due to the availability of better
alternatives for hemostasis . In addition, use of epinephrine in patients with antidepressants needs to be analyzed
with caution due to its potential for interactions . When
oral hypoglycemic drugs are swallowed and absorbed, they
are released into the bloodstream. Some molecules are free in
the blood and produce its therapeutic effects, while the rest
are bound to plasma proteins. However, nonsteroidal antiinflammatories can compete with oral hypoglycemic drugs
for these plasmatic bonds, increasing the fraction of free
molecules, which may result in hypoglycemia.
1.2.2.4 Allergies
The patient’s reports regarding allergy history and anamnestic allergic reactions must be investigated, especially with
regard to previously injected anesthesia. It is well-known that
many problems related to anesthesia occur because of accidental intravascular injection, high dosages, and excessive
use of anesthetic. Some individuals present allergic reactions,
especially to the preservatives of the injected solution.
Naturally, patients that report allergy problems with local
anesthesia should not receive this type of medication until
further investigation has been performed by a specialized
doctor. The patient’s opinion should always be trusted until
those additional tests have excluded the risk of allergy. This
precaution is necessary, considering that anaphylactic shock
can put the patient’s life at risk, requiring immediate treatment with basic life support measurements and necessitating
removal to a hospital .
> Some individuals present allergic reactions, especially
to the preservatives of the injected solution.
Some patients report latex allergies; in those cases, it is recommended that the clinician uses vinyl gloves and a rubber
dam without latex. Other allergies with relevance to dental
treatments include allergic reaction to restorative materials,
such as amalgams or resinous monomers, and will dictate the
choice of dental materials to be used. Some individuals also
present allergy to hydrogen peroxide, which contraindicates
bleaching treatments, especially those techniques that are
available at home.
1.2.2.5 Older Patients
Because of the well-known demographic changes, particularly in western countries, the number of older patients that
need to be treated in dental practice will continue to
increase over the coming decades. These patients represent a Diagnosis and Treatment Planning
6
1vulnerable and heterogeneous patient group, due to a great
number of changes related to aging, behavior, diet, and oral
and systemic health; accordingly, this group requires special
attention. The prevalence of multimorbidity and polyphar -
macy is high and has a negative impact on daily oral hygiene
capabilities. Neurodegenerative or mental disorders such as
depression, Alzheimer’s disease, and Parkinson’s diseases
play a major role in reduced oral health . Furthermore,
around 50% of individuals over the age of 75 years take at
least two medications [12, 54], increasing the risk of reduced
salivary flow rates and oral diseases .
> Because of the well-known demographic changes,
particularly in western countries, the number of older
patients that need to be treated in dental practice will
continue to increase over the coming decades.
> Around 50% of individuals over the age of 75 years
take at least two medications, increasing the risk of
reduced salivary flow rates and oral diseases.
The aging process in older patients produces physiological
changes that are not pathological. Attrition, erosion, and
abrasion of enamel reduce its thickness so that it becomes
more mineralized and translucent; the underlying dentin
becomes more apparent, resulting in a yellow appearance of
the teeth, and the pulpal chamber reduces in size. The chromogenic substances from the diet penetrate the enamel’s
microcrystalline structure, making it darker. The gum may
become inflamed and friable, associated with gum recession
and consequent exposure of the root.
The oral alterations associated with malnourishment,
immunosuppression, dehydration, smoking, alcohol consumption, diseases, medications, and dental problems reduce
the ability to feel the taste and smell in older patients .
The perception of salt and bitterness and the olfactory senses
lower with age, while the perception of sweet and sour is
unchanged. As a result, food becomes less tasty and unappetizing. Therefore, sugar, fat, and salt are added in an attempt
to improve the taste. It is crucial to evaluate dietary habits in
older patients to identify malnutrition, give suggestions for
improvement while lowering the risk for dental diseases at
the same time. For example, aromatic herbs can improve the
taste of food in place of sugar and salt. Saliva stimulants,
candy, sugar-free gum with citrus aromas that contain xylitol
or other sugar substituents, and brushing or scraping the
tongue can improve the sense of taste, while smoking cessation can improve the olfactory perception of older people.
Periodontal diseases can progress faster in older patients,
and root caries is the most significant reason for dental loss
in these patients. Inefficient removal of the biofilm, reduced
salivary flow rates, a diet rich in refined sugar, the presence of
fixed or removable prosthetic appliances, abrasion of the
cementoenamel junction (CEJ), gingival recession, and bone
loss due to periodontal disease mean that the root surface is
more prone to caries. Accordingly, dental restorations are
hard to perform, satisfactory filing materials are missing, and
the restorations are at a high risk of caries recurrence .1.2.2.6 Psychological and Social Aspects
During anamnesis, the clinician should analyze the patient’s
expectation and priorities relative to the treatment and his
oral health in general. Knowing about a patient’s priority is
crucial when it comes to treatment decisions. Patient’s expectations are highly variable and in the vast majority of cases
not congruent with those of the attending dentist. Accepting
that patients have different views than ours leaves the
decisionmaking process much easier and both doctors and
patients much more satisfied. Therefore, we have to evaluate
what is important for an individual patient. Esthetics, comfort, time-consumption, monetary aspects, longevity, success
rate, and biocompatibility are among the most important
categories that should be discussed before we start discussing
treatment options.
Social inequality in many countries leads to diminished
access and lower financial means for medical treatment of
the socially deprived. Caries, however, the most prevalent
chronic disease worldwide most often affects underprivileged members of our society . In order to overcome
this obvious inconsistency, health-care systems should
become aware of this immanent problem and try to make
dental health services accessible and affordable for those
who are in need of it. Overtreatment of people in higher
socioeconomic positions reflects the flip side of modern
health-care systems.
> Social inequality in many countries leads to diminished
access and lower financial means for medical
treatment of the socially deprived.
1.2.3 Dental History
The patients’ dental history comprises the registration of previous experiences in terms of dental treatments as well the
current oral problems (chief complaint). Those reports give
us valuable information about previous and existing problems, positive and negative experiences with the dental treatment, how often a patient visited the dentist, and the patients’
attitude toward past dental treatments. Integration of the
information will give us an overall view of a patient’s attitude
and level of significance about his oral health status. The
patient can report problems with specific types of dental procedures, which may be modified, if possible, to allow more
comfort [54, 66].
The patient may not spontaneously give the information
that we might need, and it is necessary that the clinician
directs the interrogatory, asking some specific questions in
relation to (thermal) sensitivity or discomfort during chewing, if he presents some type of pain; if he has had any trauma
on the face, infections, lost or fracture of restorations, tooth
fractures, and impaction of food in between the teeth; and if
he presents difficulties during the hygiene or bleeding when
doing the oral hygiene. It should also be asked whether a
patient uses dental floss, and how often, asking information
about the areas that he cannot pass the dental floss or if the
C. R. G. Torres et al.
7 1
dental floss rips when passing between the teeth. Additionally,
it should be asked whether the patient is satisfied with the
oral esthetic, the shape and color of their teeth, or any other
aspect that he or she may want to point out. In case there is a
report of any problem, complementary exams are used to get
to a specific diagnosis [54, 66]. One example of a questionnaire about the dental history can be seen in . Fig. 1.13 and
may be answered by the patient alongside with the medical
history questionnaire.
Tip
The more patient-related information you get, the
more reliable your diagnosis will be.
1.3 Objective Exam
After anamnesis and subjective examination, a clinician conducts the objective clinical examination. Records obtained
from the subjective exam can help to guide the clinical exam,
allowing that the most probable diagnosis is reached .
The clinical exam consists of the general evaluation of the
patient, outside and inside the mouth, and the esthetic analysis. From the reports of the subjective exams and the changes
found on the objective exam, the clinician will elaborate a
problem list that needs to be addressed for a complete rehabilitation of the patient.
1.3.1 General Aspects and Vital Signals
As soon as the patient enters the office, his general appear -
ance may be observed. He may present as a healthy rather
unremarkable person or present signs of debility, malnutrition, malformation, or signals that suggest a congenital syndrome. Deficiency on the general self-care, as the lack of
personal hygiene, can be associated with the lack of compromise on the maintenance of the oral health.
Vital parameters, such as blood pressure and heart rate,
may easily be checked during the first or any follow-up
appointment. Instant blood sugar analysis can indicate the
presence of diabetes. Patients presenting signals or symptoms of systemic problems should be referred to a general
practitioner prior to dental treatment, except in case of an
emergency.
1.3.2 Extraoral Exam
Before any intraoral examination, the head and neck region
should be checked first. The exam comprises visual assessment and palpation. Visual aspects can show us sores,
asymmetries, swollen areas, redness, or fistulas. The palpation of the submandibular and cervical lymphatic glands
can show swelling of lymph nodes, sore or not, hard or with mobility, and it can indicate the presence of infections or
neoplasia. Muscles should be palpated, searching for rigid
or sensitive areas. The mastication muscles can present
trigger points that may be related to temporomandibular
disorders. The region of the temporomandibular joint
(TMJ) should be palpated, asking the patient to open and
close the mouth, to verify the presence of pain, clicks, or
crepitation.
1.3.3 Intraoral Exam
During the intraoral clinical exam teeth, soft tissues and periodontal structures are examined.
1.3.3.1 Evaluation of the Soft Tissues
A visual and/or tactile analysis is performed on the cheeks,
lips, palate, dorsum, and, under the tongue, the vestibule
regions, and the tonsils. The presence of ulcer lesions or
nodes, vesicles, or inflammation has to be thoroughly investigated. In some cases, the dentist is the first to detect infectious and contagious diseases, as well as neoplasia, that can
put the patient’s life at risk. Many infectious diseases present
their first signals inside the oral cavity. Every clinician should
be prepared to diagnose or at least suspect any alterations
and direct the patient to a specialized dentist or doctor for
further analysis .
1.3.3.2 Periodontal Evaluation
A thorough periodontal evaluation is essential for all patients,
not only to determine the periodontal situation and its effects
on possible dental restorative treatment plans but also to
establish the potential effect of existing or planned restorations on periodontal health . Also, it is well-known that
many diseases such as diabetes have an impact on periodontitis and should therefore be treated. Visually, a healthy gum
is pink and firm, with the attached gingiva presenting the
aspect of an orange peel; in contrast, inflamed gum is usually
red, soft, swollen, and smooth. The depth of the gingival sulcus must be verified with a probe. In healthy gums, no bleeding should occur after probing, and the gingival sulcus should
be 1–2 mm deep. The presence of calculus and periodontal
pockets with a sulcus deeper than 3 mm, as is the case with
inflammatory active pockets associated with bleeding, is an
indicator of periodontal disease . The periodontal chart
is a schematic representation of the depth of the periodontal
pockets and should be filled out correctly to determine the
necessity for periodontal treatment ( . Fig. 1.15). The calculation for the gingival bleeding index should be executed and
registered on a clinical chart. Surfaces that present bleeding
are registered, and their percentage in relation to the total
surfaces that were analyzed is calculated. The involvement of
bifurcations on the posterior teeth is evaluated, mobility of
teeth as a result of bone loss or excessive occlusal forces; these
factors should be taken into account when performing risk
assessment for each tooth and when making therapeutic
decisions .Diagnosis and Treatment Planning
8
1 > A thorough periodontal evaluation is essential for all
patients, not only to determine the periodontal situation
and its effects on possible dental restorative treatment
plans but also to establish the potential effect of existing
or planned restorations on periodontal health.
A radiographic exam may be indicated to analyze bone
topography. Then the presence of gingival recession areas
and regions with a small quantity or lack of attached gum is
evaluated, which is registered on the clinical chart. Presence
of biofilm and residues indicates deficiency of oral self-care.
The existence of gingival inflammation impairs dental restor -
ative procedures, because of the difficulty in obtaining a dry
field, risking the success of the treatment; the disease needs
to be controlled and the situation improved before planning
further treatments .
The presence of dental restorations with an inadequate
contour can result in periodontal problems. Overcontouring
and the resulting overhangs in the proximal area, due to an
excess of restorative material that pours out during application, result in inflammation and pain during cleaning by the
patient ( . Fig. 1.5b). Open approximal contacts, particularly
in the posterior region, foster food impaction and increase
biofilm accumulation. These conditions may lead to gingival inflammation, tooth dislocation, increased mobility and
bone loss . In cases of deep caries lesions or necessary
restorative treatment, radiography should be used to estimate
the position of the cavity margin, to assess whether there
will be an invasion of the biological width . Teeth that
need restorative treatment, but have a doubtful periodontal
prognosis, should be noted on the clinical chart and added
to the problem list. Until the diagnosis of this particular
tooth becomes positive, the restorative treatment should be
as minimal as possible, and the treatment plan has to remain
flexible .
1.3.3.3 Dentition Evaluation
The dentition is subject to a broad range of alterations, which
can lead to loss of structure, pain, or pulpal symptoms. Others
are related to the formation of dental structures, such as amelogenesis and dentinogenesis, the position of a tooth in the jaw
or agenesis. In general, the visual exam should be performed
after air-drying the teeth and under good lightening conditions. Additional isolation of the area during examination can
be achieved with cotton rolls and saliva ejectors. However, cotton rolls may hinder the view on the soft tissues. All teeth
should be clean, without residues of bacterial biofilm and
extrinsic stains, which might require a previous prophylaxis.
Unwaxed dental floss may be passed through all approximal
contact areas. In case the floss rips or tears apart, it indicates a
rough surface, excess restorative material, or cavities.
Tip
Meticulous examination of periodontal conditions is as
fundamental as assessment of the teeth.Detection of Caries Lesions
Caries lesions are clinical symptoms of the disease “caries, ”
resulting from the unbalance of demineralization and remineralization processes. Early stages impose as subsurface
lesions in the enamel, eventually progressing toward the
dentinoenamel junction (DEJ) and later on into the dentine. Surface cavitation occurs at a rather late stage as a
result of mechanical instability. Caries lesions usually progress very slowly in enamel and take up speed past the
DEJ. Detection and diagnosis of caries lesions are a challenging process. On the occlusal site, a seemingly intact
surface can overlay a rather extensive lesion, a phenomenon
that is referred to as “hidden caries. ” Examination of inter -
proximal sites is challenging as well, because we do not
have a direct view on the surface. Meticulous cleaning and
air-drying prior to visual examination and utilization of a
validated caries classification are reported to be sufficient
and accurate . However, bitewing radiographs are
extensively used as an adjunct caries detection method.
Bitewing radiographs are highly accurate for cavitated
proximal lesions and suitable to detect dentinal caries
lesions . Although repeated bitewing radiographs may
result in overdiagnosis and hence overtreatment, radiographs are a suitable method for monitoring interproximal
non-cavitated lesions that are treated nonoperatively or
microinvasively.
On root surfaces, especially in patients with periodontal
pockets, lesions can progress fast, affecting the pulp tissue.
Detection of such lesions may be complicated by the presence of the gingival tissue, and here radiography plays a very
important role, too. Progression of a caries lesion depends on
many variables, for which many detection methods are available. For detailed information, see 7 Chap. 3.
> Bitewing radiographs are highly accurate for detection
of cavitated proximal lesions. They are also a suitable
method for monitoring interproximal non-cavitated
lesions that are treated non-operatively or
microinvasively.
Non-carious Lesions
Non-carious lesions result from the loss of dental structure
without the participation of bacterial biofilm. They can be
divided accordingly to its etiology in erosion, abrasion,
abfraction, and attrition, even though in many cases the origin is multifactorial.
The term dental erosion is used to describe the physical
result of a pathologic, chronic localized, and usually painless
loss of hard tissues that is chemically attacked by acids without the involvement of bacteria . The acids attacking
enamel and later on dentin may be of extrinsic (diet) or
intrinsic (reflux) origin. The acids promote loss of structure
and softening of the surface layer, which is then worn by the
friction of the food bolus or brushing, characterizing the erosive tooth wear (ETW). According to the etiology, the lesions
can be classified as extrinsic, intrinsic, or idiopathic
C. R. G. Torres et al.
9 1
(unknown origin). As an example of extrinsic acidic sources,
the frequent consumption of sour fruits, low-pH juices or
sodas, sports drinks, and alcoholic beverages is to be mentioned. Other sources are the work environment (as industrial acids), pool water, and some medication as effervescent
tablets of vitamin C ( . Fig. 1.1a) may be the cause for dental
erosion. The main characteristic of ETW is the loss of contour and natural surface morphology. On occlusal surfaces,
the flattening of the structures and cupping of the cusps are typical signs. In advanced situations, the morphology may
completely transform into concave surfaces. Restorations are
not affected and become exposed ( . Fig. 1.1b). On smooth
surfaces, typical characteristics are surface flattening and an
intact rim of enamel along the gingival margin. Concavities
usually wider than deep can be observed in some cases .
> Non-carious lesions result from the loss of dental
structure without the participation of bacterial biofilm.
.Fig. 1.1 Non-carious lesions. a Dental erosion caused by the very
frequent ingestion of lemonade; b erosion resulting from the abusive
ingestion of cola based soda; c erosion on the tip of the cusps on
patients with gastroesophageal reflux associated with attrition; d erosion of the lingual surfaces because of regurgitation of gastric
acid; e abrasion by excessive brushing; f , g abfraction on anterior and
posterior teeth; h , i intense attrition in patient with bruxism
a
c
eb
d
fDiagnosis and Treatment Planning
10
1
As example of the intrinsic source, gastric acids produce an
erosive challenge during vomiting, constant regurgitation, or
reflux. The gastric acid has a pH of 1–1.5 and hence is much
lower than the critical pH for enamel dissolution. Intrinsic
erosive challenges are associated with psychosomatic disor -
ders or psychogenic eating disorders, such as nervous
anorexia or bulimia. Somatic causes comprise pregnancy,
alcoholism, treatment for alcoholism and gastrointestinal
dysfunction, hiatus hernia, peptic and duodenal ulcers, and
gastroesophageal reflux. Dental erosion due to chronicle
regurgitation often hits the internal region of the arches, cor -
responding to the track of the regurgitated acid over the dor -
sum of the tongue, along the palatal surfaces of the maxillary
teeth and the occlusal sites of the posterior mandibular teeth
(. Fig. 1.1c, d ) . Even though it may affect the occlusal and
lingual surfaces of every maxillary tooth, it is confined to the
buccal and occlusal sites of the mandibular premolars and
molars. Buccal surfaces of maxillary teeth are usually not
affected, and the posterior teeth are protected by the neutralizing saliva from the parotid gland. Lingual surfaces of the
mandibular teeth are covered by the tongue and thereby protected from the acidic challenge .
Eliminating or reducing the causative factor, i.e., the
source of acid, is crucial for patients with erosive problems.
This can include medical treatment for any intrinsic prob-lem. Some studies suggested that those patients should not
brush their teeth immediately after acid exposure, although
others did not confirm this recommendation. The toothbrush should have extra soft bristles, and the toothpaste
should contain little abrasive substances. Additionally,
fluoridecontaining mouth rinses may be used on a regular
basis. A neutral 2% sodium fluoride gel or 5% fluoride var -
nish can be applied on dental visits. The use of sugar-free
chewing gums can stimulate salivary flow. Deeply eroded
lesions might benefit from a mechanical barrier against acid
attacks by adhesive restorations . Dentin sealants also
seem to be rather resistant against erosive conditions and
might serve as an intermediary treatment option for exposed
dentin surfaces . Acidic drinks should not be held in the
mouth, especially not being “swished” around the teeth.
Using a non-plastic straw will minimize the fluids’ contact
time with the teeth and save our environment at the same
time.
> Eliminating or reducing the causative factor, i.e., the
source of acid, is crucial for patients with erosive
problems.
Abrasion is defined as tooth wear induced by substances or
objects other than food. Tooth brushing is the main etiological factor of abrasion depending on tools, dentifrices, and
g
ih
.Fig. 1.1 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres et al.
11 1
techniques used for the cleaning procedure ( . Fig. 1.1e). In
addition, the type of material, hardness of the bristles,
whether these bristle tips are rounded or not, and their flexibility have an impact on abrasive wear, as well as abrasivity,
pH, and the quantity of toothpaste used .
Abfraction derives from the Latin word frangere which
means to break. It is used to describe the specific wedgeshaped defects in the cervical region, resulting from occlusal
forces applied to the tooth, leading to its flexion ( . Fig. 1.1f g ,
g). Parafunctional forces especially during lateral movements
of the mandible expose teeth to intense flexion and shear
forces, resulting in substance loss in the cervical region,
which is the weakest part of the tooth. Lesions are located on
the CEJ, caused by microfractures on the enamel, growing
perpendicularly to the long axis of the affected tooth. The
resulting damages have the wedge shape and sharp edges .
The incisal/occlusal wall generally has sharp cavosurface
angles, forming a right angle to the external tooth surface.
The gingival cavosurface angle are located on the root surface
. Apart from dynamic occlusion parameters, the use of
hard toothbrushes and a horizontal brushing technique are
frequently associated with the occurrence of non-carious
cervical lesions .
Differential diagnosis and origin of non-carious cervical
lesions is not always unequivocal. There is a high chance
that a lesion’s etiology has more than one origin; however,
some fundamental properties can be observed. Abrasive
lesions are more frequently on the buccal surfaces and above
the gum, while abfractions can be located partially or completely under the gum. The abrasive lesion is characterized
by a rather shallow and rounded morphology, whereas
abfractions have a wedge shape with sharp edges. Abrasions
usually involve many neighboring teeth, while the abfraction can occur in just a single tooth. Abfraction is always
associated to some occlusal interference, while the abrasion
is not necessarily accompanied by an occlusal interference.
As abrasion intensifies structural loss of a tooth under erosive conditions. Erosion and abrasion may be important
secondary factors on the progression of lesions induced by
the abfraction. It is important to control the etiological factors of non-carious cervical lesions, because restorations
will be subjected to the same factors that initially caused the
lesion [7 ].
> Differential diagnosis and origin of non-carious
cervical lesions is not always unequivocal.
Depending on the size, location, and presence of sensitivity,
treatment of non-carious (cervical) lesions particularly consists of controlling the etiological factors. Additionally, this
causal therapy can be flanked by the use of desensitizers or
ultimately the restorations of these lesions. The restorations
should be placed when the lesion is active, and nonoperative
treatment is not capable to arrest the lesion. A restoration can
be advantageous when the structural tooth integrity is compromised, there is a risk of pulp exposure, or the defect is esthetically unacceptable for the patient. Further indications
for restorations may be remaining dentin sensitivity after
nonoperative care, periodontal problems, the use of the
tooth as an abutment for prosthesis or due to caries lesions
[7, 54]. Restorative procedures in the cervical part of a tooth
are demanding, since moisture control and contouring might
be challenging. The indication should thoroughly be weighed
against potential disadvantages, especially for periodontal
health.
Attrition is defined as wear by tooth-to-tooth contact
without the impact of any other substance. It can result from
physiological or pathological etiological factors. Physiological
wear is considered a slow degradation of the dental shape,
manifested as a flattening of the tips of the cusps in posterior
teeth and the incisal curve of the anterior teeth ( . Fig. 3.16c , d)
[66, 70]. Characteristic features are opposing wear facets
with sharp margins. When the wearing becomes excessive, it
may be related to pathological causes. Excessive attrition is
primarily caused by bruxism that will result in facets on the
opposing teeth ( . Fig. 1.1h, i ). Since elimination of the parafunctional habits is very hard to achieve, occlusal acrylic
resin splints are used to prevent the patient from further
tooth wear. The clinician has to identify patients with excessive tooth wear, especially younger individuals. Significant
attrition areas that resulted on exposition of dentin and present sensibility or discomfort might be considered for restor -
ative treatment. However, a previous analysis of the occlusion
and the causal factors of the wearing should be carried out
previously .
The resulting wear of an antagonistic tooth against a restoration very much depends on the restorative material used.
Wear analysis showed that amalgam would cause a slightly
increased wear to the opponent tooth . Microfilled composites result in wear similar to the enamel, while hybrid
composites generate a slightly increased wear compared to
enamel. The microhybrid and nanofilled composites seem to
induce a similar wear than the enamel. Cast gold restorations
are usually softer than enamel and amalgam, resulting in less
wear of the antagonistic tooth. Feldspar ceramics produce
extensive antagonistic tooth wear; however, modern dental
ceramics are significantly less abrasive .
It is not rare to have patients complaining of sensibility
on the root surface, characterized by an acute pain, gener -
ally associated with a gingival recession and exposition of
the cementum or dentin. The most accepted theory to
explain this phenomenon is called the hydrodynamic theory, claiming that pain results from the movement of fluids
inside the dentinal tubules, stimulating the mechanical
receptors within the pulp tissue . Fluid movements may
be initiated by thermal changes, air-drying, osmotic pressure, or mechanical contact. Any treatment that reduces
this movement of fluids closing the tubules partially or
completely can help to reduce the sensitivity . Further
details relative to dentine sensitivity can be obtained in
7 Chap. 18.Diagnosis and Treatment Planning
12
1Tip
The clinical management of non-carious cervical
lesions should always include elimination or reduction
of the causative factors rather than just restoring the
defect.
Pulpal Diseases
Unhindered progression of a caries lesion may lead to
pulpal symptoms which manifest as pain and at a later
stage can turn into pulpal inflammation and necrosis.
Patients with pulpal diseases consult the dentist because
they suffer from pain. Non-symptomatic necrosis of the
pulp is frequently overseen or incidentally detected on a
radiograph. Partial removal of the pulp (pulpotomy) can be
a sufficient therapy for reversible forms of pulpitis or exposure of the pulp during caries excavation. Irreversible
pulpal inflammation and pulpal necrosis however require
endodontic treatment of the entire root canal system.
Pulpal diagnosis is primarily based on reported symptoms,
the reaction to thermal and percussion tests and ultimately
radiographic examination. Conducting pulp sensitivity
testing on each tooth is not recommended. However, teeth
with a symptomatic history, questionable periapical radiographic findings, or those considered for restoration might
be tested for signs of pulpal vitality. It is embarrassing for
both clinician and patient to discover that a recently
restored tooth had a necrotic pulp before the treatment and
becomes symptomatic after it . A more detailed
description about diagnosis of the pulpal alterations can be
found in 7 Chap. 9.
Dental Integrity and Fractures
When submitted to occlusal load, dental cusps tend to
undergo deflection, which is strongly increased when a
restoration is present. The greater the amount of substance loss, the bigger the cuspal deflection will be. The
quantity of movement depends on the intensity of the
force acting on the tooth. The force is determined by the
muscular strength of the individual and correlates with
parafunctional activities such as bruxism, clenching, and
grinding. Under the influence of repetitive loads, cusps
suffer fatigue and may happen to fracture, losing that por -
tion of the dental structure. Cracking of a tooth as a result
of mechanical overload oftentimes cannot be visually
detected, originating a painful process called “cracked
tooth syndrome” . When cracked teeth are submitted
to masticatory or occlusal loads, the crack line opens,
resulting in movement of the dentinal fluid. According to
hydrodynamic theory, this movement can cause pain.
Patients generally report acute and sharp pain, upon loading and unloading forces, usually when chewing hard or granulated food. The patient is usually capable to localize
the cracked tooth. Cracked teeth mostly respond to vitality tests and can present sensitivity when eating cold, hot,
sweet, or acidic food. Usually no alterations can be seen
radiographically; teeth are either clinically intact or
restored. Diagnosis is performed with a device that allows
placing pressure on each cusp separately or by removing
the restoration and inspecting the cavity wall. Dye can be
applied into the cavity in attempt to visualize a potential
crack. For more details about the cracked tooth syndrome,
see 7 Chap. 18.
> Cracking of a tooth as a result of mechanical overload
oftentimes cannot be visually detected, originating a
painful process called “cracked tooth syndrome. ”
Complete tooth fractures can be due to trauma or progression of a crack. It should be verified which tissues are
involved, as the fractures may be having affected the enamel,
enamel/dentin, enamel/dentin/pulp, or enamel/dentin/pulp/
periodontal tissues. Fractures that involve only the enamel or
the enamel and the dentin can usually be treated with restorations. Fractures involving the pulp may need an appropriate endodontic treatment. Preserving vitality of the pulpal
tissue is preferred whenever feasible and particularly in cases
with incomplete root formation. Fractures involving periodontal structures, including infrabony defects, may need
surgical crown lengthening or an orthodontic extrusion
therapy prior to restoration. Root fractures may occur as a
side effect of endodontic treatment or due to trauma. Detection and treatment of such fractures is challenging, and these
cases are often called hopeless. Multidisciplinary approaches
in terms of combined orthodontic, surgical, and restorative
treatment can lead to complete rehabilitation of complicated
crown-root fractures. . Figure 1.2a–d shows examples of
cracks and fractures in anterior and posterior teeth. For
details, see 7 Chap. 14.
Shape and Position Abnormalities
Teeth can present deviations in shape or size. Such alterations
can have genetic origins, such as conical teeth, dens in dente,
and microdontia or can be related to infectious diseases dur -
ing odontogenesis period, such as congenital syphilis that
results in in screwdriver-shaped incisors (Hutchinson incisor) or mulberry molars. Disproportion between tooth size
and size of the jaw can result in crowding or dental gaps
called diastema. Gaps are usually closed with orthodontic
procedures. In some cases, remaining gaps particularly in the
anterior region can be corrected with direct or indirect restorations. Transposition or ectopic eruption describes the phenomenon when teeth do not erupt at their predetermined
position within the jaw. Missing teeth may occur due to
agenesis or avulsion, bearing the potential risk of adjacent
tooth migration ( . Fig. 1.3a–i ).
C. R. G. Torres et al.
13 1
a
cb
d
.Fig. 1.2 Dental fractures. a , b Cracks and fractures on the anterior teeth; c , d cracks and fractures on posterior teeth
a
cb
d
.Fig. 1.3 Abnormalities on the shape and position. a Diastemas
between anterior teeth; b cone-shaped right lateral maxillary incisor; c
transposition of the maxillary canine on the place of the right lateral incisor; d, e dens in dente; f anodonty of the lateral incisors; g left maxillary
canine positioned in place of the lateral incisor; h hypoplasia of the enamel
on the incisal third of the anterior teeth; i imperfect amelogenesisDiagnosis and Treatment Planning
14
1
Color Changes
Most patients are unsatisfied with their tooth color and feel
esthetically impaired. Consequently, the desire for tooth whitening is among the most often heard demands when assessing
the patients’ chief complaints. Color changes can be of extrinsic or intrinsic origin. Extrinsic staining is frequently caused
by food and beverages, where chromogenic agents attach to the enamel surface. For example, staining can be observed
after regular coffee or tea consumption and tobacco smoking,
due to ingestion of iron-containing vitamin compounds or
from chromogenic bacteria in the biofilm ( . Fig. 1.4a). Some
substances capable to cause extrinsic discoloration can also
penetrate to some extent into the tooth, resulting in a mostly
yellowish appearance. Intrinsic staining occurs when chrof
h
g
i
e
.Fig. 1.3 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres et al.
15 1
mophores are incorporated into the hard tissues during tooth
development or caused by conditions acquired later in life,
such as endodontic treatment, dental trauma, or caries. In
most cases application of an oxidant bleaching agent is the
therapy of choice, like hydrogen peroxide or carbamide per -
oxide, diffusing into the enamel and dentin and breaking the
chromophores, leaving the tooth with a significantly lighter
appearance. Tooth whitening can be performed at the dental
office or at home, in a single visit or over a longer period.
Peroxide concentrations vary considerably among products
and are strictly limited in several countries.In cases where tooth whitening is not sufficient to fulfill
the patients’ need, veneers may be an option to enhance the
anterior teeth esthetics, a procedure described in 7 Chap. 17 .
> Most patients are unsatisfied with their tooth color and
feel esthetically impaired. Consequently, the desire for
tooth whitening is among the most often heard
demands when assessing the patients’ chief complaints.
Some people have naturally darker teeth than others do.
Intrinsic color changes can be caused by problems during
tooth formation. Excess of fluoride intake can result in hypo-
.Fig. 1.4 Color changes of tooth structure. a Extrinsic staining due
to smoking; b dental fluorosis; c , d amelogenesis imperfecta; e staining
due to ingestion of tetracycline; f hypomineralization on enamel due to trauma and intrusion of the deciduous teeth; g , h darkening of tooth
22 by pulp calcification after the orthodontic traction. i Darkening of
the tooth 11 due to pulpal necrosis after trauma at the region
a
c
eb
d
fDiagnosis and Treatment Planning
16
1
mineralization during enamel formation, resulting in whitish areas of enamel, up to a surface with porosities or pits
in the more severe situations ( . Fig. 1.4b). This side effect
of a chronic fluoride overdose during tooth formation is
called dental fluorosis. Different in origin, amelogenesis and
dentinogenesis imperfecta result in great esthetic problems,
which may require extensive operative care ( . Fig. 1.4c, d ).
When ingested during odontogenesis, tetracycline, an
antibiotic widely used in the past, deposits itself inside the
dental structure and results in horizontal striped pattern
(. Fig. 1.4e ).
> Excess of fluoride intake can result in hypominer -
alization during enamel formation, resulting in whitish
areas of enamel up to a surface with porosities or pits
in the more severe situations.
Trauma or infection in deciduous teeth can result in hypomineralization or hypoplasia in the following permanent
teeth (. Fig. 1.4f). Trauma or orthodontic movements can
result in dystrophic calcification of the pulpal tissue, also promoting dental darkening ( . Fig. 1.4g, h ). In other cases,
trauma can lead to pulpal necrosis, which decomposition
products darken the crown ( . Fig. 1.4i). As mentioned above,
aging as a natural process results in darkening of teeth because
of a higher degree of dentin mineralization and the enamel
becoming thinner and more translucent at the same time.It should be noted that in cases where dental bleaching is
included in the treatment plan, it should precede any restor -
ative procedure on anterior teeth. A washout phase of minimum 2 weeks should be observed after the bleaching, to
allow the color stabilization and peroxide release from inside
the tooth structure. Besides, the patient should be informed
that restorations and existing prosthetic appliances will not
be bleached and probably need to be replaced afterward.
Tip
Most patients are dissatisfied with their tooth color.
Therefore, whitening procedures should be part of the
portfolio of modern dentists.
Analysis of Existing Restorations
The decision whether to keep or to replace an existing restoration is a demanding process in everyday routine.
Overtreatment, in terms of random or premature replacement of an existing restoration, would invariably result in an
unnecessary removal of the tooth structure, including the
risk of accidental pulp exposure. Re-dentistry, i.e., replacement of restorations, is reported to be the dentist main duty
. The diagnostic process and decision tree in favor or
against restoration replacement should be primarily based on
g
ih .Fig. 1.4 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres et al.
17 1
health risks for the patient and always be a result of a shared
decisionmaking process . From an ethical point of view,
it is inacceptable that clinicians take decisions for their
patients and even worse without providing any justification.
Therefore, transparent findings and diagnoses as well as
patients’ preferences should be the basis in the decision-making this process.
> The decision whether to keep or to renew an existing
restoration is a demanding process in everyday
routine. Overtreatment in terms of random or
premature replacement of an existing restoration
would invariably result in an unnecessary removal of
the tooth structure, including the risk of accidental
pulp exposure.
> Transparent findings and diagnoses as well as patients’
preferences should be the basis in the decision-making
this process.
Clinical assessment of restorations should be carried out
under dry and well-illuminated conditions, isolated with cotton rolls and saliva ejectors. The clinician first may visually
inspect the restoration, followed by a tactile examination
with an exploratory probe and probably the use of dental
floss. Bitewing radiographs can yield additional information
in particular areas that cannot be assessed clinically.
For evaluation of amalgam restorations, many conditions
should be observed, such as transparency through the enamel,
marginal integrity, fracture lines, improper anatomic shape
(overcontour, undercontour, proximal overhangs, inappropriate height of the marginal ridge relative to the adjacent
tooth, and inadequate interproximal contacts), recurrent car -
ies, inadequate occlusal contact, undesirable surface roughness, and violation of the biological width [54, 66].
Facial walls of proximal boxes of the Class II preparations
happen to be very thin in many cases and not supported by
dentin. Due to enamel translucency, shining through
amalgam restorations may impair the esthetics. However,
this does not necessarily indicate that the restoration needs
to be replaced, unless it is among the patient’s chief complaint
(. Fig. 1.5a) . When there is no apparent marginal degradation, the discoloration appears gray or blueish. However,
when the discolored area is yellow or brownish, and it seems
to have communication with the cavosurface margin, presence of a caries lesion in the interface is likely, indicating a
health risk for the patient. Consequently, replacement of this
restoration should be discussed with the patient .
Proximal overhangs, because of inadequate use of the
matrix and wedge system during restoration, create conditions favorable for biofilm adhesion and niches that are difficult to access during oral hygiene ( . Fig. 1.5b). Diagnosis of
such overhangs is usually performed with radiographs and
the use of an exploratory probe or dental floss. The clinician
can try to remove the excess of restorative material with a
steel abrasive strip or with an oscillating diamond-coated file
(EV A system) in a handpiece ( . Fig. 4.36). However, in most
cases, replacement of the restoration may be necessary.The margins of the restorations may be examined with an
exploratory probe, moved perpendicularly to the interface
tooth restoration. It should be moved from the restoration
toward the dental surface and the other way round, working
along the whole margin . In case the explorer gets stuck
from the tooth toward the restoration, there is an excess of
restorative material, which can be removed by finishing and
polishing ( . Fig. 1.5c). In case it gets stuck from the restoration toward the tooth, there is a lack of material. It should be
evaluated whether these margins are accessible to oral
hygiene and whether dentin is exposed. The latter may be an
unfavorable condition and be considered for either repair or
replacement of the restoration.
When the probe gets stuck both ways, there is a ditch on
the interface . Marginal ditching is a result of wear or
fractures, either in amalgam or in the enamel, mostly due to
improper cavity preparation ( . Fig. 1.5d, e ). The presence of
marginal ditching does not necessarily implicate the presence
or an increased risk for developing a caries lesion .
Corrosion products of amalgam may seal the interface and
keep the restoration intact for a long time. Ditches going deep
into the interface, with or without dentin exposure, may
increase the risk of biofilm accumulation and secondary car -
ies. It should be weighed out whether marginal sealing, repair,
or entire replacement of this restoration would increase tooth
longevity and enhance the patients’ quality of life.
The occlusal surface of a restoration is examined thor -
oughly for fracture lines ( . Fig. 1.5f). Fractures mostly occur
in the isthmus region, between the occlusal and proximal
boxes or where the cavity is rather shallow or irregular, causing the restorative to fracture. In general, fractures mostly
result from an incorrect cavity preparation. In cases where
restorations have been repaired, the junction between the old
and new amalgam can be visible, similar to a fracture line. In
other situations, parts of the fractured restoration have been
lost (. Fig. 1.5g, h ). In some cases, the restoration is still in
place, but the remaining tooth structure fractures ( . Fig. 1.5i).
This usually happens when the remaining tooth structure is
too fragile and likely to fracture under occlusal load.
The restoration should mimic the individual anatomical
shape of the intact tooth structure, to allow optimal esthetics
and function. Therefore, height and volume of the restored
cusps will guarantee adequate chewing efficiency avoiding
extrusion of the antagonist ( . Fig. 1.5j). Location of the
height of curvature on the buccal and lingual surfaces is also
very important because it deflects the food bolus, so that the
passing food may stimulate the gingival tissues. Restorations
with under or overcontour on the buccal and lingual surfaces
can result in gingival lesions . Undercontouring may
cause food impaction over the gingival tissue, resulting in
gingival inflammation or recession in the worst case.
Overcontouring deflects food from gingiva and results in
understimulation of the supporting tissues, promoting the
deposit of biofilm in the cervical region and gingival inflammation .
The marginal ridge of a restoration should be adjusted to
the height of the adjacent tooth, creating adequate occlusal Diagnosis and Treatment Planning
18
1embrasures that allow the passage of food toward the buccal
and lingual surfaces. Adequate marginal ridges allow proper
contact of the opposing tooth in an occlusion of 2:1. Marginal
ridges of neighboring teeth at a different height may cause
food impaction, resulting in gingival inflammation.
Furthermore, the patient may face difficulties when using
dental floss . The proximal contact area of Class II restorations should be located in the occlusal third of the proximal
surface, with an occlusal embrasure to allow the insertion of
dental floss and a tightness to avoid food impaction. > The proximal contact area of Class II restorations should
be located in the occlusal third of the proximal surface,
with an occlusal embrasure to allow the insertion of
dental floss and a tightness to avoid food impaction.
The restored proximal surfaces should present a natural
convex contour, to guarantee the formation of a perfect
contact area with the convex surface of the adjacent tooth.
However, when a proximal carious cavitation remains
unrestored, adjacent teeth might show the tendency to drift
.Fig. 1.5 Analysis of the amalgam restorations. a Visualization of
the amalgam by translucency; b cervical overhang (arrow); c excess on
the margins of the proximal restorations (arrow); d marginal degradation being checked with an exploratory probe; e intense marginal degradation exposing the dentin; f fracture line. g , h Fracture in the
restoration body; i fracture of the remaining cusp; j mesiolingual cusp
in amalgam with inadequate height; k inadequate proximal contour;
l restoration with open proximal contact
a
cb
d
ef
C. R. G. Torres et al.
19 1
into the open cavity ( . Fig. 6.21a , b and . Fig. 1.5k). Restor -
ative treatment without previous orthodontic treatment
most likely results in a concave contact area, which is unacceptable for reasons outlined above. Therefore, orthodontic
movement of these teeth, for instance, with the help of
separation rubbers, is needed before a final restoration is
placed.
Open interproximal contacts may foster food impaction
resulting in discomfort, increased biofilm deposit, and
hence gingival inflammation and tooth migration
(. Fig. 1.5l). On the other hand, the contact point should
not be too tight, in order to avoid the shredding and impaction of dental floss fibers or periodontal trauma induced by excessive force applied during flossing . In situations
where repair of the restoration will not be the solution, the
total replacement would be necessary. The interproximal
contacts are best evaluated with waxed dental floss, explor -
ing its resistance when passing through the contact area,
and using a dental mirror in many angulations, keeping it
on the lingual position and observing the teeth from the
buccal aspect, reflecting the light to the contact region, so
that the clinician can see whether there is space in-between
the teeth. For that, the contact area should be dry and free of
saliva . Creating an anatomic contact point is an impor -
tant quality factor of a restoration and should be paid par -
ticular attention.
g
ih
j
kl
.Fig. 1.5 (continued)Diagnosis and Treatment Planning
20
1Tip
Creating an anatomic contact point is an important
quality factor of a restoration and should be paid
particular attention.
Many restorations show some defects in relation to the anatomic shape, but they provide adequate clinical function and
do not require replacement. When considering the replacement of an existing restoration, it is crucial whether this restoration has caused damage or is likely to be a risk for the
patients’ health.
The presence of recurrent caries on marginal areas is
detected visually and/radiographically. It is common to find
secondary caries lesions in regions where marginal gaps
occur in gingival walls, and those indicate replacement .
Lesions on the buccal or lingual walls are generally not
detectable in radiographic images due to superposition of the
radiopaque restorations. For details about diagnosis of caries
lesions, see 7 Chap. 3.
Occlusal contacts of a restoration are evaluated to
determine whether they are serving its chewing function,
without causing a symptomatic or pathogenic occlusion. In
the absence of gingival inflammation, a traumatic occlusion does not trigger bone loss. However, in the presence of
a periodontal disease, the traumatic occlusion may intensify progression of the disease and bone resorption.
Restorations with traumatic occlusal contacts should be
adjusted or replaced. On the other hand, restorations without occlusal contact may foster overeruption of the antagonistic tooth .
The desirable surface roughness of a restoration should
be similar to the intact tooth surface, giving the patient comfort and preserving gingival health. Rough areas, next to the
gingival margin, promote an increased biofilm deposit and
should be repolished. On damaged restorations, polishing
may not be efficient, and replacement is supposedly the best
solution. Restorations with gingival margins violating the
biological width are associated with gingival inflammation
and bone resorption. Surgical crown lengthening is indicated
when the cervical restoration margin invades the connective
tissues .
Cast metallic restorations should essentially be evaluated
the same way as amalgam restorations. However, they hardly
suffer from external degradation, and the main problems
happen in the marginal region. Other than amalgam that
tend to fracture when extended secondary caries is present,
they do not present any visual signals unless the restoration is
displaced.
Direct tooth-colored composite restorations and indirect
ceramic or composite restorations should be assessed analogously. Other than metallic restorations, color match is a
quality parameter here. It is highly appreciated to have restorations not clearly discernable as such that perfectly blend
into the natural dentition. Some restorations present an unsatisfactory color match because of extrinsic staining or
degradation, but also due to color mismatch of the composite or inadequate translucency ( . Fig. 1.6a). In regular hybrid
composite materials, wear of the organic matrix exposes the
filler particles, resulting in a dull appearance of the restoration (. Fig. 1.6b, c ). Usually surface repolishing is sufficient
to bring back the lost gloss. However, depending on the
patients’ diet, consumption of staining substances or tobacco
smoking, there might be a tendency toward superficial staining of the restoration. Color mismatch per se is not a biological hazard; therefore, it is solely incumbent upon the
patient whether they feel impaired or not. Change in color
may also be the result of the degradation of the polymeric
matrix, usually an indication for restoration replacement
(. Fig. 1.6d–f ).
Marginal staining is an indicator that there are marginal
gaps at the tooth restoration interface associated with microleakage. These can be superficial and not influence the esthetics, or intense, extending deep into the interface. Most
superficial stains can be eliminated by repolishing, while the
deeper ones might need repair or even replacement of the
restoration ( . Fig. 1.6g, h ). The presence of a marginal stain
does not always indicate the need for replacement, unless
there is an esthetic impairment that cannot be solved by polishing or when a secondary caries lesion is present
(. Fig. 1.6i). Opaque areas, along the cavity margins, and
underlying dark shadows may indicate a carious process
underneath the restoration alongside the cavity walls. Usually
these lesions are active because the ecosystem is nearly sealed
and inaccessible to oral hygiene. Progression therefore cannot be controlled, which is potentially detrimental for the
hard tissues and tooth vitality . Bacterial growth has been
shown to progress faster under composite resin restorations
than under amalgam and glass ionomer . However, mar -
ginal gap size needs to pass a threshold of approximately
μm to allow sufficient fluid exchange for bacterial sur -
vival under the restoration .
Requirements of the anatomical shape, including contact
points, marginal ridges, and shaping of buccal and lingual
surfaces that were earlier described, also apply for composite
and indirect restorations. ( . Fig. 1.6j–l ).
The esthetic assessment of a restoration performed by a
dental professional may differ from the patient’s perspective. As we strive to establish a collaborative partnership
with our patients and oblige ourselves to respect patients’
autonomy, it is self-evident that patients exclusively decide
whether they suffer from esthetic impairment of a restoration or not. What seems perfect in the eyes of a professional does not necessarily reflect the individual’s
perception and vice versa. If the patient voices dissatisfaction, the dentist should evaluate quantifiable medical reasons and whether there is a chance of improvement and
how this can be achieved. First, the reasons why restorations have an unfavorable esthetic result should be deter -
mined. Probably the reason for an esthetic failure is not
the restoration itself but the shade or discoloration of the
C. R. G. Torres et al.
21 1
remaining tooth. In this case, replacement may lead to a
restoration with the same unsatisfactory result. In case a
restoration is medically impeccable from the dentist’s but
unpleasant from the patient’s perspective, we have to per -
ceive patients’ concerns notwithstanding. When we intend
to replace a restoration because of mere esthetic matters,
the clinician needs to inform the patient in detail about risks and side effects, for instance, additional preparation
of the tooth may lead to pulpal symptoms or even an accidental pulp exposition .
> What seems perfect in the eyes of a professional does
not necessarily reflect the individual’s perception and
vice versa.
.Fig. 1.6 Defects on composite restorations. a Improper restorations by the lack of the color match; b large class IV restorations
performed on the central incisors with hybrid composite at the 6th
year recall, with satisfactory shade but lost of the surface gloss; c class I
restorations with loss of gloss and rough surface; d –f color changes in
the body of the restoration. g , h Marginal staining due to lack of marginal sealing; i deep marginal staining with a darkened aspect
under the restoration; j restoration with inadequate color/translucence
match and anatomic shape; k overhang of restorative material
trespassing the contour on the buccal surface of the first molar;
l aspect of gingival inflammation immediately after the overhang
removal
a
cb
d
efDiagnosis and Treatment Planning
22
1
Tip
Always remember that a patient’s perception may differ
significantly from that of a clinician and medical
requirements may vary too.
1.3.3.4 Occlusal Analysis
Before planning restorative treatment, it is advisable to analyze the occlusal conditions. Any interferences of intended
restorations on the occlusion should be considered beforehand, as well as the impact occlusal conditions will have on the treatment plan . In complex cases, occlusion analysis
is preferably performed on plaster models.
> Before planning restorative treatment, it is advisable
to analyze the occlusal conditions.
The static occlusal analysis should be registered in maximal
intercuspation, including the vertical relation of molars and
canines (Angle’s Classes I, II and III), including overbite and
overjet. The absence of teeth, migration and inclination of
crowns, as well the presence of turned or overlapped teeth
should be registered. Midline shift of the mandible and the
maxilla and the shape of the occlusal plane are to be registered.
g
ih
j
kl
.Fig. 1.6 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres et al.
23 1
Functional evaluation of the dynamic occlusion, during
lateral movements to the right and left as well as protrusion,
should be executed. Additionally, the difference between
position of the jaw in centric relation and centric occlusion is
evaluated. During lateral movements, disocclusion guide is
registered as to canine or group guide and how much anterior guide is involved. Contacts that may interfere on the
non-working side need to be identified and possibly adjusted.
The presence of deviation during opening or temporomandibular joint (TMJ) cracking is regarded as a potential indicative for temporomandibular disorder .
The reasons of abnormal occlusal surface wear need
to be explored. Most probably, the underlying causes are
parafunctional habits such as bruxism. Matching wear facets on the opposing teeth because of parafunction or a general wear on the occlusal surface can be noticed. The
treatment of those patients may include the use of protective occlusal splint so that the further tooth wear is slowed
down. Results of the occlusal analysis are registered on a
clinical chart and included for treatment planning
(. Fig. 1.14). Positive aspects of the occlusion need to be
preserved and should not be altered during treatment.
However, improvement of the occlusal relation is desired,
and abnormalities should not be perpetuated on the restor -
ative treatment [ 54, 66].
Number and position of the occlusion contacts in the
position of maximal intercuspation, intensity of the biting
force, and the way that the opposing teeth occlude and disocclude on excursive movements may influence the choice of a
restorative material. When the occlusal stress is high, the
dentist rather selects restorative materials that are more resistant, performing the restorations in a way that they can allow
more strength on the load areas .
1.3.4 Esthetic Evaluation
During clinical examination, it is fundamental to explore the
patients’ estimate of dental esthetics. According to Rufenacht
, the smile represents the most primitive and purest form
of communication between human beings, appearing in the
early youth, observable already in babies. A smile as all facial
expressions transmit feelings and emotions. A pleasant smile
can produce an aura that improves the beauty of a face, and it
is part of the qualities and virtues of the human personality.
The perception of those qualities generates the power of attraction, a necessary component for success in our society .
> According to Rufenacht , the smile represents the
most primitive and purest form of communication
between human beings, appearing in the early youth,
observable already in babies.
As beauty is primarily a matter of personal taste, modified by
social norms, its visualization is a subjective experience .
However, some objective parameters can be used to identify
the most expressive changes that may compromise oral
esthetics. Many characteristics of teeth and gingiva, such as tooth dimension, clinical crown width-to-length ratio, color,
shape, and gloss, among others, as well as gingival shape,
contour, embrasure, zenith, and height (position or level), are
part of what is called microesthetics. These parameters cannot be analyzed separately, although being very important to
result on a pleasant smile (miniesthetics) but in association
with a harmonious face (macroesthetics) to result in good
self-esteem (hyperesthetics) .
Dental and gingival esthetics are inseparable to create a
pleasant smile. Therefore, good restorations cannot compensate for (esthetic) problems of the surrounding soft tissues
. The opposite turns out to be true as well. The most common esthetic problems are changes in tooth color, contour -
ing of anterior teeth (length, width, incisal edge shape, and
axial contour), unesthetic position or space between the
teeth, caries lesions or defective restorations, excessive buccal
corridor space, a gummy smile, etc. .
Apart from these factors, asymmetry creates visual tension on the observer side. The occlusal frontal plane or line is
a connection between the tips of both maxillary canines. This
line should be parallel to the interpupillary line and to the
line that connects both labial commissures, the commissural
line (. Fig. 1.7). The facial midline is perpendicular to those
two lines .
The dental midline is traced between both maxillary central incisors, and it should be perpendicular to the occlusal
frontal line ( . Fig. 1.8a, b ). Other than that, it should be coincident with the facial midline of the patient, even though
small asymmetries do not impair a great deal of the esthetic.
The facial midline and dental midline coincide in only 70%
of the people, while the dental midlines of the upper and
lower arches do not coincide in almost three-quarters of the
population [ 41, 45].
The borderline of the dental crown and the gingival tissue
determines the so-called gingival line, which also interferes
with the harmony of the smile. For its evaluation, a straight
line is traced from the highest point of the interface between
the tooth and the gum, known as the gingival zenith, from
the right to the left maxillary canine ( . Fig. 1.9a). The toothgum interface of both central incisors should be on this line,
.Fig. 1.7 Relation of the occlusal frontal line, commissural line,
interpupillary line, and the facial midlineDiagnosis and Treatment Planning
24
1
while the lateral incisors are approximately 1.5 mm below
this line [2, 66]. The gingival line is preferably parallel to the
occlusal frontal line. The gingival zenith of the homologous
teeth should be on the same plane, guaranteeing the symmetry of the dental-gingival composition.
Since the long axis of the anterior maxillary teeth is
slightly inclined to the distal, the gingival contour does not
form a symmetric arch, and the gingival zenith is slightly displaced to the distal side ( . Fig. 1.9b) . Visibility of the
gingival contour during a broad smile largely contributes to
facial esthetics. Corrections on the gingival contour can be
obtained by surgical techniques, such as gingivectomy or
coronally advanced flaps.
The relation between lips and teeth is also fundamental
for the beauty of a smile. The quantity of dental exposition
while smiling depends on many factors such as muscle contraction, the gingiva level, skeleton particularities, tooth
shape, and the presence of dental wear . The incisal edges
of the anterior maxillary teeth form a curve, called incisal
line or smile line, with the lowest part in region of the central
incisors. During a maximum smile, those edges are supposed
to softly touch the lower lip ( . Fig. 1.10a, b ). That means the curve formed should be parallel to the curve of the lower lip
[58, 66]. The degree of curvature of the incisal line is more
prominent in women than in men . The incisal edges
should never be hidden by the lower lip, as shown in
. Fig. 1.10c . In this case, it is probable that there is a problem
with the vertical position of the maxilla, as a dental overeruption or a very large maxilla on the vertical way . The presence of an inverted incisal line curvature is generally related
to aging due to anterior teeth wear ( . Fig. 1.10d ). If there is a
reverse incisal curve in relation to the lower lip or a very large
space between the lower lip and the edges of the anterior
maxillary teeth, the esthetic might be improved increasing
the length of the incisal edge .
The line formed by the upper lip border is called upper lip
curvature or lip line. On a maximum smile, the upper lip
should translate up to the gingival line, which happens in
70% of the population. The ideal upper lip curvature is
obtained when the lip reaches the edge of the interdental
gum (. Fig. 1.10a, b ) . About 10% of the people have a
very high upper lip curvature. Every time this line surpasses
more than 2 mm of the gingival line, an esthetic impairment
is noticed, causing the so-called “gingival smile” or “gummy
a
b
.Fig. 1.8 Relation between the dental midline and occlusal frontal line. a Midline perpendicular to the occlusal frontal line; b midline inclined
in relation to the occlusal frontal line
a
b
.Fig. 1.9 Gingival contour. a Gingival line; b gingival zenith
C. R. G. Torres et al.
25 1
smile” (. Fig. 1.10e ) . The modalities for treatment of
this situation are limited. Orthodontic intrusion and surgical
crown exposition are treatment options to be considered
. Another option is the application of botulinum toxin
(Botox-A) in the muscles that control the upper lip movement, which is a minimally invasive and effective option.
About 20% of the individuals have a very low upper lip cur -
vature (. Fig. 1.10f ) [66, 69]. Every time the upper lip does not translate up to the gingival line during a maximum smile,
a loss of the smile dynamics will result .
If the patient presents an asymmetric movement of the
upper lip when smiling, this will result in excessive one-sided
gingival exhibition, besides misalignment between the
commissural and the interpupillary lines ( . Figs. 1.10g and
. Fig. 14.42a ). In this case surgical crown lengthening may
help to improve the esthetics, although Botox application,
.Fig. 1.10 Esthetic analysis of the maximum smile. a Incisal edges
of the anterior maxillary teeth touching the lower lip and the upper lip
curvature exposing the gingival papilla; b small exposure of the
gingival tissue and the presence of a small and homogeneous space
between the edges of the maxillary anterior teeth and the lower lip;
c incisal edges of the maxillary anterior teeth covered by the lower lip; d inverted incisal line; e excessive exposure of the gingival tissue; f low
upper lip curvature. g Asymmetric movement of the upper lip, greater
on the left side; h straight upper lip curvature; i inverted upper lip
curvature; j inclined occlusal plane downward on the right side;
k excessive buccal corridor; l loss of gradation because of the
inadequate position of the teeth 24 and 25
a
cb
d
efDiagnosis and Treatment Planning
26
1
notwithstanding its temporary effect, involves less risk and
costs. If the asymmetric movement occurs on the lower lip, a
greater space between the incisal edges and the lower lip will
result in one of the sides, impairing the symmetry of the
smile. In those cases, the maxillary teeth can slightly be
lengthened to compensate for this problem .
In repose or when the patient says “M, ” there should be an
exhibition of 3–4 mm of the incisal edge of the central maxillary incisors in young women or 1–2 mm in men. After
40 years of age, the quantity of exposition of the incisal edge
decreases in about 1 mm per decade, while it increases the
exposition of the lower incisors [58, 66, 71]. When the patient
says “E, ” a space between the upper and lower lips will form. If less than 50% of this space is occupied by the maxillary
central incisors, probably, a lengthening of the tooth will
improve the esthetic of the smile. On the other side, if more
than 70% of space is occupied by the maxillary incisor, the
lengthening of the incisor will not be pleasant . When the
patient says “V” or “F, ” the edges of the upper central incisors
should slightly contact the border of the lower lip .
From the middle to the corners of the mouth, the upper
lip curvature should form a curve facing upward, due to the
activity of the facial muscles during the smile ( . Fig. 1.10a–c ).
However, some people have a straight ( . Fig. 1.10h ) or even
downward curvature ( . Fig. 1.10i ), affecting the attractiveness of those smiles. In those cases, some improvement can
g
ih
j
kl
.Fig. 1.10 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres et al.
27 1
be obtained using techniques of muscle training when the
other components of the smile do not compensate for this
deficiency .
The incisal edges of the incisors and cusp tips of posterior
teeth form the occlusal plane, which is actually a curved sur -
face. When analyzing the esthetics of a smile, the cuspal tips
of the maxillary posterior teeth should present a visual progression, in general upward, starting from the tip of the
canine cusp, without high or low points. The right and left
sides must be symmetric . In . Fig. 1.10i , the occlusal
plane is inclined downward on the right side, breaking the
harmony of the smile. The space between buccal surfaces of
the posterior maxillary teeth and the cheeks is called buccal
corridor, which becomes visible during smiling and mouth
opening. During a broad smile, the corridor is almost completely occupied by teeth with a small lateral space toward the
cheek. A constricted maxillary arch ( . Fig. 1.10k ) can cause
an excessive buccal corridor and thereby impair the esthetics
. Conversely, the complete absence of the smile corridor
can also negatively affect the esthetics.
Facing a patient from the front, as the eyes move laterally
from midline, each tooth must seem proportionally thinner
than its mesial neighbor. This is called the principle of gradation . The distal half of the maxillary canine must not be visible when viewing the patient from the front. Inadequate
contouring or misalignment may break the front teeth har -
mony (. Fig. 1.10l ) . The proportion between height and
width of each individual tooth also influences the dental
esthetic and is further discussed in 7 Chap. 14.
The size of the incisal and gingival embrasures changes
with age. In young individuals, the incisal embrasures are
large and open increasing from the midline to the canine,
while gingival embrasures are little visible ( . Fig. 1.11a ). With
aging, the size of the incisal embrasures decreases and may
disappear completely because of tooth wear ( . Fig. 1.11b ).
Simultaneous to the incisal wearing, gingival papilla suffers
from recession, increasing the size of the gingival embrasures.
In some cases, abrasion happens before gingival recession,
leaving the teeth shorter and apparently wider. In other cases,
the gingival recession happens first, giving the teeth an appar -
ently longer appearance. Both cases contribute to an aging of
the smile [7 ].
> The size of the incisal and gingival embrasures
changes with age. In young individuals, the incisal
embrasures are large and open increasing from the
midline to the canine, while gingival embrasures are
little visible.
a
cb
d
.Fig. 1.11 a Incisal embrasures with progressively increasing sizes
as they distance from the midline; b incisal embrasures with similar
sizes, giving a less natural aspect and an aged look; c cervically located contact, causing a very large incisal embrasure; d very small contact
causing a dark triangular spaceDiagnosis and Treatment Planning
28
1If the interdental contact is positioned too far away from the
incisal area, a too large embrasure leaves an unnatural
appearance ( . Fig. 1.11c ). If the contact does not extend far
enough toward the gum, the interproximal space will be
open, creating a dark triangle ( . Fig. 1.11d ).
> Aging has a tremendous impact on teeth, alveolar
bone, and connective tissues.
1.4 Evaluation of Caries Risk
Untreated dental caries is the most prevalent chronic condition worldwide . It is known that the etiology is multifactorial and associated with behavior, socioeconomic status,
and physical, environmental, microbiological, and other
host-related factors. Each patient can present a combination
of different factors that will determine the characteristics of
the current disease and the likelihood of progression referred
to as caries activity . The higher the number of risk factors, the higher his caries risk will be. However, caries risk
assessment is not a standardized process in clinical practice
and is based on various techniques; the most prevalent is the
visual-tactile assessment . This evaluation can help to
guide the treatment. Elimination or control of etiological factors should be the primary goal in high-risk patients, whereas
monitoring and re-evaluation might be sufficient guidance
for patients with lower caries risk .
> Untreated dental caries is the most prevalent chronic
condition worldwide. It is known that the etiology is
multifactorial and associated with behavior,
socioeconomic status, and physical, environmental,
microbiological, and other host-related factors.
Caries risk factors can be divided into oral and non-oral
parameters. For the oral aspects, dental anatomy can foster
biofilm deposit (presence of deep fissures and pits), no contact
with fluoride, inadequate oral hygiene, presence of restorations (that may indicate a past history of high caries activity),
and the presence of defective restorations that allow the
deposit of biofilm, contributing to a higher caries risk. Nonoral factors, associated with an increased caries risk, are age,
low socioeconomic status, systemic diseases (Sjogren’s syndrome, diabetes, chronicle stress, radiotherapy, etc.), intake of
medications that reduce the salivary flow, high consumption
of carbohydrates, smoking , and alcohol abuse ,
besides systemic debilitating diseases that reduce selfcare
ability [ 54]. Among all the factors, the most important indicators for caries activity are the presence of active or recently
treated caries lesions, a great quantity of cariogenic biofilm,
frequent sugar consumption, and low saliva flow [66, 72].
In patients with active lesions, microbiological biofilm
analysis, evaluation of dietary habits, and salivary flow are
important to assess the susceptibility to caries and prediction of the likelihood of success for any restorative treatment. Salivary flow rate can easily be determined, asking the
patient to chew on a gum or a piece of wax for about 5 min, spitting inside a graduated cylinder of 20 ml. To eliminate
the foam of the saliva and have a precise measurement, some
drops of dimethicone can be added to the collected content.
This addition does not interfere with the measurement
because the volume used is very small . The result is
divided by 5, which is the flow rate per minute. The normal
values must be between 1.5 and 3 ml/min. Values between 1
and 1.5 ml/min indicate a slight hyposalivation, while a
value between 0.5 and 1 mm/min indicates a moderate
hyposalivation. A flow between 0.05 and 0.5 indicates a
severe hyposalivation [18, 68]. Based on a 7-day dietary protocol, patients’ nutrition habits can be evaluated. Presenting
a full nutrition record, including the amount of food, snacks,
and beverages to most patients, is a very intimate and per -
sonal matter. A trustful doctor-patient relationship is therefore the ultimate prerequisite for unaltered protocols.
Professionals must not be judgmental and demoralizing or
must not point an incriminating finger at a person but
should offer help and support patients who want to change
their habits for the better. Motivational interviewing is a
counseling method that gradually helps patients to develop
discrepancies and establish solutions for behavior change
. In dentistry, there are numerous fields of application,
starting with oral hygiene motivation and diet counseling,
culminating in smoking cessation, or establishing a responsible drinking behavior.
Biofilm control is one, if not the key, issue in the prevention of dental caries. Therefore, it is a standard practice to
register plaque formation over time. Many indices are proposed for daily routine or epidemiologic purposes (API, QHI
and PI, PFRI). The O’Leary index, for example, is based on
the presence or absence of biofilm on four surfaces (buccal,
lingual, mesial, and distal). After disclosing the biofilm with
a dye, presence of plaque is marked the diagram as shown in
. Fig. 1.15 . Missing teeth should be marked with an X
on the diagram, so they are not taken into consideration for
the calculation. The result is expressed as the percentage of
surfaces with biofilm in relation to the entirety of examined,
surfaces using the following formula:
OLeary IndexQuantity of dy ed surfaces
Total surfaces ¢= ́
aanaly zed
number of present teet h ́ () 4
The use of a plaque index objectively visualizes biofilm deposit
and enables monitoring changes over time. Indices between
0% and 12% are acceptable; values between 13% and 23% are
considered increased. Values from 24% to % express ineffective oral hygiene. Results of a biofilm index, however, are
just one tessera of the complex caries risk assessment. In order
to obtain an overall impression, as many possible risk factors
should be gathered and weighed. The software Cariogram
integrates risk parameters calculating the probability of future
lesion development. However, it was found to be inferior to
identify high-risk patients compared with clinical judgment
based on decayed surfaces and incipient lesions .
C. R. G. Torres et al.
29 1
Biofilm indices can be collected on several occasions dur -
ing treatment course and on every recall appointment when
appropriate. Improvement of oral hygiene is, like any other
behavioral change, a delicate matter that cannot be achieved
by simply telling the patients to do so. Instructions can be
helpful for those who are capable and willing to implement
new routines. Frequent recall interval, including professional
tooth cleansing, is an effective alternative for those who have
a lack of motivation or are manually incapable of maintaining efficient oral hygiene.
Tip
Try to gather as many risk and protective factors, and,
for practicality, organize your patients into groups of
high, moderate, or low caries risk. Re-evaluate factors
in defined intervals.
1.5 General Treatment Plan
The treatment plan is a series of treatments planned to eliminate or to control etiological factors, to repair existing damage
and create a functional oral environment, possible to be maintained . A precise prognosis for each tooth and the general
oral health of the patient is fundamental for its success. To
establish a treatment plan, the dentist should be capable to
foresee the outcome of treatment procedures, regarding best
available evidence as well as risks and side effects of different
treatments, based on the individual risk of a patient .
One principle of medical ethics is to ensure patienty’s
safety, preventing any injury to them (non-maleficence),
which also applies to dentistry . Clinicians should have
profound knowledge of the current evidence about risks and
benefits of treatments being offered. As mentioned above,
invasive therapy is flanked by more or less unwanted side
effects that need to be taken into consideration, as well as the
wanted benefits of operative treatment. Replacement of a restoration causes additional substance loss, leading to larger
restorations. This may happen many times during the
patient’s life, resulting in what is called the repetitive restor -
ative cycle, which leads more invasive restorations with every
treatment, endodontic treatment, and tooth loss as the final
consequence and worst-case scenario [15, 54].
> One principle of medical ethics is to ensure patienty’s
safety, preventing any injury to them (non-maleficence),
which also applies to dentistry .
Tip
Invasive treatment should be considered with caution,
since the so-called repetitive restorative cycle leads to
continuous substance removal and premature loss of
teeth as final consequence.Having an initial list of patient-centered problems and knowing about the patients’ preferences, the clinician should propose treatment alternatives to the patient. Following the rules
of shared decision-making, advantages and risks of each
option should thoroughly be evaluated . Shared decisionmaking basically aims at achieving mutual agreement about
the clinical procedure, diagnostic methods, and therapy of
choice between the caregiver and the patient and/or their
legal guardians. Both doctor and the patient rather act as
partners, trying to overcome the natural asymmetry of
knowledge. The clinician should enable the patient to make a
self-determined therapy decision and to comprehend the
risks and benefits that are associated with this choice or any
other alternative. The outcome of this process is ideally an
informed choice that is recorded on a chart ( . Fig. 1.16). The
treatment process should follow a reasonable order. The
sequence of treatments is ordered as follows: systemic phase,
urgency phase, control phase, re-evaluation phase, definitive
phase, and maintenance phase [22, 54, 66]. Following this
treatment concept will guarantee a structured and biological
sequencing of therapy steps.
> Shared decision-making basically aims at achieving
mutual agreement about the clinical procedure,
diagnostic methods, and therapy of choice between
the caregiver and the patient and/or their legal
guardians.
Objective of the systemic phase is to determine whether there
is a medical risk for the patient or for the professional team
during dental treatment. According to their physical conditions, patients can be classified according the American Society of Anesthesiology (ASA), employed to evaluate surgical
risk [ 23]. According to this system, the patients are classified
into six categories:
5ASA I – Healthy patient, without any physiological,
biochemical, or psychical disturbs and little or no
anxiety. No risk for dental treatment.
5ASA II – Patient with slight or moderate systemic and
controlled diseases, not compromising his normal
activities. Conditions may affect surgical and anesthesia
procedures. Healthy patients (ASA I) with extreme
anxiety or fear for the dental treatment can also fall into
this category. They present a minimum risk during
treatment. For example, well-controlled diseases as
prehypertension, non-insulin-dependent diabetes,
epilepsy, asthma or thyroid problems, patients ASA I
with active allergies, breathing problems, or pregnancy.
They might need a previous medical consultation.
5ASA III – Patients have severe systemic diseases that are
hard to control, limiting their normal activities, but it
does not incapacitate them, presenting impact on the
surgical procedures and anesthetics. There are, for
example patients who suffered or currently suffer from
angina pectoris, myocardial infarction, cerebrovascular
accident, congestive heart failure more than 6 months
before the dental appointment, hypertension, controlled
insulindependent diabetes or chronic obstructive Diagnosis and Treatment Planning
30
1pulmonary disease of little intensity. They need a
previous medical consultation.
5ASA IV – Patients with incapacitating life-threatening
systemic diseases with great impact on surgical anesthesia. These patients have a significant risk during dental
treatment; hence, any elective treatment should be
dropped or postponed.
5ASA V – Dying patients with life expectancy less than
24 h notwithstanding any medical treatment. They have
terminal diseases and are almost always at the hospital.
Dental treatment is definitively contraindicated, but an
emergency palliative care might be provided in the
hospital.
5ASA VI – Declared cerebral death and kept alive for
organ donor.
After completion of the systemic phase and in the event a
patient can be safely treated, urgent treatments are usually
given the first priority . The urgent phase is dedicated to
pain relief and infection control. These conditions should be
eliminated prior to realization of any further treatment .
Esthetic problems can also be considered as urgency treatment; in particular, when anterior teeth are involved .
Another important reason to treat urgent problems first is
that, in general, patients are not capable to take adequate
decisions when they suffer pain .
When the patient is pain-free, the treatment plan might
be re-evaluated regarding the definitive phase. It might happen that patients take different decisions when pain and discomfort are no longer present. During the control phase,
etiological risk factors of a disease are eliminated or reduced
. In order to achieve and later on maintain healthy oral
conditions, an individual program is designed to establish
oral hygiene measures and possibly support the patient to
refrain from health endangering habit . The ultimate success of any rehabilitating treatment plan depends on how
well diseases are controlled over time . Treating the
symptoms of a disease is doomed to fail since persisting etiological factors will jeopardize the treatment outcome .
Examples for causal-therapeutic measures comprise infection control, establishment of oral hygiene, periodontal and
endodontic therapy, (provisional) restoration of open cavities
or defective restorations, removal of cervical overhangs, and
extraction of hopeless teeth. Based on the individual caries
risk, the dentist should develop an individual treatment plan
aiming at arresting and preventing caries and periodontal
diseases, as well as any other oral disease or detrimental condition . Again the definitive treatment should be reevaluated after this phase and amended if necessary .
> It might happen that patients take different decisions
when pain and discomfort are no longer present.
Time should be allowed between the control and definitive
phase in order achieve oral conditions that are free of pain
and inflammation. For example, teeth with pulpal or periodontal doubtful diagnosis may have responded positively to
causal treatment and may be considered for a definitive res-toration or integration into full mouth rehabilitation; or they
might have had a negative response and should rather be
extracted. Then, the rehabilitating plan should be modified,
including possible prosthetic replacement of the mentioned
teeth. Control of bacterial biofilm usually results in improvement of gingival health and a reduced risk of developing fur -
ther caries lesions. In some cases however, strategies could
not have been efficient and may require modification before
the next step. At the end of this phase, the patient should be
orally healthy without an active disease .
The corrective treatment focuses on restoring masticatory function and esthetics concerning the patients’ expectations in these matters. A favorable prognosis is highly
depending on controlling the disease causing factors in the
longer term and hence requires informed patients who are
willing and capable to maintain good oral health .
Another reason to change the initial treatment plan may be
financial matters. Treatment costs may actually not fit the
patient’s financial situation at that moment. It is wise to
address costs for dental treatment overtly and nonjudgmental and provide less expensive treatment options whenever
possible. No treatment at all or postponing cost-intensive
procedures is usually preferable to losing a patient due to
obscure pricing strategy.
Before follow-up maintenance, the definitive or corrective phase is the final phase of the treatment concept [54, 66].
It aims to reconstitute the dentition to a comfortable, esthetic,
and functional situation, as defined by the patient’s demands
. Many procedures that fall into the control phase, like
restoration of carious teeth, may control the disease and act
as definitive restoration at the same time . In addition,
some procedures improving esthetic and function, such as
prosthetic, orthodontic, cosmetic restorative, or surgical
treatments, may be indicated. This part is frequently the most
cost intensive.
The maintenance phase aims to stabilize treatment results
and hinders diseases to reoccur. The frequency of the reevaluation intervals will greatly depend on the patient’s risk
to oral diseases. A longer interval of approximately 1 year can
be recommended for patients with a very low documented
risk for developing periodontal diseases and caries lesions
. On the other side, high-risk patients may benefit from
more frequent recall intervals, for example, every 3–4 months
. It is expected that this phase is the longest of the treatment, and it is focused on keeping the oral health for the
whole life of the patient .
Bitewing radiographs may flank oral examination in riskorientated intervals as well. There is no general agreement
about the frequency of radiographic re-evaluation. The
higher the risk for the development of new lesions and the
more differentiated the treatment concept for caries lesions
are, in particular in non-operative care, the more frequent
bitewing radiographs may be beneficial for the patient. On
the downside, a higher frequency of radiographs may lead to
overdiagnosis and overtreatment, initiating the abovementioned repetitive restorative cycle . Frequently patients
are skeptical about radiographic examinations because of
C. R. G. Torres et al.
31 1
radiation exposure, which has to be taken into consideration
for the decision whether and, if yes, how frequent bitewing
radiographs will improve oral health.
Tip
The treatment concept enables clinicians to structure a
treatment into biological stages, in a logical order, aiming
at creating and maintaining healthy conditions and
improving a patient’s oral health-related quality of life.
> Frequently patients are skeptical about radiographic
examinations because of radiation exposure, which
has to be taken into consideration for the decision
whether and, if yes, how frequent bitewing
radiographs will improve oral health.
1.6 Planning Restorative Treatment
Planning an individual and tooth-specific restoration is the
final step in the restorative treatment plan. It requires the
consideration of four main factors and a number of modifying factors. The main factors are quantity and shape of the
remaining tooth structure, functional requirement of an
individual tooth, and the superordinate objective of the treatment plan in general . Above all this, it is of course the
patients’ demands that largely provide the direction which
kind of restoration is preferred.
The quantity of remaining tooth structure determines its
resistance and possibility of retention for the restorative
material and thereby influences the drawing of the final restoration. Since longevity of a restoration is an ultimate treatment goal in most scenarios, the design of a restoration
should prevent fracture and displacement. Small and medium
Class II cavities can easily be restored with amalgam or resin
composites. However, when the amount of lost tooth structure is greater than one-third of the intercuspal distance, the
tooth is more susceptible to fracture. Indirect restorations
claimed to be a solution for those problems. However, modern concepts of adhesive dentistry advocate the unlimited
use of direct composite restorations even in endodontically
treated teeth . Doctrines differ considerably, yet direct
adhesive suppresses increasingly indirect restorations.
Besides the width, the depth of the preparation is also fundamental. On large and deep preparation, the need to protect
the cusps from fracture is greater either with direct amalgam
restorations or with indirect restorations.
In anterior teeth, the amount of the remaining tooth
structure as well will determine the success of a restoration.
Direct composite restorations are sufficient in most cases and
can be seen as the standard anterior restoration. In cases of
severe loss of tooth structure, extreme malpositioning or
overal esthetic impairment, veneers, or full crowns may be
indicated. However, masters of their craft are capable to solve even the most complex cases using direct restoration techniques .
When choosing the material for a dental restoration, it
needs to be considered whether a patient suffers from excessive occlusal load and parafunction or not. Patients with
bruxism, deficient disocclusion guide, worn facets, or severe
attrition due to heavy occlusal stress are probably not the best
candidates for delicate and fragile ceramic restorations.
Therefore, signals of excessive functional load should be
carefully evaluated during the clinical exam .
Even though the indication of indirect metallic restoration has decreased significantly, they present excellent properties and acceptable longevity . They may also be
favorable on preparations with deep subgingival margins.
Indirect restorations are fabricated and polished outside the
mouth, which makes it easier to obtain a convex and smooth
contour compared to direct restorations . The longevity
and hence the clinical success of restorations depend on
numerous variables including materials-, patient-, and
dentistrelated factors .
> The longevity and hence the clinical success of
restorations depend on numerous variables, including
materials-, patient-, and dentist-related factors.
Indirect restorations can be performed with light-curing
composites designed for laboratorial use, feldspar porcelain,
pressed ceramic, or ceramic/composite blocks for computergenerated restorations (computer-aided design/computerassisted machining – CAD/CAM). They present physical
properties that are superior in relation to the direct composite restoration. However, they are associated with higher
costs, because materials are more expensive and laboratorial
work and more treatment time are required. Even though
composites for laboratorial use have improved resistance, no
difference regarding longevity compared to direct composite
restorations can be found . The restorations of feldspar
porcelain are an alternative for large Class II cavities and have
predictable esthetics, even though it has a relatively high incidence of fractures, especially when they are exposed to occlusal stress. They also wear the opposing tooth because of
higher microhardness in relation to natural enamel or other
restorative materials. Pressed ceramics offer an excellent
marginal adaption, low abrasion of the opposing tooth, and
superior resistance if compared to the indirect composites or
feldspar porcelain. It offers an alternative to indirect metallic
restorations. The restorations made with CAD/CAM technology are indicated from Class I and II cavities up to single
crowns and have higher resistance to occlusal stress and low
abrasion than direct composites .
The choice of a restorative material has to be in line with
the superordinate treatment plan. For example, restoration of
a tooth that later on serves as an abutment for prosthetic
rehabilitation might be different from a permanent restoration without further treatment .
After shared decision-making and after the patient has
made an informed choice on the treatment, the whole process should be brought to a logical order. The adequate Diagnosis and Treatment Planning
32
1sequence is many times critical for the success of the treatment, avoiding unnecessary complications. Most of the
restorative treatments will be in the phase of disease control
or definitive rehabilitation. Restorative interventions aiming
to control the disease mostly comprise direct restorations
with amalgam, composites, or glass ionomer cement. The
treatment sequence should be coordinated with the patient’s
preferences. Symptomatic teeth, those with severe decay or
esthetically compromised teeth, are usually treated first.
However, it is highly recommended to fulfill a patient’s chief
complaint at a very early stage, signaling a patient-centered
and professional demeanor. Restorative procedures in the
definitive rehabilitation phase may go beyond the necessity
to stabilize the disease and may include treatments destined
to improve esthetics, for instance, placing veneers for closing
diastemas or offering adequate function by replacing missing
teeth . The treatment sequence should be registered on
the clinical chart as presented in . Fig. 1.16 .
1.7 Interdisciplinary Aspects
Dentistry today consists of highly specialized disciplines,
which bring up the need for interdisciplinary teamwork. In
complex cases where more than one dentist is involved, one
colleague has to have the coordinating role. Usually the family or general dentist takes the lead and refers patients to specialists.
> Dentistry today consists of highly specialized
disciplines, which bring up the need for interdisciplinary teamwork.
Periodontal treatment frequently precedes restorative treatment, creating more favorable environment and facilitating
operatory maneuvers. Teeth with unsatisfactory periodontal
prognosis should not be considered for comprehensive prosthetic rehabilitation. Restorations may precede periodontal
treatment in inflammation-free periodontal conditions or in
the presence of open cavitation or lost restorations. Treatment
of deep caries lesions may require a temporary filling, to promote oral hygiene capability and prevent from caries progression. Self-explanatory endodontic treatments should be
performed prior to definite restoration and periodontal treatment. If surgical periodontal treatments become necessary,
indirect restorations and prosthetic measures are postponed
until complete healing of the operated area. Teeth planned for
indirect restoration should receive temporary restorations
before periodontal surgery, defining the position of the margins
and improving access for surgery. Preparations which margins
invade the biological width should be submitted to crown
lengthening surgery, before a definitive restoration is placed. A
minimum of 3 months and possibly up to 6 months is necessary
before initiation of definite prosthetic treatment .
Orthodontic pretreatment may be the prerequisite to
achieve optimal function and/or esthetic results in complex
cases. Minor interventions comprise single tooth movement,
uprighting molars, or extrusion therapy. Caries and peri-odontal diseases need to be controlled adequately before
comprehensive orthodontic treatment over a longer period.
Indirect restorations should preferentially be postponed until
removal of orthodontic appliances .
Surgical interventions like tooth extraction or removal of
impacted teeth should precede restorative treatment. This is
particularly important in the cases of third molars, where, as
a side effect, surgical procedures can lead to damage or displacement of restorations on second molars . Occlusal
analysis can evince a lack of disocclusion guide or interfer -
ences, which might be treated before restorative and prosthetic procedures. If necessary, the occlusal adjustment is
initiated before the definitive phase . It might be easier to
place direct restorations before indirect ones; however it also
works in reverse order.
1.8 Oral Health Records
A detailed documentation of anamnestic and patient-related
information is fundamental for quality control when planning the treatment. This also applies for documentation of
treatment procedures and incidents, as well as discussions
and telephone calls with the patient or relatives. The patient
file serves as the basis in case of legal disputes, as documentation to a third-party payment, and in the case of forensic
identification [54, 63, 66]. Patient’s oral health records should
contain a central document, which might be flanked by supplementary documents . Additionally intraoral camera
image and photography are excellent features for documentation [54, 66]. Documentation should follow the statutory
requirements of the Federal Council that control a clinician’s
activity in each country . The complete oral health record
allows the clinician to analyze the case, even when the patient
is not present, and to anticipate the treatment at the following
appointment [ 54, 66].
> A detailed documentation of anamnestic and
patient-related information is fundamental for quality
control when planning the treatment. This also applies for
documentation of treatment procedures and incidents as
well as discussions and telephone calls with the patient or
relatives. The patient file serves as the basis in case of
legal disputes, as documentation to a third-party
payment, and in the case of forensic identification.
Every clinical chart contains the clinician’s and the patient’s
identification, patient’s master data, anamnesis, clinical findings, treatment plan, and records about the progress and
intercurrences during the treatment. It is mandatory to have
the clinician’s identification including name and registration
number of the Federal Dental Council, on all printed papers.
As to patients’ identification, the following information are
essential to meet legal requirements according to each country: complete name, address, national identification number,
social security number, health insurance information, place
and date of birth, civil status, nationality, and gender. The
way a patient chose a specific clinician should also be
C. R. G. Torres et al.
33 1
registered. When the patient is underage or has been declared
incompetent, it is necessary to register contact data of his
legal guardian. It may be important to record the name of
clinicians whom the patient previously attended and, if possible, date and place of attendance ( . Fig. 1.12 ).
Anamnestic records contain the chief complaint, the history of the present illness, and medical and dental history as
it has already been described ( . Figs. 1.12 and 1.13). Findings of the clinical examination (objective examination) are
noted as objective signals and symptoms divided in extraand intraoral diagnostic findings ( . Fig. 1.14). Recordings of
dental and periodontal findings are best registered on charts,
which graphically provide a number of information in a
clearly arranged manner ( . Fig. 1.15). Furthermore, these
records become indispensable in the communication with
third parties or a fellow colleague [57, 66]. The condition of
every tooth, restorations, defects, caries, and soft and hard
tissues are registered. A detailed record of nature, place, and
even the size of restorations should be performed .
Tip
No matter how busy you are in a day, take your time
for documentation; it is worth the effort and can save
you money and trouble in the event of a legal dispute.
During shared decision-making, different treatment options,
including their benefits and potential risks, are discussed
with the patient. Ultimately both the patient and the doctor
come to a therapeutic solution both parties support and
agree upon. It might be useful to briefly note all options,
including those services the clinician cannot provide himself,
since it may happen that patients regret their decision. Therefore, it will be helpful to refer to the notes of the decisionmaking process. It is highly recommended to explain and to
describe treatment options thoroughly, registering the teeth,
procedure, and materials involved. Risk communication
includes the discussion of limitations and potential harms of
every treatment option, based on the best available evidence
and more importantly in a clear and nontechnical language
(. Fig. 1.16) . The best way to document the result of a
shared decision-making is an informed consent signed by all
parties involved. The patient has the right to receive clear,
simple, and comprehensible information about diagnoses
and possible therapeutic actions. In a consumer point of
view, the offering and presentation of the treatment should
be correct, clear, precise, ostensive, and in patient’s language,
informing the characteristics, quality, quantity, composition,
price, and guarantee, as the risks that they might present to
his health and safety .
> During shared decision-making, different treatment
options, including their benefits and potential risks,
are discussed with the patient. Ultimately both the
patient and the doctor come to a therapeutic solution
both parties support and agree upon. > The patient has the right to receive clear, simple, and
comprehensible information about diagnoses and
possible therapeutic actions. In a consumer point of view,
the offering and presentation of the treatment should be
correct, clear, precise, ostensive, and in patient’s
language, informing the characteristics, quality, quantity,
composition, price, and guarantee, as the risks that they
might present to his health and safety.
Apart from risk communication, costs and length of the
treatment should be transparent and overtly discussed. As
mentioned before, it is the patients’ inherent right to decide
what treatment they prefer and, perhaps more importantly,
which option is unwanted. Medical laypersons often dread to
take decisions because they feel overstrained, helpless, and
uneasy to be responsible for their decision. It is therefore the
clinicians’ duty to enable a patient to take part in the decisionmaking process according to their medical literacy. In conclusion, patients do not have to become professionals in
order to take a self-determined therapy options, but doctors
need to learn how to transfer the existing evidence into easily
consumable facts and how to carve out the patients’ very own
interests.
Tip
Risk communication seems to be unpleasant, especially
for inexperienced dentists. Patients, however, have a
right to learn about the risks involved in a particular
treatment option and usually appreciate clear-cut
information.
Every treatment is documented separately and in detail in the
patients’ file including date, which tooth surface has been
treated and what procedure has been carried out mentioning
all materials ( . Fig. 1.17). Changes of the initial treatment
plan, nonattendance, and new information should be
recorded. Whenever needed the patients’ signature may be
added as a sign of mutual agreement .
Oral health records are legal documents. They might
become key component of a legal dispute. Hence, clarity and
completeness in documentation are quintessential .
Erasing text passages is not allowed and impossible in electronic patient files. Mistakes are marked as such and corrections should follow below, dated and signed [40, 66]. In many
ethical proceeding of the Dental Councils, dentists did not
do technical mistakes but failed to adequately state risks and
alternatives to the proposed treatment . . Figures 1.12 and
1.17 display an example of clinical charts following the guidelines of the Dental Federal Council.
In the course of progressive digitization and networking,
various documentation and accounting software have
become available for dental offices and universities. While
handwritten documents may have their veracity proven by
graphological methods, and a photography finds its proof on
the negative film, a digital document may lack proof . Diagnosis and Treatment Planning
34
1
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((DENTIST'S NAME
DENTIST'S SPECIALITY
REGISTRATION NUMBER
Complete address
Name: ID:
ID:
ID:Date of birth: //
//Gender: ( )M ( )F City of birth:
Marital status:
Phone (com):
Home address:
Business address:
Spouse name:
Recommended by:
Last dentist:
Legal guardian: Name:
Social Security: Marital Status:
ANAMNESIS
Chief Complain:
History of the present illness:
MEDICAL HISTORYCell number:Profession:
E-mail:
Social security:
Insurance number: Insurance company:
Last consult:Social security:
Nationality:
Phone (res):
CARDIOVASCULAR PROBLEMS
Do (Did) you have any of the following problems?
Cardiac problems?
Pacemaker?
Chest pain?
Cardiac transplant
Shortness of breath or easily tired?
How many pillows do you use?
Cardiac valve problems?
Heart murmur?
Hypotension? (Low blood pressure)
Hypertension? (High blood pressure)
Bleeds much when gets cut or extracts a tooth?
Varicose veins?
Infarction (Heart attack)?
Cerebrovascular accident?
Feet or legs swelling?
Heart problems?
What?
ALLERGIES
Are you allergic or had a reaction to:
Dental anesthesia?
Penicillin or other antibiotic?
Sulfamethoxazole (Bactrim)?
Aspirin?
Dipyrone?
Metals?
Latex (rubber)?
Iodine?
Animals?
Food?
Resins?
Oxygenated water?
Other ? What ?YESN OD ON’T KNOWYESN OD ON’T KNOW
Are you under any medical treatment?
What?
Doctor's name:
Taking any medication?
What?
Have taken or is taking:
Blood thinner?
Anticonvulsants?
Tranquilizer?
Antihistamines?
Analgesics?
Corticosteroids?
Have you received dental anesthesia?
Have you been submitted to a surgery?
What?
Have you been hospitalized?
Why?
Gained or lost weight quickly recently?
Why?
Do you practice sports or physical activity?
What?
How often?
Since when?
Do you drink alcoholic beverages?
What?
How often?
Since when?
Do you smoke?
Did you receive chemotherapy or radiotherapy?
Why?
BREATHING PROBLEMS
Do (Did) you have any of the following diseases?
Pneumonia?
Sinusitis?
Rhinitis?
Bronchitis?
Asthma?
Hemoptysis (spit blood)?
Pneumoconiosis (Disease caused by inhaling dust)?
Lung Emphysema?
Other breathing problem?
What?
Cough for more than 3 weeks?KIDNEY PROBLEMS
Do (Did) you have any of the following problems?
Nephritis?
Kidney failure?
Hemodialysis?
Polyuria? (large amounts of urine)
Pollakiuria? (extraordinary daytime urinary frequency)
Dysuria? (Painful urination)
Cystitis (inflammation of the bladder)?
Any other kidney problem?
What?
.Fig. 1.12 Template of clinical chart (identification data, anamnesis, medical history)
C. R. G. Torres et al.
35 1
ONLY WOMEN
Are you pregnant? How far?
Are you breastfeeding?
Are you taking birth control pills?
Are you under hormone replacement therapy?
Is it regular your menstrual cycle?
HEPATIC PROBLEMS
Do (Did) you have cirrhosis?
Do (Did) you have other hepatic problem?
What?
JOINT/BONE PROBLEMS
Did you fracture any bone?
Where?
Did you have any facial trauma?
Do (Did) you have arthritis?
Do (Did) you have arthrosis?
Do (Did) you have rheumatism?
Do (Did) you have rheumatic fever?
Do (Did) you have osteoporosis?
Do (Did) you have any bone calcification problem?
Do (Did) you have join problems?
Do (Did) you have other joint or bone problem?
What?
TRANSMISSIBLE DISEASES
Do (Did) you have gonorrhea?
Do (Did) you have syphilis?
Do you have AIDS?
Do (Did) you have hepatitis?
Do (Did) you have tuberculosis?
Do (Did) you have any childhood disease?
Other? What?
ENDOCRINE DISORDERS (hormonal disorders)
Do you have polyphagia (excessive hunger)?
Do you have polydipsia (excessive thirst)?
Do you have diabetes?
Do you have hypothyroidism?
Do you have hyperthyroidism?
Do you have Hyperparathyroidism?
Do (Did) you have any other endocrine problem?
What?
OPHTHALMIC PROBLEMS
Do (Did) you have glaucoma?
Did any doctor recommend the use of antibiotic before the dental treatment?
Did you have any other health problem not mentioned in this questionnaire?
What?
DENTAL HISTORY
Did you receive professional oral hygiene instructions?
How many times do you brush your teeth a day?
Do you use dental floss?
How often?
Does your gum bleed?
Are your teeth sensitive to temperature changes?
Are your teeth sensitive to sweets?
Are your teeth sensitive when biting?
Are you feeling any pain on teeth?
Where?
Do you have the habit of nail biting and thumb sucking?
Do you have the habit of biting objects?
Do you often bite tongue, lips or cheeks?
Do you breathe through the mouth?
Do you drink coffee/soda during the day?
Do you frequently have mouth sores?
Do you have any tooth mobility?
Did you receive orthodontic treatment?
Are you satisfied with your oral aesthetics?
Did you have any mouth infection?
I certify that every answer, including personal information, above written is true. I compromise to inform any change in my cur rent health status.
of 20 ,,
Patient's/legal guardian's signatureBLOOD PROBLEMS
Do (Did) you have anemia?
Do (Did) you have Leukemia?
Do you have hemophilia?
Did you receive blood transfusion?
Why?
Do (Did) you have hemorrhage?
Where?
Why?
Do (Did) you have any blood problem?
What?
SALIVARY PROBLEM
Do you have excessive production of saliva?
Do you have xerostomia? (little or no saliva)
Did you have salivary stone?
NEUROLOGIC PROBLEMS
Do you have frequent fainting?
Do you have frequent headache?
Do (Did) you have facial neuralgia?
Did you have convulsions?
Do you have epilepsy?
Do (Did) you receive psychiatric treatments?
Since when?
Why?
Are you stressed?
Do (Did) you have any other neurologic problem?
What?
GASTROINTESTINAL PROBLEM
Do (Did) you have gastritis?
Do (Did) you have stomach ulcers?
Did you vomit blood?
Do (Did) you have any other gastrointestinal problem?
What?
FAMILY HISTORY
Is there any one sick in your family?
What disease?
In your family, was there any case of:
Cancer?
- Diabetes?
- Infarct?
- Hypertension?
- Renal Problem?
Did you have cold sores in the lips?
Have you lived -erg a place without water treatment?
Do you grind or ciench your teeth (day or night)?
Do you chew in just one side?
Why?
Do you hear a clicking when open your mouth?
Do you feel pain in the ear, head, face or neck?
Do you have difficulty to open your mouth?
When waking up, feel face muscles and/or teeth in pain?
Did you have any problem with dental treatment?
What?
Do you have mouth sores
Do you practice any sports
Did you have any impact on the mouth?
Do you feel food deposit between teeth?
Did you have any other oral problem?
What?
How often do you visit the dentist?YESN OD ON’T KNOW YESN OD ON’T KNOW
YESN OD ON’T KNOW YESN OD ON’T KNOW((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
(((((((((((((((((((((((((((((( ((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
((((((
.Fig. 1.13 Template of clinical chart (medical and dental history)Diagnosis and Treatment Planning
36
1
General aspect:
Vital signs: Pulse:
EXTRAORALCLINICAL EXAM
Lymph nodes:
Muscle palpation:
Lesions:
INTRAORAL
Occlusion evaluationbpm (/ /) ;/ (/ );/(/ );
/(/ );/(/ );
/(/ );/(/ ); ; Glycemic index:
Blood pressure:
Static evaluation: Angle classification:Swelling and asymmetry:
TMJ palpation:
Other:
Overbite:; Overjet:
; Tooth migration or leaning? Tooth extrusions?
Anterior open bite?
Lips:Functional evaluation: Relation between CR and CO:
Disocclusion guidance: Anterior:
Wearing facet from attrition?
Non-working side interference?
Amount of mouth opening:
Soft tissues evaluation
Dorsum of the tongue:
Palate:
Teeth evaluationLoss of molar support? Loss of vertical dimension?
; Right lateral:; TMJ snaps?
; Left lateral:
; Abfraction?
; cheeks:; Protrusion interference?
; Deviation when opening?
; Vestibule:
; Ventral surface of the tongue:
; Tonsils:
DENTAL CHART IN //
1.8. 1.7. 1.6.CE
AM4.8.
AM4.7. 4.6.
AM4.5. 4.4.
DT4.3.
COM4.2.
COM4.1.
COM3.1.
GIC3.4.
CM3.5.
CE3.6.
FSP3.7.
FSI3.8. 3.2. 3.3.CE COMC OM COMC OM COMA M AR FPDF PD FPD
1.5. 1.4. 1.3. 1.2. 1.1. 2.1. 2.2. 2.3. 2.4. 2.5. 2.6. 2.7. 2.8.; Floor of the mouth:
= Lesion (carious/non carious) AM = Amalgam MC = Metal-ceramic
= Deficient restoration COM = Composite resin FPD = Fixed partial denture
= Satisfactory restoration GIC = Glass ionomer cement RPD = Removable partial denture
= Absent tooth X CM = Cast metal FSI = Fissure sealant is indicated
= Endodontic treatment is necessary CE = Ceramic FSP = Fissure sealant is present
= Endodontic treatment is present AR = Acrylic resin DT = Darkened tooth
= Implant TR = Temporary restoration WSL = White spot lesion
.Fig. 1.14 Template of clinical chart (clinical examination – extraoral and intraoral)
C. R. G. Torres et al.
37 1
1.8. 1.7. 1.6. 1.5.48
Probe Depth
GM to CEJ
Attachment Loss47 46 45 44 43 42 41 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38
1.4. 1.3. 1.2. 1.1. 2.1. 2.2. 2.3. 2.4. 2.5. 2.6. 2.7. 2.8.
//
4.8. 4.7. 4.6. 4.5. 4.4. 4.3. 4.2. 4.1. 3.1. 3.2. 3.3. 3.4. 3.5. 3.6. 3.7. 3.8.GBI:
//
GBI:Gingival bleeding index
O’Leary plaque index1.8. 1.7. 1.6. 1.5. 1.4. 1.3. 1.2. 1.1. 2.1. 2.2. 2.3. 2.4. 2.5. 2.6. 2.7. 2.8.
4.8. 4.7. 4.6. 4.5. 4.4. 4.3. 4.2. 4.1. 3.1. 3.2. 3.3. 3.4. 3.5. 3.6. 3.7. 3.8.
1.8. 1.7. 1.6. 1.5. 1.4. 1.3. 1.2. 1.1. 2.1. 2.2. 2.3. 2.4. 2.5. 2.6. 2.7. 2.8.
//
4.8. 4.7. 4.6. 4.5. 4.4. 4.3. 4.2. 4.1. 3.1. 3.2. 3.3. 3.4. 3.5. 3.6. 3.7. 3.8.PI:
1.8. 1.7. 1.6. 1.5. 1.4. 1.3. 1.2. 1.1. 2.1. 2.2. 2.3. 2.4. 2.5. 2.6. 2.7. 2.8.
//
4.8. 4.7. 4.6. 4.5. 4.4. 4.3. 4.2. 4.1. 3.1. 3.2. 3.3. 3.4. 3.5. 3.6. 3.7. 3.8.PI:48
Probe Depth
GM to CEJ
Attachment Loss47 46 45 44 43 42 41 31 32 33 34 35 36 37
Probe Depth
GM to CEJ
Attachment Loss17 16 15 14 13 12 11 21 22 23 24 25 26 27
Probe DepthDate:Periodontal evaluation
/
GM to CEJ
Attachment Loss
B
U
C
C
A
L
B
U
C
C
A
LL
I
N
G
U
A
L
L
I
N
G
U
A
L17 16 15 14 13 12 11 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28/
.Fig. 1.15 Template of clinical chart (clinical examination – periodontal evaluation, bleeding index, plaque index)Diagnosis and Treatment Planning
38
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
– Carious lesion OL (2 surfaces)
14 – Deficient restoration OD (2
surfaces)
13 and 33 — Pulpal necrosis
11, 21 and 41 – Defective
restorations (4 surfaces)
22 – Defective total crown
26 – Defective MODV restoration
46 – Carious MOD lesion (3
surfaces)
45 – Defective MO restoration
43 – Darkened toothTREATMENT PLAN
a)Amalgam restoration
b)Composite restoration
c) ---------- ---------- ---------- ----
----
-------------- ----------
---------- ----------
---- ---------- ----------
---- ---------- ----------
---- ---------- ----------
---- ---------- ----------
---- ---------- ----------c) ----------
c) ----------
c) ----------
c) ----------c) ----------b) ----------
b) ----------a)Amalgam restoration
b)Composite restoration
a)Endodontic treat. + Compos.
a)Composite restoration
a)Metal free full crown
b)Metal ceramic crown
c) Metallic-plastic crown
a)lndirect ceramic rest.
b)Amal. rest.+ comp. veneer
c)Composite restoration
a)Amalgam restoration
b)Composite restoration
a)Amalgam restoration
b)Composite restoration
a)lnternal bleaching
b)lndirect veneer
b)Direct veneer
a)Composite restoration> Durability
> Aesthetic
> Durability
< Durability
Only option
Only option
> Aesthetic
> Resistence
< Aesthetic
>Aesthetic, >Resist.
< Aesthetic
< Resistence
> Durability
> Aesthetics
> Durability
> Aesthetic
Less Invasive
Dental wearing
Dental wearing
> Aesthetic
<Aesthetic
< Aesthetic/>wearing100.00
.00
.00
.00
.00
.00
.00
.00
.00
.00
.00
.00
.00
.00
.00
.00
.00
.00
.00
.00
.00
,001h X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X1h
1h
1h
4h
3h
3h
3h
3h
2h
1h
1h
1h
1h
1h
1h
1h
1h
1h
1
TOTAL .00 21h4h
3hProblems List Treatment optionAdvantage/
DisadvantageFees TimePatient's
option
b)GlC restoration
c)Amalgam restoration46, 44 and 32 – Non carious
cervical lesion (3 surfaces)
Treatment sequence: 3, 1, 7, 6, 2, 4, 8, 10, 5, 9
INFORMED CONSENT DECLARATION
I state that after being informed about of the purposes, risks, costs and treatment alternatives, according to wha t is
presented above. I agree, accept and authorize the treatment, and declare to follow the professional instructions and pa y
the costs that are mentioned on the presented budget.
Patient's or Legal
Guardian signatureDentist's signatureof 20 ,,
.Fig. 1.16 Template of clinical chart (treatment plan, informed consent)
C. R. G. Torres et al.
39 1
.Fig. 1.17 Template of clinical chart (records of procedures and relevant information about the dental visit)Diagnosis and Treatment Planning
40
1Other than that, current legislation in some countries still
oblige dental services that patient documents must be handwritten or have a “physical existence” . However, as this
new tendency seems to be irreversible, it has been calling
researchers and legislators to change the system to legally
recognize electronic documentation, without the possibility
of adulteration or violation of medical confidentiality .
The Dental Council gave dentist the choice between handwritten or computerized documentation [3 ]. Information and
requirements have to be supplied, inside a pattern of authenticity regardless of the documentation mode [3 ]. In recent
years, many countries create a system of digital certification,
designated to guarantee the authenticity, the integrity, and the
juridical validation of the documents in electronic form [3 ].
This is a method to recognize the authenticity of a digital
document (Digital Certificate) similar to an “authentication”
by a notary. After the identification and the registration of the
user by an official authority, they receive a “key” (called token
or a smart card), a type of identity card. Technically, an exter -
nal device that is connected to the computer liberates, through
a pin code, a text that is incorporated into the document that
needs to be authenticated. A type of an “electronic stamp” that
declares its authenticity. This signature is achieved or printed
together along with the document and can be sent with the
document to the receiver. However, if for some reason there is
an alteration of at least one letter, the certificate is excluded,
disappearing the authentication registration and canceling the
recognition. On this way, the document is protected against
adulterations [3 ]. However, the contract of service, authorization for the treatment (in case of minors or incapable), anamnesis, and any further documents that may need the signature
in paper still need to be printed, unless patients or their legal
representatives also have their digital signature [3 ].
Conclusion
Patients seeking for dental treatment present actual complaints and have their own theories of a disease and personal
preferences regarding treatment options. It is the clinician’s
duty to uncover this information and to develop a personalized treatment plan in accordance with the patient. The
patient has to be an equal partner in this process, even though
not being a dental professional. Therefore, dentists need to
avoid technical language and always should be aware of anxieties and concerns. Active listening is a basic communication
skill that encourages people to talk and keep them interactive.
Identification of the chief complaints and knowing a patient’s
medical attitude and expectation build a reliable and solid
fundament for an intact doctor-patient relationship. Empathy
and respecting patients’ autonomy are simple to adopt pre -
requisites to build up an equal partnership. They are also an
essential precondition for shared decisionmaking.
Apart from the interpersonal level, a sound examination
allows proposal of a most probable diagnosis, which in turn is
the fundament for the treatment plan. Dentists need to
accept that diagnoses may be false, and they need to explain
that to their patients giving likelihood ratios at the best. It is
advisable to follow a certain systematic during the clinical examination. After the interview, it is best to start with the
extraoral and then proceed with the intraoral assessment.
Dental findings are recorded separately from periodontal and
endodontic findings using hard copies or digital files. Many
patients are unsatisfied with their esthetic appearance and
possibly state these concerns during the medical interview.
Analysis of dental, periodontal, and facial esthetics may
round off a comprehensive clinical examination.
Based on clinical findings and in conjunction with the
patient’s complaints, a treatment plan is developed. In a modern doctor-patient relationship, an empowered patient takes
a self-responsible informed choice after discussing advantages and risks of potential options. Clinicians need to be upto- date with the best available evidence, in order to provide
actual information needed to take a treatment decision.
Sometimes no treatment can be an option as well and displays a deliberate choice as well. Shared decision-making is
opposed to a paternalistic model where doctors dictate
patients what choice is best for them. In many countries,
shared decision-making is made mandatory by law. After
shared decision-making, patients are informed better, have
more control, and stick to their therapy of choice.
Implementation of the treatment plan is sequenced in
different phases, systemic, urgency, control, corrective, and
maintenance phase. Each phase helps the patient to establish
oral health and improve or maintain masticatory function or
dental esthetics. Ultimately, every intervention should
improve oral health-related quality of life.
References
1. Alam M, Bastakoti B. Therapeutic guidelines: antibiotic. Version 15.
Aust Prescr. Melbourne: Therapeutic Guidelines Limited; ;
38: . https://doi.org/10. /austprescr. . .
2. Allen EP . Surgical crown lengthening for function and esthetics.
Dent Clin N Am. ;37: –79.
3. Almeida C, Zimmermann R, Cerveira J, Julivaldo F. Prontuário odontológico – Uma orientação para o cumprimento da exigência contida no inciso VIII do art. 5° do Código de Ética Odontológica. Cons
Fed Odontol Rio de Janeiro; .
4. Andrade E. Terapêutica medicamentosa em odontologia. São Paulo:
Artes Médicas; .
5. Asa’ad F. Shared decision-making (SDM) in dentistry: a concise nar -
rative review. J Eval Clin Pract. .;jep. ; https://doi.
org/10. /jep. .
6. Attin T, Wegehaupt FJ. Impact of erosive conditions on toothcolored restorative materials. Dent Mater. ;30:43–9. https://doi.
org/10. /j.dental. .07. .
7. Baratieri LN, Monteiro Junior S, Andrada MA, Ritter AV. Odontologia
Restauradora: Fundamentos e Possibilidades. São Paulo: Santos; .
8. Barbe A, Heinzler A, Derman S, Hellmich M, Timmermann L, Noack
M. Hyposalivation and xerostomia among Parkinson’s disease
patients and its impact on quality of life. Oral Dis. ;23: –70.
https://doi.org/10. /odi. .
9. Barbe AG. Medication-induced xerostomia and hyposalivation in
the elderly: culprits, complications, and management. Drugs Aging.
;35: –85. https://doi.org/10. /s40266- -5.
10. Barbe AG, Bock N, Derman SHM, Felsch M, Timmermann L, Noack
MJ. Self-assessment of oral health, dental health care and oral
health-related quality of life among Parkinson’s disease patients.
Gerodontology. ;34: –43. https://doi.org/10. /ger. .
C. R. G. Torres et al.
41 1
11. Beauchamp TL, Childress JF. Principles of biomedical ethics. 7th ed.
Oxford: Oxford University Press; .
12. Berkey DB, Berg RG, Ettinger RL, Mersel A, Mann J. The old-old dental patient: the challenge of clinical decision-making. J Am Dent
Assoc. ; : –32.
13. Brandão RCB, Brandão LBC. Finishing procedures in orthodontics: dental dimensions and proportions (microesthetics). Dental Press J Orthod.
;18: –74. https://doi.org/10. /S217694512013000500006.
14. Brännström M. The hydrodynamic theory of dentinal pain: sensation
in preparations, caries, and the dentinal crack syndrome. J Endod.
;12: –7. https://doi.org/10. /S00992399(86) -4.
15. Brantley CF, Bader JD, Shugars DA, Nesbit SP . Does the cycle of
rerestoration lead to larger restorations? J Am Dent Assoc.
; : –13.
16. Bullen CME, Sierra E. Odontograma para tratamientos preventives y
conservadores en restauradora dental. Rev Fola/Oral. ;3
17. Busato ALS. Dentística: Filosofia, conceitos e prática clínica. 1st ed.
São Paulo: Artes Médicas; .
18. Conceição M, Marocchio L, Fagundes R. Técnica de Sialometria para
uso na prática clínica diária. Available at: http://www. halitofresco.
com. br/pdf/tecnica-de-sialometria-para-uso-na-praticaclinica-
diaria. pdf .
19. Congiusta MA. No differences in longevity of direct and indirect
composite restorations. Evid Based Dent. ;18:46. https://doi.
org/10. /sj.ebd. .
20. Dablanca-Blanco AB, Blanco-Carrión J, Martín-Biedma B, VarelaPatiño P , Bello-Castro A, Castelo-Baz P . Management of large class II
lesions in molars: how to restore and when to perform surgical
crown lengthening? Restor Dent Endod. ;42: . https://doi.
org/10. /rde. .42.3. .
21. Drancourt N, Roger-Leroi V, Martignon S, Jablonski-Momeni A, Pitts
N, Doméjean S. Carious lesion activity assessment in clinical prac -
tice: a systematic review. Clin Oral Investig. ;23: –24.
https://doi.org/10. /s00784- - -7.
22. Fasbinder DJ. Treatment planner’s toolkit. Gen Dent. 47:35–9.
23. Fehrenbach MJ, Weiner J. Saunders review of dental hygiene. St.
Louis: Saunders; .
24. Genovese WJ. Metodologia do exame clínico em odontologia. 2nd
ed. São Paulo: Pancast; .
25. Gillam DG, Yusuf H. Brief motivational interviewing in dental prac -
tice. Dent J. ;7:51. https://doi.org/10. /dj7020051.
26. Gimenez T, Piovesan C, Braga MM, Raggio DP , Deery C, Ricketts DN,
et al. Visual inspection for caries detection. J Dent Res. ;94: –
. https://doi.org/10. / .
27. Goldstein GR. The longevity of direct and indirect posterior restorations is uncertain and may be affected by a number of dentist-,
patient-, and material-related factors. J Evid Based Dent Pract.
;10:30–1. https://doi.org/10. /j.jebdp. .11. .
28. González-Cabezas C, Hara AT, Hefferren J, Lippert F. Abrasivity test -
ing of dentifrices – challenges and current state of the art; .
p. –7. https://doi.org/10. / .
29. Hänsel Petersson G, Åkerman S, Isberg P-E, Ericson D. Comparison
of risk assessment based on clinical judgement and Cariogram in
addition to patient perceived treatment need. BMC Oral Health.
;17:13. https://doi.org/10. /s12903- - -4.
30. Haralur SB, Alqahtani AS, AlMazni MS, Alqahtani MK. Association of
non-carious cervical lesions with oral hygiene habits and dynamic
occlusal parameters. Diagnostics. ;9:43. https://doi.
org/10. /diagnostics9020043.
31. Heaven TJ, Firestone AR, Weems RA. The effect of multiple examinations on the diagnosis of approximal caries and the restoration of
approximal surfaces. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol
Endod. ;87: –91.
32. Hempton TJ, Dominici JT. Contemporary crown-lengthening ther -
apy: a review. J Am Dent Assoc. ; : –55.
33. Imfeld T. Dental erosion. Definition, classification and links. Eur J
Oral Sci. ; : –5. 34. Kassebaum NJ, Bernabé E, Dahiya M, Bhandari B, Murray CJL, Marce -
nes W. Global burden of untreated caries. J Dent Res. ;94: –
8. https://doi.org/10. / .
35. Kidd EAM, O’Hara JW. The caries status of occlusal amalgam restorations with marginal defects. J Dent Res. ;69: –7. https://doi.
org/10. / .
36. Klein F, Keller AK, Staehle HJ, Dörfer CE. Proximal contact formation
with different restorative materials and techniques. Am J Dent.
;15: –5.
37. Kupke J, Wicht MJ, Stützer H, Derman SHM, Lichtenstein NV, Noack
MJ. Does the use of a visualised decision board by undergraduate
students during shared decision-making enhance patients’ knowledge and satisfaction? – A randomised controlled trial. Eur J Dent
Educ. ;17:19–25. https://doi.org/10. /eje. .
38. Lang F, Floyd MR, Beine KL. Clues to patients’ explanations and concerns about their illnesses. A call for active listening. Arch Fam Med.
;9: –7.
39. Lombardi RE. The principles of visual perception and their clinical application to denture esthetics. J Prosthet Dent. ;29:
–82.
40. Machen D. Legal aspects of orthodontic practice: risk management
concepts. Current concepts in orthodontic informed consent. Am J
Orthod Dentofacial Orthop. ;96:88–9.
41. Magne P , Belser U. Restaurações adesivas de porcelana na dentição
anterior: Uma abordagem biomimética. São Paulo: Quintessence;
.
42. Mamoun J, Napoletano D. Cracked tooth diagnosis and treatment:
an alternative paradigm. Eur J Dent. ;9: . https://doi.
org/10. / - . .
43. Marinho VCC. Prática odontológica baseada em evidência. Sua aplicação na promoção de saúde bucal. In: Buischi YP , editor. Promoção
saúde bucal na clínica odontológica. São Paulo: Artes Médicas;
. p. –59.
44. Mergulhão V, de Mendonça L, de Albuquerque M, Braz R. Fracture
resistance of endodontically treated maxillary premolars restored
with different methods. Oper Dent. ;44:E1–11. https://doi.
org/10. /17- -L.
45. Miller EL, Bodden WR, Jamison HC. A study of the relationship of the
dental midline to the facial median line. J Prosthet Dent. ;41:
–60.
46. Milosevic A. Direct placement composite: the treatment modality
of choice to restore the worn or eroded dentition in primary dental
care. Prim Dent J. ;5:25–9.
47. Mjör IA, Shen C, Eliasson ST, Richter S. Placement and replacement
of restorations in general dental practice in Iceland. Oper Dent.
27: –23.
48. Mulic A, Svendsen G, Kopperud SE. A retrospective clinical study on
the longevity of posterior Class II cast gold inlays/onlays. J Dent.
;70:46–50. https://doi.org/10. /j.jdent. .12. .
49. Paranhos LR, Salazar M, Ramos AL, Siqueira DF. Orientações legais
aos cirurgiões-dentistas. Rev Odontol. ;15:8.
50. Pashley DH. How can sensitive dentine become hypersensitive and
can it be reversed? J Dent. ;41:S49–55. https://doi.org/10. /
S0300- (13) -X.
51. Petersson GH, Twetman S. Tobacco use and caries increment in
young adults: a prospective observational study. BMC Res Notes.
;12: . https://doi.org/10. /s13104- - -9.
52. Pinto VG. Saúde bucal coletiva. 4th ed. São Paulo: Editora Santos;
.
53. Priyanka K. Impact of alcohol dependency on oral health – a crosssectional comparative study. J Clin Diagn Res. ;11:ZC43–6.
https://doi.org/10. /JCDR/ / . .
54. Roberson TM, Heymann H, Swift EJ. Sturdevant’s art and science of
operative dentistry. 5th ed. St. Louis: Mosby; .
55. Roberson TM, Heymann H, Swift EJ, Sturdevant CM. Sturdevant’s
art and science of operative dentistry. Orlando: Mosby/Elsevier;
.Diagnosis and Treatment Planning
42
1 56. Robinson JD, Heritage J. Physicians’ opening questions and patients’
satisfaction. Patient Education and Counseling. ;60: –85.
http://dx.doi.org/10. /j.pec. .11. .
57. Rubira IRF, Rodrigues CBF. Odontograma e notação dental: considerações gerais. Rev Odont USP . ;2:4.
58. Rufenacht CR. Fundamentals of esthetics. Chicago: Quintessence
Publishing; .
59. Schwendicke F, Dörfer CE, Schlattmann P , Page LF, Thomson WM,
Paris S. Socioeconomic inequality and caries. J Dent Res.
;94:10–8. https://doi.org/10. / .
60. Schwendicke F, Diederich C, Paris S. Restoration gaps needed to
exceed a threshold size to impede sealed lesion arrest in vitro. J
Dent. ;48:77–80. https://doi.org/10. /j.jdent. .03. .
61. Schwendicke F, Tzschoppe M, Paris S. Radiographic caries detection:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Dent. ;43: –33.
https://doi.org/10. /j.jdent. .02. .
62. Silva M. Documentação em odontologia e sua importância jurídica.
Odontol e Soc. . p. 1–3.
63. Silva M. Compêndio de odontologia legal. 1st ed. Rio de Janeiro:
Medsi; .
64. Sollecito TP , Abt E, Lockhart PB, Truelove E, Paumier TM, Tracy SL,
et al. The use of prophylactic antibiotics prior to dental procedures in patients with prosthetic joints. J Am Dent Assoc. ; :11–16.
e8. https://doi.org/10. /j.adaj. .11. .
65. Sreebny LM, Schwartz SS. A reference guide to drugs and dry
mouth. Gerodontology. ;5:75–99.
66. Summitt JB, Robbins JW, Hilton TJ, Schwarts RS. Fundamentals of
operative dentistry: a contemporary approach. 3rd ed. Chicago:
Quintessence; .
67. Svanberg M, Mjör IA, Ørstavik D. Mutans streptococci in plaque
from margins of amalgam, composite, and glass-ionomer restorations. J Dent Res. ;69: –4. https://doi.org/10. /
.
68. Tarzia O. Halitose: um desafio que tem cura. São Paulo: Publicações
Biomédicas; .
69. Tjan AH, Miller GD, The JG. Some esthetic factors in a smile. J Prosthet Dent. ;51:24–8.
70. Torres C, Pelogia F, Borges A, Barcellos D, Pucci C. Parâmetros para
troca ou manutenção de restaurações. Dent Sci – Clínica e Pesqui
Integr. :2–13.
71. Vig RG, Brundo GC. The kinetics of anterior tooth display. J Prosthet
Dent. ;39: –4.
72. Wyatt CC, MacEntee MI. Dental caries in chronically disabled elders.
Spec Care Dent. ;17: – .
C. R. G. Torres et al.
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG
C. R. G. Torres (ed.), Modern Operative Dentistry, Textbooks in Contemporary Dentistry,
https://doi.org/10. / -3- - -0_243 2
Ergonomics Principles Applied
to the Dental Clinic
Karen Cristina Kazue Yui, Cristiani Siqueira Barbosa Lencioni,
Eliel Soares Orenha, and Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres
2.1 Introduction – 44
2.2 Ergonomics in Dentistry – 44
2.2.1 Working Posture – 45
2.2.2 Positioning of the Delivery Unit and Dental Chair – 50
2.2.3 Positioning of the Patients on the Chair – 53
2.2.4 Positioning of the Patient’s Head – 54
2.2.5 Positioning the Operating Field in Relation to the Dentist – 55
2.2.6 Positioning of the Operating Field in Relation to the Assistant – 56
2.2.7 The Use of Overhead Chair Light – 57
2.2.8 Vision of the Teeth to Be Treated – 58
2.2.9 Types of Movements During the Dental Treatment – 58
2.2.10 Ways to Grasp the Hand Instruments – 59
2.2.11 Rest Places – 61
2.2.12 Work Environmental Conditions – 63
2.3 Work-Related Musculoskeletal Disorders – 65
2.3.1 Occupational Diseases Epidemiology – 67
2.3.2 WMSD Prevention – 68
2.4 Exercises to Prevent Osteomuscular Problems – 69
2.5 Current Panorama of Dental Ergonomic: Challenges,
Proposals, and Goals – 74
References –
44
2Learning Objectives
The learning objectives of this chapter are related to the following topics:
5The principals of ergonomics in dentistry
5How to ergonomically seat during the dental treatment
5How to properly position the patient in the chair in order
to have the operating field facing the operator and
assistant
5How to grasp the instruments and rest the fingers in the
oral environment, in order to have the full control of the
hand during treatment
5How to deal with the work environmental condition in
order to protect the dental team health
5How to prevent the most common work-related
musculoskeletal disorders in dentistry
2.1 Introduction
We, human beings, are provided of a force that drives us to a
continuous search of the knowledge of ourselves and to better adapt to the environment in which we live, aiming to
improve and ease the development of our activities, so we can
reach superior levels of interaction, satisfaction, and internal
and external well-being, socially and individually. This
power, which at the same time drives and is driven by this
search, enhances our capacity to transcend and develop; and
nowadays, it has come to proportions never imagined before
. Throughout the last few years, we have noticed a rapid
transformation in our society due to the huge quantity, availability, and transference of information. This has allowed a
significant improvement at work and life conditions. Multiand transdisciplinary strategies have each day been more
used to break barriers that once before hindered the acquisition, transference, and availability of knowledge.
The ergonomics, by its own nature, has benefited on this
context, enclosing and interconnecting the knowledge of
physiology, psychology, sociology, architecture, semiotics,
industrial design, anthropometry, engineering, physical ther -
apy, anthropology, medicine, communications, and many
other neighboring sciences, applied to the work and on
human being activities, with the purpose to improve the
adaptation of the methods, means, and environment work to
men . Ergonomics is the study of the adaptation of the
job to men, and it has been defined as “the group of scientific
knowledge about men that are needed to conceive an instrument, a machine and tools that can be used with maximum
comfort, safety and efficiency” [30, 36, 64]. What has been
seen on most of the professions is an adaptation of men to the
job and not the inverse. However, the human being is not
always capable to adapt to the job. Therefore, it can be seen
that men should be the center of the attentions to elaborate
projects for each job, adapting it to the human being capacity
and limitations . Therefore, for the ergonomic studies, it
is important for us to know human being’s characteristics
(physical, physiological, psychological, social aspects and
age, gender, training, and motivation), characteristics of the machine (equipment, tools, furniture, and spatial arrangement), and characteristics of the worker’s environment (temperature, noise, vibrations, light, colors, gases, etc.), besides
the consequences of the job, among other things.
In dentistry, as in any other health professions, this inter -
action between the worker, the environment, and the tool has
very special characteristic. The goal of the activity is not to
produce or manufacture a product or an object but to offer a
service. This service is very special, because it is performed
for and to a human and not for nor to an object; this fact,
obviously, leads to very specific aspects, where the emotional
aspects relative to the environment, the clinician, and the
patient play a very fundamental role. That is why a satisfactory adaptation between the dentist and his job requires an
environment that is emotionally positive and pleasant; where
the feelings to go further than comfort and productivity
flourish such as desire, pleasant surprises, interest, delight,
admiration, satisfaction, fascination, kindness, acceptance,
tolerance, proactivity, motivation, and confidence . A
good adaptation does not occur where there is negativity
and is not pleasant and where feelings such as indignation,
disdain, grief, unpleasant surprise, excessive competition,
dissatisfaction, frustration, intolerance, suspicion, subor -
dination, monotony, and fear flourish. Giving emphasis to
the emotional aspects and using the knowledge on human
sciences as psychology and sociology, the contemporary
ergonomics aims to turn the dental service more pleasant
and enjoyable, and that way demystify the image people
have about the dentist, untying it from unpleasant feelings
and experiences. For that, it needed a more humanized dentistry, where more empathy, affection, love, and satisfaction
are noticed. Positive sensations and good feelings must be
instilled on the dentistry character and on the development
of the dental attention to reach those sublime goals .
Ergonomics is the study of the adaptation of the job to
human being. What has been seen on most of the
professions is an adaptation of human being to the job
and not the inverse. However, the human being is not
always capable to adapt to the job.
2.2 Ergonomics in Dentistry
The knowledge on dental ergonomics has advanced much on
the last decades, revealing its importance for the dentist.
However, we observe the non-implementation and practice
of this knowledge. Some studies show that it is high the
occurrence of joint, muscles and lumbar problems, and many
clinicians’ diseases related to the bad posture, lack of ergonomic planning of the dental treatment unit, work
environment, work systems, among others . This has
caused many of the dentists to work on a low productivity
rate, without comfort and especially without the quality of
K. C. K. Yui et al.
45 2
life and, in many cases, it has even drive them to abandon the
career prematurely.
There is no doubt the dentistry is a weary and stressful
profession, which causes damage to the health, both physical
and psychic [10, 37, 39, 41, 46]. Studies about the musculoskeletal disorders among dentists have been performed since
the 1950s, and they are responsible for the first proposes to
change their working process, including the changes on the
orthostatic position to the sitting position . The actual
postural awkwardness at the dental work has been subject to
many discussions . Non-ergonomic dental workspace
and awkward postures cause musculoskeletal disorders,
which are common among dentists. This context is the theme
for studies, especially in the ergonomics area. The posture
adopted by the dentist on their tasks has changed throughout
the world over the last 30 years . However, the requirements of the dental practice, as the restrict visual field and
adoption of awkward postures, increase the predisposition
for the dentist to get musculoskeletal diseases [40, 51, 58].
Therefore, more research is needed, which can define the
impacts of the muscular and nervous diseases on those clinicians, with the aim to prevent their development. With that,
there will be a better quality of life and a better service .
There is a consensus among authors in relation to the
causes of repetitive strain injuries (RSI) and work-related
musculoskeletal disorders (WMSD) among the dentists and
it can be highlighted:
5Factors with organizational nature: Movement concentration on the same person, extra work hours, double
shifts, accelerated work rhythm, lack of necessary
pauses, pressure from the boss, and others
5Factors with biomechanical nature: Excessive strength,
intense repetitiveness of the same movement pattern, the
wrong posture of the upper limbs, compression on the
lower limb structures, static posture, and others
5Factors with psychosocial nature: Excessive pressure for
results, excessively tense work environment, interper -
sonal relation problems, excessive rigidity at the work
system, and others
5Factors of work conditions: Temperature, vibration,
furniture, noise, illumination, space, tools, and others
For the described factors to be considered a risk to cause RSI/
WMSD, it is important to observe their intensity, duration,
and frequency [44, 45]. Among those predisposed elements,
it can be pointed out the factors with organizational nature.
The way in which the work is organized can cause a greater
impact on the well-being of the individuals when compared
to the other factors.
The ergonomics applied to dentistry has the primary goal
to find mechanisms to reduce the physical and mental stress
on the dentist, to prevent diseases related to the dental practice, increasing the productivity but also the quality of life
. The rationalization of the job can be obtained by means
of organizing the clinical procedures, applying the corporate
management concepts and ergonomic principles, space
arrangement, and four-handed dentistry. > The rationalization of the job can be obtained by
means of organizing the clinical procedures, applying
the corporate management concepts and ergonomic
principles, space arrangement, and four-handed
dentistry.
International standards on the ergonomic field were elaborated aiming to promote significant improvement and to
assure that the standard procedures, for a healthy and safe
job, are established. The ISO : /Cor 1: establishes the health limits for a static sitting job . The ISO
: presents a glossary of the main ergonomic terms,
requirements and necessary procedures for the development
of working systems and places . In , the ISO
was revised and updated, and even though its first edition has
been published about 40 years ago, not all clinicians apply its
principles on the spatial arrangement of their work environment [15, 32]. In . Fig. 2.1, a correctly spatial arrangement of
the dental office according to the ISO , in which we can
notice a correct division of working zones on the floor, will
be described further in this chapter.
2.2.1 Working Posture
The posture is defined by the American Academy of
Orthopedics as a reactive arrangement of the body parts;
the good posture is related to the balance between the support structures, the muscles, and bones, protecting themselves from aggression (direct trauma) or progressive
deformity (structural changes) [1 ]. It is called postural
work, the invisible effort that the back, shoulders, and arms
muscles do in silence against gravity. When we are sitting,
there is a continuous effort of the back muscles to maintain
the torso erect, any other way, the body would collapse. This
muscular effort generated is in disadvantage because it
blocks the blood flow. To have postural comfort, uncomfortable positions for the torso, head, and arms should be
avoided [5 ]. During the dental procedure, it should be
permitted to alternate between the sitting and standing
.Fig. 2.1 Dental clinical room built observing the criteria of the ISO
: standardErgonomics Principles Applied to the Dental Clinic
46
2positions. When only one of the positions needs to be chosen, the sitting position must be preferred.
Another important aspect is the interchange of the body
posture to avoid prolonged muscular static tension, that will
lead to fatigue. On the same way, a good balance between the
body movements should be established, and the movement
must be preferred against the prolonged immobility. The
high precision movements, common in dentistry, should not
involve a significant muscular force.
The healthy posture for the dental job is sitting, also called
“finger control posture” or “pianist posture. ” The working
position should be similar to the positions that we adopt
when we are reading a book, in a way that the visual field is
perpendicular to our visual axis . To reach this healthy
posture, three basic work positions can be used [26, 28].
5Active (dynamic): Static positions are only possible
when the object to be seen by the dentist can face his
visual axis. For example, when the dentist is adjusting a
temporary crown outside the mouth, all the surfaces can
be easily seen by rotating the tooth completely without
having to change the visual axis. On the other hand,
when the dentist makes a preparation on the buccal and
lingual surfaces of the tooth 46, it is necessary to change
his position and the position of the patient’s head in a
way that it is possible to look in a perpendicular manner
to the working field. This frequently happens during the
intraoral procedures. Therefore, it is frequent the
necessity to visualize different sites, which cannot be
completely positioned in the direction of the visual axis
of the dentist, being necessary to move to get adequate
vision without excessive inclination. For that, it is
necessary to have enough space under the back of the
patient’s dental chair that will allow the dentist to freely
move, without obstructions and where the legs will not
be “hindered and restrained” under the back of the
chair.
5Symmetric (stable and balanced): The working field
must be positioned in front of and centralized in relation
to the chest of the dentist. Every time that the working
field is not centralized in relation to the chest of the
dentist, an asymmetric work posture will occur. It
requires more muscular effort to maintain the balance
and it will generate more fatigue and tiredness. The
inclination and effort will lead to scoliosis. Other
important disadvantage will be the difference in distance
among the objects focused by the left and right ocular
globe . This difference in distance leads to more
effort on the ocular muscles to correct the distortion of
the image that will be generated, which will predispose
prematurely the dentist to a presbyopia condition . A
symmetrical position is reached when there is a parallel
relation to the imaginary lines that go through the
pupils, shoulders, hips, knees, and feet completely laying
on the ground. This also requires that the foot control of
the chair is closely positioned to the foot of the dentist,
so it is not necessary to stretch the leg to reach it. 5Erectus: It is reached when we intentionally position
the forward and upward, with the vertebral column in a
neutral position, and the closest as possible to the shape
that it has when it is in the orthostatic position (standing). This avoids overload of the intervertebral discs,
herniated disc, hyperlordosis, hyperkyphosis, and scoliosis of the vertebral column. This way, when passively
seated, the correct support on the upper and lateral parts
of the pelvis, which must be proportioned by the support
of the dental stool, is fundamental to increase stability
and reduce the muscular overload.
> The healthy posture for the dental job is sitting, but
this working position has also to be erectus, active,
and symmetric.
The ISO : /Cor 1: : standard “Ergonomics –
Evaluating the posture of static work” establishes the healthy
limits for a job performed sitting and static and determines
the ideal position considering the head, the torso, the arms,
and the legs angles . To reach an ideal posture, according
to this standard, the column must be erect, the legs must
remain perpendicular to the ground, and the tights must be
parallel to the ground or slightly leaned, forming a 90° to a
° angle on the knees and hip angle ( . Fig. 2.2a). The head
can lean up to 20° forward in relation to the column, while
the torso can lean up to 10° forward ( . Fig. 2.2a). The upper
arms must present a maximum angulation of 20° on the for -
ward inclination ( . Fig. 2.2a ).
Tip
The dentist must pay attention to his body. The head
should not lean more than up to 20° forward in
relation to the column, while the torso can lean up to
10° forward. The upper arms must present a maximum
angulation of 20° on the forward inclination.
The patient must be positioned in a way that the forearms of
the operator are leaned, at least, 10° and the most to 15°
upward, when the hands are in a position of operating
(. Fig. 2.2a). This inclination of the forearms avoids the
excessive frontal inclination of the torso, so it is possible to
have a good vision of the operating field . The elbows
must be close to the body with a maximum lateral distance
of 20° (. Fig. 2.2b) [26, 28]. It is very common to observe
that the dentist and the dental students usually work with
an excessive distance between the elbows, and always that
the patient’s mouth is positioned above the recommended
distance from the ground, which is 5–10 cm below the
elbows when the dentist is well positioned in the stool. This
patient’s position can avoid that the dentist leans the torso
beyond the 10° forward, in the anteroposterior direction.
To lean the body forward produces a reduction of body’s
agility and increase the static load. The back and neck of the
dentist should not lean or rotate laterally, and the top of the
K. C. K. Yui et al.
47 2
shoulders should stay parallel to the ground, which characterizes a symmetric and equilibrated posture, without muscular overload ( . Fig. 2.2b ) [26, 28].
On the other hand, the effective application of the rules to
the postural needs of the dentist demonstrates a great challenge, because the working field (surface, tooth, quadrant, or
region) cannot always be directed perpendicularly to the
visual axis. In many cases, the use of the clinical mirror is
essential because it facilitates the visualization without the
need to lean laterally or forward, especially in procedures
performed on the upper jaw, and even that, it is not always
enough .
One difficulty is related to the angles formed by the thigh
and the leg. When a 90° knee angle is adopted ( . Fig. 2.3a),
the space under the back of the chair is limited, especially
when the patient is sitting down, forcing the dentist to back
up from the patient and to lean forward to approach the
working field, causing a compression on the abdominal
region that will lead to a diminishing of the venous circulation . This space becomes greater when we increase the
angle to °, and it can go up to ° ( . Fig. 2.3b, c ).
Another additional benefit is that this increase, to at least
°, propitiates less compression on the abdominal region,
facilitating the blood circulation on this region. It also per -
mits that the work posture of the dentist become more
dynamic, prone to the movement, permitting the alternation
of the position on a simple way, naturally and without obstacles, which is an essential condition, for example, when a
procedure is performed on the first quadrant, comprehending the buccal, lingual, mesial, and distal surfaces. This mobility and freedom of movements are necessary when we
do a cavity preparation that comprehends two or more sur -
faces, or even the preparation for a full crown that comprehends all surfaces of the tooth. On those cases, only asking
for the patient to move the head left or right, backward or
forward, may not be enough and requires that the dentist
move himself more to the right or behind the patient.
Consequently, there is a need for a work posture that is at the
same time symmetrical, erect, balanced, and stable, but
prone to the movement [26, 28].
Other benefit in using an angle greater or equal to °
between the thigh and lower part of the leg is that this leads
to a neutral positioning of the pelvis, slightly leaning forward
and downward. When this angle is lower, close to 90°, there
is an upper and backward leaning of the pelvis. Therefore,
when the pelvis is raised and forced back, there is more tension on the lumbar region of the vertebral column, reducing
its normal curvature and causing a compression on the inter -
vertebral discs .
Kinematic chain balance and neutral working posture is
most easily achieved by working in a higher sitting posture,
with a ° knee/hip angle, because it allows the patient’s
chair to be raised, creating the necessary space for proper
movement of the legs of the dentist under the back of the
chair. However, currently, most of the dental stools offered
on the global market have a flat seat; hence working in a
higher sitting posture leads to a greater compression on the
returning venous circulation, and, consequentially, there are
more chances to have varicose veins because there is a
greater support on the legs and less support on the coccygeal
ab
.Fig. 2.2 Healthy work posture for the dentist according to the ISO : standard. a Side view; b back viewErgonomics Principles Applied to the Dental Clinic
48
2
region (. Fig. 2.3b – arrow) [2 ]. So that does not happen, it
is necessary that the dentist’s stool comprises a seat pan, consisting of a horizontal rear part for the pelvis, and an inclinable sloping down front part for the upper legs, with a
vertically and horizontally adjustable back rest [13, 28].
. Figure 2.4 shows the Ghopec dental stool with an appropriate design, that allows the dentist to assume a passive as
well as a dynamic posture .
Other option would be to use stools shaped like a horse’s
saddle (Salli System), as it can be shown in . Fig. 2.5. On this
type of seat, the support happened at the ischium bones in a simulation as if the individual was standing up, and because
of that, there is no back in the stool. The angle on the knee
region is found to be more adequate, which lowers the pressure on the knees, improves the joint metabolism (knee and
hips), and lowers the risks of future problems, also contributing to improve the circulation on the legs. Because it is composed of two separate pars, it ventilates the genital region of
the woman, which reduces the occurrence of infections and
reduces the pressure on the masculine genital organ. This
system also reduces pressure on the chest, on the ribs, and on
the upper part of the column, increasing the inhaled oxygen
ab c
.Fig. 2.3 Angle between the leg and the thigh. a 90° angle. Distance between 5 and 10 cm between the height of the elbows and the mouth
of the patient; b ° angle. The inadequate stool leads to a compression of the thigh (arrow). c Use of the saddle shaped stool (Salli System)
a b c d
.Fig. 2.4 Dental stool with design of two-inclination seat, which allows the dentist to adopt a healthy work posture. a , c Stools with straight
seats; b, d stool with double inclination. (Courtesy from Professor Paul A. Engels)
K. C. K. Yui et al.
49 2
quantity. Furthermore, lowers the pressure on internal
organs, especially on intestine and stomach ( . Fig. 2.3c).
Limitations are attributed to saddle stool which are related to
increased angle in the lumbar spine when sitting with a °
hip angle and muscle fatigue in the same region by the
absence of the backrest . A recent systematic review
has revealed that there is a limited number of studies and
insufficient scientific evidence that using saddle stool leads to
improved dentist’s sitting posture, and there are no studies on
its effect to reduce neck pain and musculoskeletal pain.
Therefore, prospective longitudinal studies that are necessary
to strengthen the scientific evidence about its contribution
and effect.
However, the recommendation to use an angle >90° continues to be a problem for most of the dentist around the
world, who may not have a stool with a proper design available on the market. In the case the stool does not have one of
the mentioned designs and an angle >90° is used, the resulting forces on the tripod legs stool can push the stool backward and also result in the compression and venous
obstruction on the thigh region. Therefore, in the abscence of
an adequate stool, a 90° angle should be used. The incorrect
drawing of the stool can seriously affect the health of the clinician, leading to an irreversible deformation of the vertebral
column .Vianna and Arita described a working position that
is based on the logic performance concept, which is a scientific model of improved performance by means of emphasis
on a more natural position, to do a finite task on a balanced
posture. Studying the space relation between the operator
and his work plane, it can be concluded that the dental work
is much better performed on the midsagittal plane, with the
hands, on the chest or heart level, in myocentric harmony
(. Fig. 2.2 ).
The dentist must sit with his feet completely supported on
the ground, providing a position of equilibrium and a positive physiologic condition. The greater the area in which a
force acts on, the smaller the pressure and better distribution,
so more favorable to the health of the feet. The feet must be
parallel to the ground, in a way where the right foot is slightly
ahead of the left foot, and this position can be alternated. The
right foot must be free on a plane area to reach the command
of the dental chair, without diverting the attention from
the operating field. Furthermore, the shoes must be comfortable and loose . The dentist should not sit on his legs and
should always sit on the gluteus region, with the support on
the ischium bones, which is part of the hip bones . The
whole seat surface must be used to support the operator’s
weight. The compression of the tissues varies with the type of
seat, been greater on the stools with a flat surface and lower
on a saddle-shaped stool, as it can be seen on the . Fig. 2.6a,
b. In relation to the angle formed by the gap between the legs,
it can be between 25° and 45° ( . Fig. 2.14 ).
> The dentist must sit with his feet completely supported
on the ground, providing a position of equilibrium.
In relation to the leaning of the body on the anteroposterior
position, the ideal is to maintain the sitting positioning on a
medium posture ( . Fig. 2.7a). On this position, it is recomended a support on the upper pelvic region or lumbar ,
which alleviates the abdominal cavity, an important region
for blood flow and digestion . A slight leaning forward
<10°, on a relaxed position, decreases the electrical activity of
the muscles, and so it is favorable. However, if the forward
leaning of the chest is too high, there will be a compression
on the abdominal cavity ( . Fig. 2.7b). On the anterior position, the large saphenous vein can be compressed, causing an
obstruction of the veins of the leg and undesirable effects on
the internal organs, which can reflect on the chest or on the
groin . In addition, this leaning pushes the organ upward,
which impairs the well-functioning of the lungs and heart
due to a less volume on the thoracic cavity. If the dentist is
leaning backward, in a posterior position, there will have a
displacement of the equilibrium point with its tragic consequences ( . Fig. 2.7c ).
According to Ferreira , there is a consensus among
researchers that working on a seated position allows a more
comfortable condition for the clinician. On the other hand, it
is fundamental to point out that the bad posture at a seated
job, can be potentially more harmful to the individual than to
work in the standing up position. In other words, the dentist
.Fig. 2.5 Saddle-shaped stool (Salli System)Ergonomics Principles Applied to the Dental Clinic
50
2
who works standing up has less harmful consequences than
the one who works sitting down in a wrong position. In summary, to work on a healthy way, the dentist needs to work
symmetrically erect on active and stable position, avoiding
lifting and curving the shoulders and only making small
movements with the arms. To make this possible, the operating field must be positioned on the correct height, in symmetrical position in relation to the dentist, facing his visual
field in a way that he/she is capable to see the field in a most
perpendicular way as possible. The instruments must be
positioned on the correct working height, inside the vision
field, at 30° angle to the left and right. As a result of all that,
the dentist will be able to reach the instruments without
extreme movements. Finally, the dynamic working method
must be applied instead of a static method.2.2.2 Positioning of the Delivery Unit
and Dental Chair
There are four basic concepts to build dental treatment unit.
On concept 1, the most commonly used dental delivery unit
(treatment cart or instrument bridge) is positioned to the
right of the dental chair and to the right of the dentist
(. Fig. 2.8 ).
To analyze the dental treatment unit according to its position in the dental office, the ISO/FDI is established to divide
the room into areas, like a clock face. The center, corresponding to the axis of rotation of the clock, is located in the
patient’s mouth (the most important point in the dental
office). Around the center, three concentric circles are drawn,
named A, B, and C, with a radius of 0.5, 1, and 1.5 m, respeca
b
.Fig. 2.6 Relation between the kind of seat and the compression on the soft tissues. a Straight surface stool; b Saddle-shaped stool. The red
areas represent greater compression regions. (Images kindly supplied by the Salli System Company)
ab c
.Fig. 2.7 Leaning of the body on the anterior-posterior direction. a Medium sitting posture; b Anterior sitting position with excessive leaning; c
Posterior sitting position
K. C. K. Yui et al.
51 2
.Fig. 2.8 Basic concept 1 for delivery unit and chair. (Scheme kindly supplied by the Dabi-Atlante company)Ergonomics Principles Applied to the Dental Clinic
52
2
tively (. Fig. 2.9) . The A circle is called the transference
zone, where the instruments, handpieces, and stools must be
placed. The B circle is the working zone, where the cart and
the body of the dental delivery unit are placed. The C circle is
the rest of the useful area of the dental office, where the sink
and stable furniture are placed. The position 12 o’ clock is
always marked by the head of the patient, in other words, the
back of the chair.
The use of the zone of activity concept is the best way to
identify the work position for the working dental team. The
6–12 h line divides the room into two areas ( . Fig. 2.9). The
operator’s zone is where the dentist will be positioned, to the
right of the patient, going from 7 to 12 o’ clock for cases of
right-handed clinicians and from 5 to 12 on the left-handed
cases. The ideal work position is reached when the clinician
is positioned in front of the patient’s mouth and is able to
place the working field the closest as possible and facing his
visual axis.
The 9 o’ clock position is considered by most authors as
the basic for the dentist’s job ( . Fig. 2.10a ). At this position,
one of the best places for the dental delivery unit is to the
right. This way, the dentist can reach the high and low-speed
handpieces and the 3-way syringe with only one movement
of the forearm, with the elbows in a comfortable position
near the body, without rotating the head. The 7 and 8 o’ clock
positions are not appropriate for the intraoral procedures,
only for the external procedures or when the clinician is talking to the patient, for example, during the anamnesis
(. Fig. 2.10b ) . The attempt to work on the mouth being
in one of those positions will lead to an asymmetrical posture, leaning laterally and with the dentist’s right elbow lifted above 20°. On those positions, the working field will not be
located in front of the dentist’s body, forcing him to execute
lateral flexion movements of the body to the side of the
patient. That will generate an overload of the intervertebral
discs on the lumbar region and on the cervical column, and
may cause scoliosis and herniated disc. This may also produce, further than tiredness, a lot of muscle fatigue on the
right shoulder.
The 12 o’ clock position may permit the operator to work
on a labial surface of the anterior maxillary teeth and to use a
direct vision. However, it presents disadvantage that the
movement of the instruments will occur above the patient’s
face, exposing him to the risk of an accident, being not used
more than 10% of the dentist’s time. The dentists work mainly
on a 9–11 o’ clock position. As an advantage of those positions, the direct vision of almost all surfaces of all teeth is
possible, with a minimum leaning of the column forward
and never laterally, being more natural and better to the ver -
tebral column. The operators can also use direct vision moving to the 8 o’ clock position, when working on an occlusal
surface of the posterior mandibular teeth on the right side.
The assistant’s zone is the area of auxiliary activities, situated to the left of the patients for the right-handed clinician. In
that area the furniture, auxiliary equipment, and all equipment used by the assistant are placed, such as the vacuum suction tip and the 3-way syringe. The assistant position varies
from 2 to 4 o’ clock for the right-handed (generally is 3 o’ clock),
and from 8 to 10 o’ clock for the left-handed. Nothing in this
zone can interfere on the access of the assistant to the instruments and handpieces ( . Fig. 2.10a–c ). The static zone is the
limit between the operator and auxiliary areas on the region
A - Transference zone (instruments, handpieces, stool)
B - Work zone (auxiliary table and delivery unit)1 2
11
10
9
8
7
C
B
A
50cm50cm50cm
C - Useful office area (sinks and furniture)
Operator area
Assistant area
.Fig. 2.9 Functional work circles at the dental office. (Scheme kindly supplied by the Dabi-Atlante company)
K. C. K. Yui et al.
53 2
behind the chair, being from 12 to 2 o’ clock for the righthanded and from 10 to 12 o’ clock for the left-handed [2 ]. It is
a zone of less activity, and, in general, it is used to place emer -
gency materials for the dentist and auxiliary equipment, as
amalgamator, ultrasonic scaler, and curing light, among others. The transference zone is located from 4 to 7 o’ clock for the
right-handed and from 5 to 8 o’ clock for the left-handed clinician (. Fig. 2.10c ).
During the procedure, the operator must be capable to
keep hands and eyes on the working field, without being wor -
ried about from where the next instrument will come. Care
should be taken so that members of dental team do not inter -
fere on the activity of each other inside the designated zones,
avoiding unnecessary movements that could interfere on the
procedure. Both team members sitting correctly must have
all the material and instruments in a minimum reaching distance, inside the working areas, and in the radius of circle A
which is the size of the forearm ( . Fig. 2.9 ) .
> During the procedure, the operator must be capable to
keep hands and eyes on the working field without
being worried about from where the next instrument
will come.
The concept that the less movement done, the less use of
energy and the greater the productivity should be adopted
. The working surfaces to place the instruments must be in
front of the patient, more or less 20 cm from his chin, on the
frontal transference zone, next to the working area. The oral
cavity of the patient, the dentist’s delivery unit, the assistant’s
delivery unit, the top of the furniture with the equipment,
and the trays with the instruments, must be placed on a
hypothetical horizontal plane, from 5 to 10 cm above the
elbow of the dentist ( . Fig. 2.3a ).2.2.3 Positioning of the Patients
on the Chair
The patient must be, always as possible, positioned in a
supine position (lying on his back), so that the dentist and
the assistant can have a direct vision on the operating
fields. One of the advantages of the supine position is that
the patient’s tongue falls behind, blocking the pharynx,
this way, even when the patient’s mouth is full of water he
does not have the need to swallow. In addition, if any material or tool escapes the hands of the dentist, the chances of
being swallowed are minimum, since the deglutition is
harder on this position ( . Fig. 2.11a, b ) . The working
field on the mouth of the patient can be turned to the visual
axis of the dentist in an easier way if the patient is in a
supine position.
On the supine position, the knees and the legs of the
patients must be at the same level as the head ( . Fig. 2.12).
This replicates the position that most people adopt when they
are sleeping for many hours without blocking the blood flow.
The position of the patient when the legs are higher than the
head for a prolonged time is not recommended .
Once the patient is in a supine position, the operator can
lower the chair up to the point where the patient’s head is at
his lap, so he will not have to raise the forearm above 15° or
lean himself more than 10° to work at the patient’s mouth .
The dentist will have to lean excessively forward when the
patient is at the same height or lower than his elbows. On the
other side, when the mouth is positioned much higher than
the level of the dentist’s elbow, the dentist will have to raise
the shoulders, arching them and moving the elbows far away.
As it has already been mentioned, the mouth of the patient
must be 5–10 cm above the elbows of the dentist.
1 2
11
10
9
8
7
6543ab c
Dentist: 9 o ́clock
Assistant: 3 o ́clockOperator area
Assistant area211 2
11
10
9
8
7
STATIC AREA
TRANSFERENCE AREA211 2
11
10
9
8
7
Dentist: 7 o ́clock
Assistant: 3 o ́clockOperator area
Assistant area21
.Fig. 2.10 Working zones for the dentist and assistant. a Dentist at 9 o’clock and assistant at 3 o’clock; b dentist at 7 o’clock and assistant at
3 o’clock; c static areas and transference areas. (Scheme kindly supplied by the Dabi Atlante company)Ergonomics Principles Applied to the Dental Clinic
54
2
It is important that both legs are positioned under the back
of the chair, without being “restrained” or “blocked, ” with the
head of the patient, who is on the supine position, being able to
alternate the position from 9 to 12 o’ clock and keeping his posture. As it has already been mentioned, this is attained by
adjusting the angle between the leg and the thigh above 90°
using an appropriated stool. Therefore, the correct working
height depends on the dentist’s height and when he is positioned correctly on the stool. This way, the dentist and the assistant must be at compatible heights, so that the adjustment of
the chair for the dentist is not uncomfortable for the assistant.
The final visual adjustments and the access to all quarters
of the mouth can be reached by rotating the head of the
patient. The torso of the dentist must be the closest as possible to the back of the chair; this way, the head of the patient
will be leaning on his lap at a distance of 30–40 cm below the
eyes/safety glasses, providing comfort for the vision and con-tributing to the infection control. The operator will also not
invade the breathing space of the patient, and this way will
show consideration about his comfort throughout the treatment.
For the working position currently recommended, the
leaning of the chair’s back depends on where the dentist will
be working in the oral cavity of the patient. The leaning of the
articulated headrest of the chair must change according to
the arch that is being treated. On the upper jaw, the patient
must be on the supine position, and the headrest must be
leaning backward. For procedures on the lower jaw, the headrest must be leaning forward ( . Fig. 2.13a, b ).
> One of the advantages of the supine position is that
the patient’s tongue falls behind, blocking the
pharynx.
2.2.4 Positioning of the Patient’s Head
The patient’s head must be placed in a way that the working
field is facing the dentist’s visual axis, considering that he is
correctly positioned on the stool. To reach this position, the
patient’s head can be moved in three axis and three directions
(. Fig. 2.13a–f ):
5Forward, by flexion, for a horizontal position of the
lower jaw. Backward, by extension, so that the occlusal
plane of the upper jaw can be switched in some cases on
a 20–25° angle in relation to the vertical plane. The
further the head is positioned backward, the more
favorable is to work with a direct vision in a correct
posture on the upper jaw ( . Fig. 2.13a, b ).
5To the left or right by the side flexion, positioning the
head of the patient on a 30–40° angle sideways in
relation to the body’s long axis. This movement is
a
b
.Fig. 2.11 Relation between the leaning of the head and the opening of the digestive and respiratory way. a Patient sitting with the orophar -
ynx opened; b patient laying down with the oropharynx closed by the backing up of the tongue
.Fig. 2.12 Adequate positioning of the patient on the supine
position
K. C. K. Yui et al.
55 2
necessary to put the operating field on the patient’s
mouth on a symmetrical plane of the dentist
(. Fig. 2.13c, d ).
5To the left or right, rotating along the longitudinal axis
of the head ( . Fig. 2.13e, f ).
Tip
It is easier to move the patient’s head than try only to
adjust the dentist’s position to see the operating field.2.2.5 Positioning the Operating Field
in Relation to the Dentist
It is frequent for us to see that the operating field on a patient’s
mouth is not directed toward the dentist, and it is placed asymmetrically in front of him, resulting in an asymmetric and
stressful operating posture. This must be avoided in a way that
the symmetrical posture can be kept. The principles for the
correct positioning of the operating field are described next:
5The operating field must be placed symmetrically,
straight in front of the chest of the dentist, at a distance
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 2.13 Movement of the patient’s head in three ways to place the working field perpendicularly to the visual axis of the dentist. a Forward;
b backward; c leaning to the left; d leaning to the right; e right rotation; f left rotationErgonomics Principles Applied to the Dental Clinic
56
2of 20–25 cm from the sternum bone. In addition, it must
be placed in a height that allows a correct working
posture.
5The clinician must look perpendicularly to the operating
field or to the mirror. If this is not possible, as it happens
on the posterior region of the mouth or when using a
handpiece, the field or the mirror must be as perpendicular as possible. The rotation of the patient’s head
allows the good positioning on the visual field. It can be
turned in three directions, according to the previous
description, to promote this vision.
If the head of a bur or instrument is positioned on the sightline, interfering with the good visualization, the patient’s
head is rotated and the dentist position is adjusted instead of
the dentist moving his torso and head laterally to reach more
visibility.
After defining those general rules, taking in consider -
ation the position of the operating field in the patient’s
mouth, the question is how it can be reached and how the
arches of the patient must be placed. This position depends
completely on the procedure to be performed:
5When a procedure is done on the mandibular occlusal
plane, the dentist must sit on the side of the patient on a
position between 9 and 10 o’ clock, for the right-handed
people, and the occlusal plane will be placed more or less
horizontally. The patient’s head will be turned to the
dentist in a way that he looks perpendicularly to the
occlusal plane. If the lower jaw is not placed like that, but
in an oblique way, the dentist will have to raise the right
arm to reach the operating field.
5When a procedure is done on the mandibular occlusal
plane, from behind the patient (on the position from
10:30 to 12 o’ clock for the right-handed people), the
occlusal plane on the lower jaw is placed approximately
40° in relation to the horizontal plane, in a way that the
operating field is viewed perpendicularly, with the help
to the head’s rotation.
5When treating the maxillary occlusal plane, with an
indirect vision from behind the patient, the occlusal
plane of the upper jaw is turned around 25° backward in
relation to the vertical plane. Followed by a rotation of
the head, it is placed on the correct position in relation
to the mirror. Those 25° of rotation promote a great
adjustment for the necessary position of the mirror. The
problem with most headrests is that it is impossible to
position the upper jaw occlusal plane at 25° backward.
Hence, the dentist is forced to lean the torso forward to
obtain a better visibility of the operating field.
5When procedures are done on the buccal and lingual
surfaces of the teeth, the dentist must place himself on
the side of the patient, on a position between 9 and 11
o’ clock, with a direct vision, except for the anterior teeth.
5The more the dentist wants to work on the upper jaw
with direct vision, the more the patient’s head needs to
be turned backward. However, the possibility to do that
must be evaluated.Tip
The more the dentist wants to work on the upper jaw
with direct vision, the more the patient’s head needs to
be turned backward.
2.2.6 Positioning of the Operating Field
in Relation to the Assistant
The assistant plays an important role on the productivity and
on the improvement of the work quality inside a dental office.
Therefore, the dentist divides with her some of his secondary
attributions, such as some complementary tasks, saving the
time of the clinician and leaving to him the work that only he
can do . As advantages of the assisted work, there is the
reduction on the movement quantity, that the dentist would
have to perform if he was working alone, reducing the physical and mental fatigue. In addition, the work at four hands
allows a higher performance, reducing the duration of the
treatment [ 21]. It will be the assistant’s duty to accommodate
the patient’s head and to open his mouth, putting away his
tongue and cheeks, suctioning the blood and saliva, always
placing the operating field to the direct vision field of the
dentist .
> The assistant plays an important role on the
productivity and on the improvement of the work
quality inside a dental office. Therefore, the dentist
divides with her some of his secondary attributions,
saving the time and leaving to him the work that only
he can do.
The dentist’s assistants must be capable to work sitting down at
a healthy position, similar to the posture described for the
dentist. However, she should occupy the position that goes
from 2 to 4 o’ clock [2 ]. When the dentist sits at the 12 o’ clock
position, this is almost impossible. The assistant will have to sit
with the legs slightly separated, and so it does not interfere
with the movement. The assistant’s legs must be synchronized
with the dentist’s legs ( . Fig. 2.14) . At this position, she will
avoid the torsion of the column to the left and the raising of the
arms during the operative procedures, being better located in
relation to the delivery unit, to reach with the left hand her
elements and to help the dentist. Her back should rest on the
back of the stool and slightly leaning forward. Her head must
be leaned downward, visualizing the working field [2 ].
Both the dentist and the assistant must have all the material to the reach of their hands. The assistant should not move
the whole arm, and for that, it is suggested that a third assistant to prepare and bring the materials that are more distant
. Another way to reach this goal is to do an effective previous planning of the tray, and placing it on the ideal distance,
to reach all the material and instruments that will be necessary during treatment.
The adjustments on the patient’s position must be per -
formed with the aid of the assistant, up to the point where
K. C. K. Yui et al.
57 2
those relations are established. When a deviation on the posture is noticed, she can communicate politely with the clinician asking: “ Are you comfortable?” This is a sign that maybe
a rearrangement on the position is needed. The assistant
needs to be capable to see and have favorable access to the
oral cavity, at least of the teeth or the area that is being treated.
To increase visibility, the height of the assistant’s stool could
be at least 10–15 cm above the dentist’s head ( . Fig. 2.15). To
make it possible, it is necessary that the assistant’s stool has
footrest. However, when this special stool is not available, it
must be adjusted so that the head of the assistant is at the
same height of the dentist’s head.
2.2.7 The Use of Overhead Chair Light
The visual performance influences directly the efficiency of
the dentist’s work. The better the clinician can see, the faster
and more reliable the work will be. The main components of
the visual performance are the ability to see small details
(visual sharpness) and the ability to see small contrast (contrast sensitivity). The light at the work environment must be
well planned to allow a good dentistry to be performed, a
professional activity that requires accuracy and details. The
perfect light at the dental office will reduce the fatigue and
the incidence of visual fatigue. The environment next to the
mouth of the patient must be lighted with at least 1/10 of the
light over the mouth. For example, if the light over the
mouth has a illuminance of 20, LUX (lx), then the sur -
roundings must be lighted with at least lx and the room
with lx.
> The better the clinician can see, the faster and more
reliable the work will be.
One of the most frequent mistakes done by the dentists is in
relation to the incorrect positioning of the dental overhead
light, putting it in front of the patient and perpendicularly to
the visual axis. This causes the formation of shadows by the
interposition of the hands and instruments between the light
and the object to be seen . The light beam must be directed nearly parallel to the dentist’s line of sight, without
shadows, with a maximum deviation of 15°. Proper positioning of the dental operating light will avoid shadows behind
the lips, teeth, and face, under the hand and on the operating
field or around it ( . Fig. 2.16a, b ).
Visual sharpness does not indefinitely get better with
crescent light levels; there is a peak when the luminance is
around cd/m2 (candela per square meter). Therefore,
the illumination above this value does not bring any benefit
in terms of vision sharpness. A best level of illumination also
does not exist, because it depends from each observer and
on the reflexivity of the working area. The illumination from
the dental light must go from to 24, lx, which cor -
responds to to cd/m2 of the light inside the mouth.
The illuminance of lx is enough to visually discriminate a white tooth, and 24, lx is more appropriate for the
visualization during procedures done in darker areas inside
the patient’s mouth, for example, during the procedures on
the molars. The light level from the dental chair light must
be easy to adjust. In combination with other sources, the
illuminance of the mouth must not exceed 30, lx. Greater
light levels cause visual discomfort and reduction of visual
sharpness.
The correct distance of the overhead light to the operating field (patient’s mouth) must be around 70–80 cm, and the
environment’s light must be compatible with the illumination inside the oral cavity, allowing the gradual accommodation of the eyes . When the dental light is positioned at
70 cm apart from the patient’s mouth, it must form a rectangle of light with the concentrated area and limited by 10 cm
height and 20 cm width, in a way that there is no direct light
beam to the patient’s eyes, which causes dazzle and discomfort. Therefore, when the patient leans laterally together with
the rotation of the head, it is important that the light beam
may follow this position of the mouth without causing discomfort for the patient.
Near the mouth, instrument that have a reflectivity similar to mouth should be choosen. Instruments with dull sur -
faces are preferable to avoid strong reflection, that will cause
.Fig. 2.15 Adequate vertical relation between the assistant and the
dentist for better visualization
.Fig. 2.14 Synchronization of the dentist’s and assistant’s legsErgonomics Principles Applied to the Dental Clinic
58
2
tension on the eyes and reduction of the eye sharpness. In
addition, white and black objects should also be avoided.
Other important factor for the correct positioning of the
light beam of the dental chair light is the need to have three
rotating axis. This is important so the beam of light can follow the movement of the patient’s head and, consequentially,
his mouth. It is common that the mouth is placed on an
oblique manner in relation to the headrest, on the vertical,
horizontal, and depth ways. The length of the chair light’s
arm must be enough to place the light on the side and above
the head of the dentist, even if he is in any position between
9 and 12 o’ clock. Especially, when he places himself at 12
o’ clock, the light must be placed according to the clinician’s
visual axis, being at most 15° laterally or above the dentist’s head, being this information little known and applied by
most clinicians.
2.2.8 Vision of the Teeth to Be Treated
The operator can use two forms to see the operating field in
the oral cavity, the direct and indirect vision. The direct
vision occurs when the operator looks directly to the cavity
preparation or the place to be treated; the indirect vision
requires the operator to look through a mirror to see the area
to be treated. The indirect vision eliminates the need for the
operator to lean to see the operating field. To treat the occlusal surface of the second upper molar on the right side, even
with the patient on the supine position, maybe the clinician
will need to lean a little to have a direct vision. The use of a
mirror will allow the operator to be seated in a healthy posture and observe the operating field satisfactorily using an
indirect vision.
> The direct vision occurs when the operator looks
directly to the cavity preparation or the place to be
treated; the indirect vision requires the operator to
look through a mirror to see the area to be treated. The
indirect vision eliminates the need for the operator to
lean to see the operating field.Even if the dentist is in an adequate posture, the patient and
operating field are on a correct position, and it is hard not to
lean the head more than 20° as recomended. Due to that, special glasses were developed for the dentist, so it can allow an
adequate position of the head and neck ( . Fig. 2.17a–f ).
Those glasses have a piece of a prism on the lower part of the
lens, and they are tilted. This way, when the dentist directs his
vision to this area of the glasses, there is no need to lean the
head and the neck. Others also present magnifying lens to
enlarge the image.
2.2.9 Types of Movements During
the Dental Treatment
The movements executed by the dentist and the assistant
can be divided into five classes, with increasing complexity
order [6 ]:
5Class 1 – Finger movement. For example, the root canal
preparation
5Class 2 – Finger and wrist movement. For example,
cavity preparation
5Class 3 – Finger, wrist, and elbows (forearm). It is
important that this occurs inside the ideal space in the
transference zone. For example, to reach the high-speed
handpiece at the delivery unit
5Class 4 – Movement of the whole arm. It is the maximum reaching area. For example, open an auxiliary
drawer when it is slightly farther than the transference
zone and inside the functional working circle
(. Fig. 2.18 )
5Class 5 – Torsions of the body and displacement. For
example, to reach the suction across the patient, at the
assistant’s side
From all those movements, the ones in Classes 4 and 5 are the
ones more difficult and time-consuming, because they need
more muscle activity, new visual accommodation, and new
focus on the operating field. Movement 5 is eliminated by the
a
b
.Fig. 2.16 Correct positioning of the dental light to avoid the appearance of shadows and to improve the illumination
K. C. K. Yui et al.
59 2
work with an assistant, and in case she is efficient, it can even
eliminate the movements Class 4, leaving for the dentist only
movements Class 1, 2 and 3. Therefore, movements 4 and 5
must be always avoided, and this rule is applied to the dentist
and the assistant . The correct posture can be easily maintained if the operator remembers that the operating field
must be positioned in his direction.
> The movements of the whole arm, torsions of the body,
and displacements produce more tiredness and are
most time-consuming, because they need more
muscle activity, new visual accommodation, and new focus on the operating field. Therefore, they should
always be avoided, and this rule is applied to the
dentist and the assistant.
2.2.10 Ways to Grasp the Hand Instruments
During the dental procedure, the hand instruments can be
grasped by the hands in different ways, depending on the
dental arch to be treated and the work to be performed. To
guarantee the correct positioning and the precision of the
job, the hands must be rested, which also avoids accidents.
a
c db
ef
.Fig. 2.17 a Special glasses with a prism segment to correct the leaning of the head; b glasses with image magnification and correction the
head position; c posture without the glasses; d posture with the prismatic glasses; e–f posture with the image magnification glassesErgonomics Principles Applied to the Dental Clinic
60
2
1 2
1
10
8
7
63
.Fig. 2.18 Class 4 movement. (Scheme kindly supplied by the Dabi-Atlante company)
K. C. K. Yui et al.
61 2
On the lower teeth, a modified pen grasp is used
(. Fig. 2.19a ). It is a grasp that allows more gentle movements. The name means that it is similar to the one when we
hold a pen, but not identical. The pads of thumb, index, and
middle fingers contact the instrument, while the tip of the
ring and little finger is slightly placed on a dental sur -
face nearby, at the same arch, as a rest point. The palm of the
hand is not facing the operator. The pad of the middle finger
is placed on the topside of the instrument, and its work,
together with the wrist and the arm, produces the pressure
on the blade of the instrument. The instrument must not rest
on the first articulation of the middle finger, as a conventional pen, which restrings the pressure applied . On the
upper teeth, a modified and inverted pen grasp must be
applied ( . Fig. 2.19b ). The position of the fingers is the same
position of the modified pen grasp. However, the hand is
turned, and the palm of the hand faces the operator . For
the upper teeth, when more force is needed, a palm-andthumb grasp can be adopted ( . Fig. 2.19c ). It is similar to the
position used to hold a knife when peeling an orange. The handles are placed on the palm of the hand and held tightly
by all fingers except the thumb, which will rest on a tooth
right next to it, on the same arch, for firmness. For an adequate control, this grasp form requires careful use .
> During the dental procedure, the hand instruments
can be grasped by the hands in different ways,
depending on the dental arch to be treated and the
work to be performed.
2.2.11 Rest Places
To obtain a correct rest place for the instrument is fundamental for a precision dental procedure. Extra oral rest and
the rest at the opposing arch should be avoided due to the
possibility of the patient to move. Whenever possible, the
dentist should opt for a rest point on the teeth nearby the
place where the treatment is being performed. The closest
the rest to the area of working, the more thrust worthy it is.
a
b
c
.Fig. 2.19 Ways to grasp the hand instruments. a Modified pen grasp; b inverted and modified pen grasp; c palm-and-thumb graspErgonomics Principles Applied to the Dental Clinic
62
2However, in some situations, it is not possible to establish a
rest place on a tooth structure and the soft tissues must be
used. Neither the soft tissue nor the hard tissues farther
from the operating area allow a reliable control. Occasionally,
it is also not possible to establish a regular rest using the
fingers of the same hand that is grasping the instruments.
On those cases, the control can be reached using an index
finger of the other hand, touching the instrument on the
handle, or using an indirect rest. That means that the operating hand will rest on the other hand, which will rest on a
stable oral structure .
On the anterior teeth, there is the possibility to directly
visualize the surfaces to be treated. However, in some regions
of the mouth, this can become very difficult, if not impossible, that is the reason we opt for an indirect vision, through
the reflected image on an oral mirror.
Tip
To properly grasp the instrument and rest the hand is
essential for stability and precision while working. Rest
your finger on teeth nearby the place where you are
doing out intervention.2.2.11.1 Lower Arch
At this arch, the modified pen grasp is recommended,
with rest place on the teeth of the same arch, next to the
cavity preparation, using the ring and little finger
(. Fig. 2.20a ). When working on the buccal surface, the
mirror is used to displace the check musculature to
improve the visualization ( . Fig. 2.20b ). When working
on the lingual surface, the mirror is used to displace the
tongue ( . Fig. 2.20c ).
2.2.11.2 Upper Arch
On this arch, the modified and inverted pen grasp is recommended. On the right side of the patient, the use of the clinical mirror improves the illumination of the operating field
when using the direct vision or allows the indirect vision. The
rest place is on the neighboring teeth on the same arch
(. Fig. 2.21a ). On the left side, the use of the clinical mirror
improves the illumination at the operating field and allows
the indirect vision, besides helping to displace the check
musculature. The rest place is at the same arch, on the opposing side ( . Fig. 2.21b ). When the palm-and-thumb grasp is
used, the tip of the thumb is placed on the tooth that is being
treated in a neighboring tooth or on a convenient area at the
same arch.
a
b
c
.Fig. 2.20 Rest areas using modified pen grasp of dental instruments at the lower arch. a Rest on the teeth from the same arch; b check
musculature displacement; c tongue displacement
K. C. K. Yui et al.
63 2
2.2.12 Work Environmental Conditions
High stress sources at work are the unfavorable environmental conditions, such as the excessive heat, noise, and vibrations. Those factors raise the risk of accidents and produce
discomfort and damage to the health . The environmental comfort is an extremely important point for the dentist,
who spends his whole day inside a closed room and concentrated on the treatment of his patients.
Studies developed by Heimstra and McFarling have
already mentioned the complexity involved on the creation
of a satisfactory environmental condition, for a group of
people who work at the same place, because each worker
presents a different level of physical and psychological sensitivity. The authors report that the noise, temperature, humidity, and illumination can produce comfort or annoyance,
affecting the performance of the individual.
2.2.12.1 Noise
When looking for noise definition, the literature is ambiguous, but in a general way, the noise can be defined as an undesirable sound. There is a subjective and a physic definition for
noise, described as followed:
5Subjective definition: Noise is all the annoying or
unhealthy audible sensation.
5Physic definition: Noise is all not periodical acoustic
phenomenon without harmonic components defined.
On the last decades, more people have been affected by the
noise, but since , the World Health Organization
started to treat noise as a public health problem. The
human ear can notice a great range of sound frequencies
from 20 to 20, Hz, and the intensity (volume) of the
sound is defined by the level of sound pressure, varying
approximately from 0 to decibels. The noise can cause
damage on the hearing organ, as deafness, that is characterized by a deficit in the range of – Hz, or
fatigue, which manifests by a temporary increase of the hearing threshold. For prevention, there are protective
hearing devices, such as earplugs and earmuffs, but on
the other hand, they can cause deficiency on the
communication.
When the noise happens on a nonconstant way or even in
an unexpected way, it can interfere with the concentration,
reducing the intellectual performance and making it harder
to do more complex tasks. The noises that are not so loud can
only cause a slight bothering, but the greater the intensity,
frequency/duration and the age of the individual, the more
damage the noise will cause .
According to Fernandes et al. , the dentist is subjected
to two types of noises:
5Outside the working environment: Traffic, voices,
compressor (when outside the work environment),
telephone, bell, and sounds coming from the waiting
room
5Inside the working environment: Dental handpieces, air
compressor (when inside the work environment),
suction, amalgamator, air conditioner, among others
According to the standards from the Occupational Safety and
Health Act (OSHA), 80 decibels (dBA) is at the maximum
tolerable limits of sound for the dentist . The manufactur -
ers in general claim that the noise level of their dental treatment unit (especially of the handpieces) is below 80 dBA. The
longer the dentist is exposed to the noise during his professional life, the greater will be the chances of a reduction of the
hearing capacity . The noise-damaging effects can also
produce many physical, mental, and social problems on the
dentist.
Tip
The use of handpieces with low noise emission is a very
important point when deciding the purchasing of a new
one.
a
b
.Fig. 2.21 Rest areas for the use of instruments on the upper dental arch. a Rest on the neighboring teeth on the same arch at the right side;
b work on the left side of the patient and rest on the right sideErgonomics Principles Applied to the Dental Clinic
64
22.2.12.2 Temperature
The stress caused by the heat or cold at work environment is
motive of concern because it affects, besides productivity, the
physical and mental health of the worker. The literature the
ideal temperature to work is between 16 and 22 °C, but in
countries with a hot weather, it can be accepted up to 5 °C
more. Other standards state a temperature between 20° and
23°, emphasizing that the difference in temperature in the
same environment cannot be >4 °C. According to Bauman
, technically comfortable environments favor the achievement of high quality services; the worker feels more attracted
by the working post, by his activity and by the positive results
of his tasks. It is noticed less complaints in relation to the
individual necessities and in relation to the diseases acquired
on those environments, which result in a drop on the operational costs.
According to Grandjean , “the excessive heat at working places leads to tiredness and drowsiness, which reduces
prompt responses and increase the chances of mistakes to
happen. ” Therefore, the thermal factor produces a great influence in the comfort during the work. The temperature, air
speed, solar radiation, and relative humidity are fundamental
for a comfortable thermal sensation, which also depends on
the type of work being performed and the kind of clothes
worn. The speed of air displacement should not be superior
to 0.2 m/s.
Guiton [ 22] states in his studies that the human body
presents its own mechanism to produce heat. The heat gener -
ated by the metabolic activity exceeds the need to maintain
the body temperature in its normal level, of approximately
37 °C. That means that we should not need any other external
heating source and that the most important thing would be
to eliminate this excess of heat, without affecting the functioning of the organism. Our working environment should
allow the control of the temperature, avoiding an extremely
hot or cold sensation.
> The thermal factor produces a great influence in the
comfort during the work. The temperature and air
speed, solar radiation, and relative humidity are
fundamental for a comfortable thermal sensation, and
it also depends on the type of work being performed
and the clothes worn.
2.2.12.3 Relative Humidity of the air
The relative humidity must not be below 40 or higher
than 60% in the work environment. The exposition to environments with levels of humidity far from the ideal may cause
diseases, but can aggravate some preexisting ones, such as
osteomuscular diseases (generally called rheumatism), the
lung, and skin diseases.
> The exposition to environments with different
relative humidity can aggravate some preexisting
osteomuscular, lung, and skin diseases.2.2.12.4 Illumination
In all working places, there must be adequate illumination,
natural or artificial, but always accordingly to the nature of
the activity. It should be uniformly distributed and diffuse,
avoiding obfuscation, reflection, shadows, and excessive contrasts. A well-illuminated environment with light colors on
the background, brings to the environment visual comfort
and rest, improving the quality of life and at work. The light
level is measured in lux. A well-illuminated environment is
important to have visual comfort, avoiding, this way, the loss
of sight sharpness, fatigue, misreading, and work accidents.
Some studies has shown that bad light conditions can
cause psychosomatics problems, as stress, and greater sensibility to the microbial attack. The effects of the very luminous environments over the vision are significant in a
longterm. In cases of obfuscation there is always the risk of
accidents. The lack of adequate illumination can cause
visual fatigue, characterized by the irritation and pain on
the eyes, redness on the conjunctiva, modification on the
blinking pattern, tearing, photophobia (light intolerance),
diplopy (double vision), feeling of blurred vision, perception of colored aura around objects, abnormal persistence
of after-images, and instability of the image on its optical
definition and in space. It usually comes with other symptoms as headaches.
The following are some very important points in relation
to the illumination:
5Type of light bulb and luminaire: Depends especially on
the environment’s characteristics and on the activities to
be developed.
5Quantity of light bulbs/luminaire: An adequate number
should be installed with the goal to reach the needed
illumination, with base on a technical project, which will
consider the variables from the environment.
5Distribution and placement of the luminaires: The
luminaires must be placed on the environment in a way
to give a homogeneous and uniform illumination,
considering the physical arrangement of the place,
avoiding contrasts and shadows at the working areas.
5Maintenance: The burnt out light bulbs or with inadequate illumination must be changed, and the good ones
frequently cleaned.
5Colors: The colors of the walls, dental treatment unit,
and furniture must be chosen in a way that they have a
good light reflection in the room. The working table and
the delivery unit, for example, cannot have a very
reflexive surface because the incidence of light could
obfuscate the eyes.
5Variation of light: The accentuated difference between
the levels of illumination between one environment and
another can damage the eyes, bringing fatigue and loss
of sharpness; this occurs due to a sudden dilatation/
contraction of the vision muscles, even in a small-time
interval. When repeated many times during the years, it
could cause an injury.
K. C. K. Yui et al.
65 2
5Age: The greater the age of the people at the working
place, the greater should be the light intensity.
5Direct incidence: Windows should be positioned so that
there is no excess of natural light within the work
environment. In dental offices located in the southern
hemisphere, it is recommended that the window be
directed in a north-northeast direction, and in cases
where it faces south, it is recommended that there is a
clear wall for natural light to be reflected into the
interior of the environment. In dental offices located in
the northern hemisphere, it is recommended that
they should be facing south or north, and that the design
of the roof and windows be planned according to the
path of the sun to prevent the direct incidence of solar
rays during the summer, and allow their entry during
the winter. Regardless of which hemisphere the dental
office is located, when the window is directed to the east,
there is an excess of illumination in the morning and a
shortage in the afternoon, the opposite occurring when
the window is facing west. In these cases, it is mandatory
to use barriers (internal or external) to avoid excess
light, forcing the use of artificial lighting.
> A well-illuminated environment, with light colors on
the background, brings to the environment visual
comfort and rest, improving the quality of life during
the working hours.
2.3 Work-Related Musculoskeletal
Disorders
The multitissue lesions of the upper limbs of the motor system, attributed to be caused by repetitive strains at work,
previously known as repetitive strain injuries (RSI), were
renamed to work-related musculoskeletal disorders
(WMSD), because it is the most appropriate name. The
WMSD, according to Lopes , is characterized by the
affections of the motor system, upper limbs, shoulder and
neck, that have direct relation with the requirements for the
repetitive, fast and continuous movements of the tasks
executed. In addition, the stress generated during the dental practice is other factor that can contribute for the development of the WMSD [1 ]. The WMSD is defined as a
phenomenon related to work, characterized by the incidence of different symptoms at the same time or not, with
pain, paralysis, heavy feeling, and recurrent fatigue, gener -
ally on the upper limbs . Those disturbances, related to
the work, initially cause pain and can evolve to the incapacity to do some movements, temporarily or permanently.
Therefore, the early detection of the lesions can be essential
to avoid the worsening of the disease, long treatment, and
medical conditions that would take the professional away
from his practice [1 ].When there is not a good relation among the different
parts of the body, a bad posture can happen, inducing to an
increase of aggression to the supporting structures, resulting
in a less efficient balance of the body over the legs. During the
dental work, many inadequate postures occur, which could
lead to musculoskeletal overload over some body segments,
which could cause lumbar inflammation, cervical pain, and
aches . According to Rio , the following inadequate
posture could occur:
5Flexion, extension, lateral leaning, and lateral rotation of
the neck
5Abducted arms
5Elevated arms above the shoulder levels
5Flexion of the forearms higher than 90°
5Pronation and supination of the upper limbs
5Ulnar and radial deviation from the body
5Lateral leaning and torsion of the vertebral column
The problems caused by the incorrect work posture are a
lumbar and back pain, and affect the feet and lower limbs. It
is called lumbar pain all and any pain located on the lumbar
column. Many are the causes for the lumbar pain, and the
treatment can be conservative, which will include specific
medication, physiotherapy, back braces, and medical orientation or surgical treatment, which involves different types of
surgeries . According to Knoplich , the work on a sitting position increases the intradiscal pressure, increasing
the bad adjustment of the disc and column. In addition, the
dentist executes movements of lateral leaning, flexions, and
extensions, which lead to defects of postural origin, named
scoliosis, kyphosis, and lordosis. The scoliosis is a lateral
deviation, permanent to the vertebral column. When the
inclination can be corrected voluntarily, it is a scoliotic attitude. Kyphosis is sagittal curves on the normal vertebral column on the anterior concavity, located on the dorsal and
sacrum and coccyx segment, while lordosis is the posterior
concavity, specifically in the cervical and lumbar region .
When a dissolution or destruction of vertebrae occurs, it is
called spondylosis.
> Incorrect work posture causes lumbar and back pain
and affects the feet and lower limbs.
The dentists can be affected by return venous circulation
problems, as varicose veins and thickening of the nails, and
also the formation of bunion, callus, and hallux valgus, which
happens because of the use of badly dimensioned shoes that
are made from inadequate fabrics or materials. It is essential
that the dentist works with his feet completely rested on the
ground, keeping, this way, a balanced position and a positive
physiological factor on the physical condition, lowering the
pressure on the feet .
If hand injuries happens to the dentist, this could force
him to leave work for a short or long period many times
throughout his professional life. The improper use of dental
instruments can promode hands injuries and are related to Ergonomics Principles Applied to the Dental Clinic
66
2constant and repetitive force, with a pinching movement of
the fingers and thumbs, combined with extreme hand movements. The carpal tunnel syndrome has the highest prevalence among the dentists. The carpal tunnel is limited by the
concave arches formed by the carpal bones of the hands and
by the transverse carpal ligament, holding the carpal nerve,
nine flexor tendons and blood vessels, as can be observed on
. Fig. 2.22a–i .
> The improper use of the instruments can produce the
carpal tunnel syndrome, resulting in motor and
functional alterations, pain, swelling, and stiffness of
the hand, requiring surgical treatment by surgery.
When the hand is flexed, it extends or deviates from the
central position; the volume of the tunnel is reduced and
the internal pressure increases ( . Fig. 2.23a, b ). According
to Osamura et al. , the most characteristic tissue in the
carpal tunnel is the subsynovial connective tissue and its
small permeability can explain the predisposition of the
region to increase the pressure, causing this neuropathy. Oh et al. , verified that ultra-structural changes occur
in the subsynovial connective tissue from patients with
carpal tunnel syndrome, as deformed collagen fibers, that
appear to be in a spiral form, and phagocytosis of the elastic fibers.
The tendons, when compressed, press the nerve, which,
with chronicle repetition of the movement, become
inflamed and suffer damages. This causes sensitive, motor,
and functional alterations, pain, swelling, and stiffness of
the hand. If this situation continues for a period of, for
example, 1 or 2 years, a paresthesia sensation on the wrist
level, pain, and swelling of the fingers will occur. Later, if the
situation persists, from 2 to 8 years, a reduction of the
pinching force will appear and an atrophy of the hand’s muscles will eventually result in incapacity to hold an instrument. Once the damage is installed, the treatment consists
in immobilization of the hand, hydrocortisone injections and finally surgical treatment, depending on the
degree of the nerve’s alterations. The presence of the carpal
tunnel syndrome can be confirmed by the positive result on
A
BC DEGIF H
.Fig. 2.22 Hand’s sections in different levels. a Carpal bone; b thenar muscle; c transverse carpal ligament; d median nerve; e concave arch of
the carpal bones; f flexor tendons; g cubital nerve; h –i flexor tendons
b
a
.Fig. 2.23 a Correct work positioning of the hand; b flexed hand, resulting in a diminishing of the carpal tunnel volume
K. C. K. Yui et al.
67 2
the Phalen’s maneuver, which consists on the placement of
the dorsum of the hands in contact to each other, with the
individual with the shoulders and elbows in 90°. With this
maneuver, the mediated nerve is pressed against the ventral
retinaculum and reproduces the night symptoms, which is
“tingling” (hypoesthesia) .
2.3.1 Occupational Diseases Epidemiology
The application of the ergonomic principles in the dental
office allows rationalizing the work, allowing the elimination
of nonproductive maneuvers. This way the clinician produces
more and faster, with less stress and more results, providing
at the same time more comfort and safety to the patient .
Therefore, it is fundamental to avoid or to correct the wrong
working habits, the ones that can bring serious damage to the
clinician. Seventy-two percent of the dentists examined by
Rundcrantz et al. reported complained about some discomfort or pain on the head, neck, or shoulders. Similar
results were reports by Kerosuo et al. , who observed that
70% of the general dental practitioners had musculoskeletal
symptoms. They also observed that the symptoms were more
frequent on women. Some specific body areas are associated
with injuries related the dental practice as described as followed:
5Carpal tunnel syndrome – Problem associated with the
continuous flexion and extension of the wrist
5Shoulder and neck ache – Tension or flexion of the
shoulders for more than 1 h/day
5Back and neck ache – Extension or elevation of the arms
for a long period
5Low back region ache – Torsion of the body for a long
period
According to Wagner , from all the occupational diseases affecting the dentists, the ones that are caused by the
posture are those with the most neglected prevention,
because they will only feel its effects with the passing of the
years. It is very hard to convince the young dental students
in the universities to take prophylactic measurements in
relation to the damages to the column. Even with the ergonomic coming to help the profession, there are excessive
working hours spent at the clinic. In addition, there are
idiopathic predispositions from each one to specific types
of skeletal degeneration, such as spondylosis and interver -
tebral disc flaccidity, that sooner or later compromise the
column of some individuals, while others never come to
manifest any symptom, at least, during the productive practice of his profession .
On the Netherlands, a study was done to evaluate the
posture adopted by dentists throughout dental procedures, which was named the Sonde Project . The authors
concluded that high percentages of deviations in relation to
the correct working posture are practiced by the clinicians, as
they are shown here: 5About 89% show forward flexion of the head, exceeding
in 20°, which is considered the limit for a healthy
position.
5About 61% show rotation of the neck combined with
strong flexion forward.
5About 63% show flexion of the posterior part of the
body exceeding in 20°.
5About 36% work with the neck turned combined with
the torsion of the back.
5About 35% keep their forearms on an angle higher
than 20°.
5About 32% keep their forearms on an angle higher
than 25°above the horizontal line.
5About 25% rest their hands wrongly when working.
5About 47% do not grasp correctly the instruments (on
the modified pen position).
5About 20% show strong flexion of the wrist.
5About 65% work with a stool with a wrong back
support.
5About 75% of the dentists work without the head of the
patient being symmetrically in front of them.
5About 32% work with their feet and legs farther than the
necessary from the dental chair.
5About 55% work for more than 7 h sitting down every
day.
5About 75% work with inadequate light and differences
in light distribution that are not according to the
standards.
Santos Filho and Barreto performed a study evaluating
the prevalence and sysmtoms of osteomuscular pain on
dentists, using a self-reporting questionnaire, and they
observed the prevalence of pain on the upper segment was
58%, being 22% on the arms, 21% on the column, 20% on
the neck, and 17% on the shoulder; 26% reported that the
pain was daily and 40% was moderate/strong. According to
Méndez and Gómez-Conesa , the information about
the arrangement of the dental treatment unit and the adequate posture at work can reduce the musculoskeletal symptoms risk. According to Melis et al. , there is a critical
need to insert the topics of ergonomics on the educational
system to prevent the risks for the future clinicians. A study
performed with students of a university demonstrated that
more than 70% of them report pain already on the third
year of school. It also demonstrated that this number
increased gradually from the first to the last year of the
course. The authors concluded that the teaching of ergonomics needs to be better elaborated and worked throughout undergraduate phase .
> The application of the ergonomic principles on the
dental office allows rationalizing the work, allowing
the clinician the elimination of nonproductive
maneuvers. This way the clinician produces more and
faster, with less stress and more results, providing at
the same time more comfort and safety to the patient.Ergonomics Principles Applied to the Dental Clinic
68
22.3.2 WMSD Prevention
It is important to adapt the work environment to the operator
instead of the operator having to adapt to the environment
. This concept requires that the dentists take a favorable
sited posture and then place the patient, assistant, and delivery unit in relation to his position. This working condition is
called “balanced posture” . It does not intend to have the
operators sitting like a statue but to establish a series of rules
that may help them to obtain comfort while working. The
specialists agree when they say that the frequent change in
position, for those who work sitting down, is the key to prevent problems on the column [25, 26, 28].
> It is important to adapt the work environment of the
operator instead of the operator having to adapt to the
environment.
The adoption of a healthy posture at work is fundamental on
the prevention of WMSD. Besides having dental treatment
unit that permits to work correctly, it is important that the dentist effectively know and apply the necessary knowledge about
the correct use of that unit. Only having a good dental treatment unit is not a guarantee that the dentist will work on a
correct posture. Therefore, the learning/teaching process in
ergonomics is determinant to adopt a healthy work posture
. A good ergonomic training during the university studies
on the preclinical phases and initial clinic is essential, so that
the student learn to identify and adopt a healthy work posture.
The use of the proprioception mechanism is fundamental, so that the dentist can effectively develop and adopt a
correct work posture [4 , 57]. The proprioception is the
capacity to recognize the position in space of each part of
the body. It results from the interaction among the muscles
to keep the body position, the tactile information and on
the vestibular system, found on the internal ear, responsible
for the equilibrium.
The proprioception mechanism works automatically as
part of the chain of reflexes to keep the body balanced and
organizing the movements. It can be used to recognize and
locate the problems and adapt the posture [4, 57]. The healthy
work posture is not a condition preprogrammed by the proprioception, and it does not occur without a conscious learning. Learning and training are necessary to get the adequate
posture, starting by determining the aim to a physiologically
acceptable posture, understanding how to reach that and
then executing the necessary actions, followed by a training
at the mirror for feedback, or using a biofeedback equipment
. To consciously use of the knowledge about proprioception is only possible during the preclinical training, where
low complexity work is being performed, which allows the
student to concentrate on the ergonomic training, without
having to worry with the result of the procedure itself. On
this initial phase, the student has not established bad postural
habits, which will lead the body to find alternative postures to
keep balance. Because of that, it is important that the dental
schools prioritize the teaching of ergonomics at the preclinical phase or at the initial clinical phase.It is known that the constant force during the pinching
movements of the fingers and the extreme movements of the
hands, used simultaneously, can produce the carpal tunnel syndrome. On the other hand, the damage can be completely
avoided with the preventive elimination of the causal factors,
which must be recognized and identified early. Therefore, aiming to prevent those lesions, some measurements can be taken.
The first would be to give preference to instruments with
thicker handles ( . Fig. 4.5), which diminishes the need to a
strong pinching to hold them tightly. The habit constantly to
hold the instrument strongly should also be avoided, because it
results on unnecessary fatigue and incorrect control of the
hands. The correct attitude is to hold the instruments gently,
only squeezing when necessary to perform an active movement, reducing the force right after to relax the muscles. The
extreme movements of the hands should also be avoided,
because the displacements of the tendons that are compressed
during those movements compress the median nerve causing
damages. The arm should turn around its fulcrum, using as rest
place the surface to be instrumented, avoiding the excess digital
work or the turning of the hand. Regis Filho et al. confirm
on their study that most dentists use instruments that do not
follow the ergonomic requirements and execute procedures
inadequately, among other factors, being submitted to adverse
work conditions, where pain and discomfort are present.
Hokwerda and Shaw recommend that the dentist
should adopt a more dynamic posture of work. According to
the authors, the problem with the dentist’s work posture is the
static nature, while the human body is supposed to be in constant movement. During the dynamic movement, the muscles
act as bomb for the blood supply, with high levels of oxygen,
and removal of blood with residual products from the metabolic activity of the muscles. The movement is necessary to
recover the distended muscles by the static work. Therefore, the
dentists must keep a more dynamic work model, as, for example, the incorporation of the most movements as possible in his
activities. The different activities can contribute to that [26, 28]:
5Adopt a dynamic way to seat alternating between active
and passive seating.
5Use various positions the maximum as possible.
5Receive personally the patients at the waiting room.
5Always possible, to work standing up or sitting down
alternately. This requires an office with adjustable heights
of the patient’s chair and delivery unit. In addition, it is
also possible to give instructions to the patient on a
standing up position. The computer work can also be
done on a standing up position, if it is organized for that.
5The installation of a sink on an adequate distance from
the head of the patient, so it is always necessary to stand
up and walk to the sink.
5The planning of the short procedures should be alter -
nated with the long ones.
5Schedule short intervals during the treatment, when
small exercises can be done, as flexion of the fingers,
deep breathing, and stretching (more details later on).
5Take short intervals between treatments, also taking
stretching exercises.
K. C. K. Yui et al.
69 2
5Take longer breaks, for coffee, tea, and lunch. Take at
least 10 min of break after each two hours of work.
5To keep or maintain the muscles in good conditions by doing exercises at least twice a week.
5Plan short or long vacations, courses, etc. every 6 weeks.
The dental profession is very hard, so it is essential to
schedule regular breaks. It is proven that adequate
leisure and sport activities reduce stress.
5Do not work more than 8 h/day.
Other indispensable factor to allow a healthy work posture is
the use of dental treatment unit that has the ergonomic
requirements. Significant changes on the concepts changed
the design of dental treatment units, which allow the work on
a more ergonomic way. It is important to know how to adopt
a healthier work posture and know how to recognize the
ergonomic requirements when purchasing a new dental
treatment unit [25, 26, 28, 33]. The market for dental units is
regulated by the demand, and this means that the dentists
need to claim for units that allow an adoption of a healthy
posture.
The treatment of WMSD must be multidisciplinary, so
the doctor identifies the alteration and coordinates the treatment, the physiotherapist uses exercises to rehabilitate the
compromised movements, the occupational therapist verifies
if the work environment needs to be changed, and the psychologist or psychiatrist detects the causes or factors like
anguish and anxiety at the work environment .
To avoid fatigue, tiredness, and stress, the dentist can follow the checklist presented on 7 Box 2.1 [19, 26, 28].
> The carpal tunnel syndrome can be avoided with the
preventive elimination of the causal factors; such as
giving preference to instruments with thicker handles;
eliminating the habit to strongly hold the instrument;
and avoiding extreme movements of the hands.
2.4 Exercises to Prevent Osteomuscular
Problems
The stretching exercises can be done at the office, during
intervals between sessions, to obtain flexibility of the articulations, improving the circulation and loosening the tense
areas, preserving the health, and optimizing the quality of life
of the practitioners. They are recommended for prevention of
tenosynovitis, tendonitis, synovitis, myositis, fasciitis,
epicondylitis, paralysis of the upper limbs, and tingling of the
hands. During the stretching the dentist must be alert not to
pass the expansion limit of his muscle, to hold the exercise
for 10 s and to avoid postural compensations of bad positioning during the exercise. Each stretching must be repeated
three times, alternating the sides ( . Figs. 2.24 and 2.25).Box 2.1 Ergonomic Check List for a Good Dental
Practice (According to ESDE Document)
Ergonomic Check List
1. Legs perpendicular to the ground.
2. Feet soles on the ground, while the pedal is positioned in a
direction in which the feet does not need to be directed
sideways during the operation.
3. The angle between the thigh and the lower part of the leg
is greater or equal to °, in a way that the knees are
slightly below the hip level (just if there is an adequate
stool with double inclination or a saddle stool). For the
regular stool this angle must be 90°.
4. Forearms slightly elevated at least 10° to the maximum of 15°.
5. Arms ahead at maximum of 20°.
6. Elbows next to the body and not far more than 20°
sideways.
7. Symmetrical sitting position with the shoulders lowered
and relaxed.
8. Avoid torsion of the torso and pressure the intervertebral
discs of the column. 9. Avoid forward flexion of the vertebral column.
10. Keep the legs slightly separated (between 35° and not
more than 45°).
11. Do not keep the neck bent or pulled.
12. Rest the back on the upper part of the pelvis.
13. Oral cavity of the patient from 5 to 10 cm above the height
of the dentist’s elbows.
14. Distance from 30 to 40 cm from the operator’s nose and
the patient’s face.
15. Head leaned forward not more than 20°.
16. Operating field well-illuminated and on the medium line of
the dentist.
17. The back of the patient’s chair is positioned lying down to
allow the operator to freely move the legs under the back
of the chair.
18. Avoid sudden movements and forces that cause heavy
stress of short duration.
19. Change posture and perform movements.
20. Limit the duration of any continuous muscular strength,
preventing muscular exhaustion.
21. Take short and frequent breaks.
22. Take a well-accommodated position at the seat of the
stool, in a way that it supports the whole weight of the
body.
23. The head of the patient is rotated accordingly in three
directions (backward or forward, leaning to the right or
left, and turned on the longitudinal axis) in a way that the
operating field is positioned symmetrically in front of the
dentist’s thorax. That allows to look into the mouth or to
the mirror as perpendicularly as possible.
24. The dental light must be as parallel as possible to the line
of sight, at a 15° angle, with the light being positioned to
the left or the right, very close to the side and above the
dentist’s head. When an intraoral mirror is necessary, the
light must be positioned slightly in front of the head.
25. Instruments need to be grasped with the tip of the first
three fingers, which must be arched around the instrument, in a way to reach three contact points, and the
fourth and fifth fingers must be used to rest on the mouth.
If necessary, one finger of the inactive hand is used for help
the rest.
26. The instruments must be positioned at the same height to
the patient’s mouth, as much as possible inside the visual
field of the dentist (30° to the left and right). The hand
instruments must be positioned at a distance of 20–25 cm
and the handpieces at 30–40 cm.Ergonomics Principles Applied to the Dental Clinic
70
2
ab
cd
.Fig. 2.24 Stretching for the back, shoulders, chest region, arms,
and neck. a Stretching of the arms. With the arms raised above the
head and palms of the hands together, stretch out the arms upward
and a little to the back. Breathe in while stretching upward. b Stretching of the arms and thorax. Interlace the fingers, turn the palms
outward, above the head, and extend the arms. Stretch, this way, the
arms and thorax. c Stretching of the arms. Interlace the fingers, extend
the arms in front of yourself with the palms facing outward. Feel the
stretching of the arms and on the upper back. d , e Stretching of the
arms. With the arms extended above the head, hold the elbow of one
of the arms with the hand of the other arm. Pull kindly the elbow
behind the head. Stretch both sides. f Stretching of the shoulders. With
the fingers interlaced behind the head, keep the elbows facing
outward, wide open, keep the torso erect. Push the elbows backward,
one toward the other. Keep the feeling to liberate the tensions for
about 8–10 s, then relax. g , h Stretching of the arms. Hold the right arm
right above the elbow with the left hand. Now pull slowly the elbow on
the direction of the left shoulder while looking over the right shoulder. Keep the stretching for 10 s and repeat the other side. i Stretching of
the chest. This stretching must be done with the fingers interlaced
behind the back. First, slowly roll up the elbow inward while the arms
extend. Second, elevate the arms behind the back until you feel the
arms, shoulders and chest stretching. j Stretching the back. Stand up
with the feet apart about the same distance of your shoulders and feet
pointing forward. Keep the knees slightly bent, put one of the hands
on the hip for support and the other arm extends over the head. Now
lean to the side in the same direction as the hand on the hip. Come
back slowly and keeping the control. k Stretching of the arms. Instead
of using the hand on the hip for support rise both arms above the
head. Hold the right hand with the left one and bend slowly to the
right side, using the right arm to gently pull the left arm above the
head and later downward, toward the ground. Using one arm to pull
the other is possible to intensify the stretching. l –o Stretching of the
neck. Turn the neck slowly and in case you feel a greater tension in any
position keep there for 10 s
K. C. K. Yui et al.
71 2
ef
gh
ij k
.Fig. 2.24 (continued)Ergonomics Principles Applied to the Dental Clinic
72
2
.Fig. 2.24 (continued)
l
nm
o
b
a
.Fig. 2.25 Stretching for the hands and wrists. a Stretching of the
flexor muscle. Start the exercise with the palm of the hand facing
downward, extending the right arm. Put the left thumb over the dorsal
side of the fingers and the other four fingers over the palm side of the
fingers for support. Stretch the flexor muscle group pulling the fingers
backward (dorsal flexion). Keep this position for 10 s and then let it go.
b Stretching the external side of the forearm. Stretch the external side
of the forearm and keep the arm at this position, with the palm of the
hand facing downward. Put the four fingers of the left hand over the
dorsal surface of the right wrist. Bend the whole hand inward. Keep this
flexed position for 10 s. c Stretching of the wrists. Interlace the fingers
of both hands and extend both arms in front of you. Turn the hands
interlaced to the left, having the wrists as the fulcrum of the movement.
After, turn to the right. Each rotation must take 5 s. Turn first to the left and then to the right, repeating every series 3 times. d –f Stretching of
the wrists. Open the hands and touch them in “praying” position. With
the fingers together, compress one hand with the other in a way that
the forces are concentrated on the wrists. Lean the palm of the hand in
the direction of the arms. Repeat to the other side. g –i Stretching of the
fingers. Open the fingers the farther as possible. Close the fingers
squeezing them with the hand extended. Squeeze the fingers against
each other, stretching them one by one. It can be done with all the
fingers at the same time. j Stretching of the fingers. Squeeze the thumb
against the other fingers of the hand, one at a time. k Stretching of the
fingers. Cross the fingers and thumbs, one by one, each finger forming
a hook. l Stretching of the fingers. Close the hands tightly as they are
holding something strongly. After open them and stretch the fingers
well. After, put the arms down and swing them, rotating to the sides
K. C. K. Yui et al.
73 2
.Fig. 2.25 (continued)
g h
ijcd
ef
Ergonomics Principles Applied to the Dental Clinic
74
2
> The stretching exercises can be done at the office,
during intervals between sessions, to obtain flexibility
of the articulations, improving the blood circulation
and loosening the tense areas, preserving the health,
and optimizing the quality of life of the practitioners.
2.5 Current Panorama of Dental Ergonomic:
Challenges, Proposals, and Goals
The international literature reveals that the practice of the
dental profession needs more use of the existing ergonomic
knowledge. To change this picture, it is needed the implementation of a vast program to stimulate the application of
ergonomics in dentistry. This program must embrace actions
in every sector of the dental system, in a way that there is an
effective participation on the dental schools and representative associations of dentists, such as Federal and State Dental
Boards, Unions, and any other Dental Associations. It is
necessary that parameters should be defined and strategies
should be created, to allow the adequate teaching of ergonomics on dental courses and that this information would
be applied when building clinics and preclinical laboratories, which allow students and clinicians to work at a healthy
posture.
The manufacturers of dental treatment unit and their
representative associations need to stimulate the constant
search and improvement of the unit, and their suitability to
the ESDE document . It is important that dental treatment unit manufactures promote ergonomic studies in
their laboratories and in conjunction with the egnonomic’s
research associations. The companies should be stimulated to
commit part of their incomings to the development of ergonomic research, and to create manuals that promote the
adequate use of the dental treatment unit, because only
to manufacture a ergonomic unit does not guarantee that
they will be used in an ergonomic way.The dental schools should promote the development
pedagogical strategies that are more efficient to allow the
proper teaching of ergonomics. The student must be stimulated to appreciate and to take a healthy work posture since
the first work, performed in laboratory or preclinical and,
later on, the clinical activities. The current knowledge of
ergonomics must be spread out on the various specialties,
through manuals of ergonomics that serves as the base for
the students and for the professors of every area.
The clinicians must be stimulated to select and to buy
dental treatment unit that satisfy the ergonomic principles,
and to know the cost benefit relationship when taking their
decision. Only with the effective and integrated participation
of all those sectors, of this complex dental system, will be
possible to implement the necessary improvement of the
dental work conditions.
> The dental schools should promote the development
of more efficient pedagogical strategies to allow the
proper teaching of ergonomics. Students should be
strongly encouraged to understand and value the
importance of adopting a healthy work posture as
soon as possible, ie, from the first procedures
performed in mannikin and during the procedures
performed in patients at all clinics during the dental
course.
Conclusion
The working position in dentistry is essential to protect the
dental team health. In this chapter, the correct way of ergo -
nomically seat during the dental treatment and properly
position the patient in the chair was explained, as well how to
grasp the instruments and rest the fingers in the oral environment. The control of the environmental condition in order to
protect the health was explained. The exercises that can be
done inside the dental office were shown, helping to prevent
the most common work-related musculoskeletal disorders. .Fig. 2.25 (continued)
kl
K. C. K. Yui et al.
75 2
References
1. Barbosa M, Marques JA, Muse JO. Odontologia em debate: Ergono -
mia e as doenças ocupacionais. Feira de Santana: Universidade
Estadual de Feira de Santana; .
2. Barros O. Ergonomia. 2nd ed. São Paulo: Pancast; .
3. Bauman FS. Giving occupants what they want: guidelines for imple -
menting personal environmental control in your building. World
Work 99. Los Angeles; .
4. Belenky M. Human-centered ergonomics: proprioceptive pathway
to occupational health and peak performance in dental practice. In:
Murphy DC, editor. Ergon Dent care Work. Washington, DC: Am Pub
Health Assoc; . p. –99.
5. Brandimiller PA. O corpo no trabalho. Guia de conforto e saúde para
quem trabalha em microcomputadores. 2a. J. Bras. Clínica Odontológica Integr. São Paulo: Editora Senac, .
6. Camacho Perdomo JE. Ministério da Saúde. Colômbia: Universidade
de Antioquia; .
7. Chasteen JE. Four-handed dentistry in clinical practice. 1a ed. St.
Louis: Mosby; .
8. Chasteen JE. Essentials of clinical dental assisting. 4 ed. St. Louis:
Mosby; .
9. Coelho ACC. Análise de ruídos em laboratórios e clínicas de prótese
dentária. [Bauru]: FOB – USP; .
10. Coster EA, Carstens IL, Harris AM. Patterns of stress among dentists.
J Dent Assoc South Africa. ;42: –94.
11. Couto H, Lech O. Gerenciando a LER e os DORT nos tempos atuais.
Belo Horizonte: ERGO Editora; .
12. Delleman NJ, Haslegrave CM, Chaffin DB. Working postures and
movements. Tools for evaluation and engineering. 1st ed. London:
CRC Press; .
13. de Bruyne MAA, Van Renterghem B, Baird A, Palmans T, Danneels L,
Dolphens M. Influence of different stool types on muscle activity
and lumbar posture among dentists during a simulated dental
screening task. Appl Ergon. ;56: –6.
14. Eero Kerosuo L. Self-reported health complaints among general
dental practitioners, orthodontists, and office employees. Acta
Odontol Scand. [Internet]. ;58: –12. https://doi.
org/10. / .
15. Europäische Gesellschaft für Zahnärztliche Ergonomie -
EGZE. Techinische Berichte: Nr. 10 - 12. Landdruckerei Späthling.
Weissenstadt; p. 96.
16. Fernandes JC, Oliveira JR, Fernandes VM. Avaliação do Ruído em
Consultórios Dentários. XI SIMPEP . Bauru; .
17. Ferreira RC. Cargas de trabalho em odontologia e formas de prevenção – Guia curricular para formação de atendentes de consultório
para atuar na rede pública do SUS. Área Curric. I, Cargas Trab.
Brasilia; .
18. Finocchiaro JA, Aassaf DL, Finocchiaro M. Manual de Prevenção das
Lombalgias. Lex Editora; .
19. Genovese W, Lopes A. Doenças Profissionais do CD. 1a ed. São Paulo:
Pancast; .
20. Grandjean E. Manual de ergonomia: adaptando o local ao homem.
2nd ed. Porto Alegre: Bookman; .
21. Guidi D, Fichman DM, Santos J Jr. A auxiliar odontológica. São Paulo:
Editora Pedagógica e Universitária; .
22. Guiton AC. Tratado de Fisiologia Humana. Rio de Janeiro: Guanabara Koogan; .
23. Heimstra N, McFarling L. Psicologia Ambiental. São Paulo: Editora
da Universidade de São Paulo; .
24. Henriques DYP , Medendorp WP , Gielen CCAM, Crawford JD. Geo -
metric computations underlying eye-hand coordination: orientations of the two eyes and the head. Exp Brain Res. [Internet].
; :70–8. https://doi.org/10. /s00221- - -4. 25. Hokwerda O, Wouters JAJ. Zicht op licht. Adviezen en richtlijnen op
het gebied van verlichting, optische hulpmiddelen en beeldscher -
men in de tandheelkunde. Nieuwegein: Movir; .
26. Hokwerda O, de Ruijter RAG, Shaw S. Adopting a healthy sitting
working posture during patient treatment. Center for Dentistry and
Oral Hygiene, University Medical Center Groningen, p. 28. .
Available at: https://www. rug. nl/research/ctm/kenniscentrum/
ergonomie/pdfergonomie/1adoptingahealthysittingworkingpostu
reduringpatienttreatment. (jan2009). pdf .
27. Hokwerda O, Wouters JAJ. Eindrapportage Sonde project. Nieuwe -
gein: Movir; .
28. Hokwerda O, Wouters JAJ, Ruijter RAG, Zijlstra-Shaw S. Ergonomic
requirements for dental equipment. Guidelines and recommendations for designing, constructing and selecting dental equipment.
European Society Of Dental Ergonomics (ESDE), editor. . Available at: http://www. esde. org/docs .
29. Iida I. Ergonomic contributions do design. 6th Int Congr Ergon
Usability Human-Technology Interfaces Prod Information, Built
Environ Transp. Bauru; .
30. Iida I. Ergonomia: projeto e produção. São Paulo: Editora Edgard
Blücher; .
31. ISO : . Ergonomics -- evaluation of static working postures. ISO: International Standard Organization, editor. . p. 19.
32. ISO : . Information system on the location of dental equip -
ment in the working area of the oral health care provider. 2 Edition.
ISO: International Standard Organization, editor. . p. 4.
33. ISO : . Ergonomics principles in the design of work system.
Int. Stand. Organ. ISO: International Standard Organization. .
34. Kimmel K. Zahnärztliche Praxisund Arbeitsgestaltung. Ergonomie
als Grundlage der Leistungsund Lebensqualität. Köln: Deutscher
Zahnärzte Verlag Däv-Hanser; .
35. Knoplich J. Enfermidades da coluna vertebral. São Paulo: Panamed
Editorial; .
36. Laville A. Ergonomia. São Paulo: EPU; .
37. Lopes A, Neto RV. A Síndrome do túnel carpal: Um risco profissional
para o cirurgião-dentista. Rev da Assoc Paul Cir. ;48: –52.
38. Lopes MF. O CD e o DORT – Conhecer para prevenir. .
39. Mandel ID. Occupational risks in dentistry: comforts and concerns. J
Am Dent Assoc [Internet]. ; :40–9. https://doi.org/10. /
jada.archive. . .
40. Marshall ED, Duncombe LM, Robinson RQ, Kilbreath SL. Musculo -
skeletal symptoms in New South Wales dentists. Aust Dent J [Inter -
net]. ;42: –6. https://doi.org/10. /j. - . .
tb00128.x.
41. Medeiros U, Riul LF. Riscos ocupacionais do CD e sua prevenção. Rev
Paul Odontol. ;6:34–43.
42. Melis M, Abou-Atme YS, Cottogno L, Pittau R. Upper body musculo -
skeletal symptoms in Sardinian dental students. J Can Dent Assoc
[Internet]. ;70: –10.
43. Méndez FJ, Gómez-Conesa A. Postural hygiene program to prevent
low back pain. Spine [Internet]. ;26: –6.
44. Ministério da Saúde. Protocolo de investigação, diagnóstico, tratamento e prevenção de DORT. Secretaria de Políticas de Saúde, editor. Brasília; .
45. Ministério da Saúde. Lesões por esforços repetitivos (Ler)/distúrbios
osteomusculares relacionados ao trabalho (Dort). Departamento
de Ações Programáticas Estratégicas ÁT de S do T, editor. Brasília;
.
46. Nogueira DP . Riscos ocupacionais de dentistas e sua prevenção. Rev
Bras Saúde Ocup. ;41:16–24.
47. Oh J, Zhao C, Zobitz ME, Wold LE, An K-N, Amadio PC. Morphological changes of collagen fibrils in the subsynovial connective tissue
in carpal tunnel syndrome. J Bone Jt Surg [Internet]. ;88:
–31. https://doi.org/10. /JBJS.E. .
Ergonomics Principles Applied to the Dental Clinic
76
2 48. Osamura N, Zhao C, Zobitz ME, An K-N, Amadio PC. Permeability of
the subsynovial connective tissue in the human carpal tunnel: a
cadaver study. Clin Biomech [Internet]. ;22: –8. https://doi.
org/10. /j.clinbiomech. .01. .
49. Paraguay ATT. Perda Auditiva Induzida por ruído em consultório
odontológico. Recife: CEFAC – Curso de Especialização em Fonoaudiologia clínica; .
50. Plessas A, Delgado MB. The role of ergonomic saddle seats and
magnification loupes in the prevention of musculoskeletal disor -
ders. A systematic review. Int J Dent Hygiene. ;16: –40.
https://doi.org/10. /idh. .
51. Poi W, Tagliavini RL. Organização do trabalho em clínica integrada.
Rev da Assoc Bras Odontol Nac. ;7: –12.
52. Rasia D. Quando a Dor é do CD! Custo Humano do Trabalho de
Endodontistas e Indicadores de Dort. Área Conc. Psicol. Soc. e do
Trab. [Brasília]: Universidade de Brasília; .
53. Regis Filho G, Michels G, Sell I. Lesões por esforços repetitivos/distúrbios osteomusculares relacionados ao trabalho em cirurgiõesdentistas. Rev Bras Epidemiol. ;9: –59.
54. Rio LMS. Ergonomia odontológica. Rev do CROMG. ;6:28–33.
55. Rising DW, Bennett BC, Hursh K, Plesh O. Reports of body pain in a
dental student population. J Am Dent Assoc [Internet]. ; :81–
6. https://doi.org/10. /jada.archive. . .
56. Roberson TM, Heymann H, Swift EJ, Sturdevant CM. Sturdevant’s art
and science of operative dentistry. London: Mosby/Elsevier; . 57. Rock I. Perception. New York OSABI, editor. .
58. Rucker LM, Sunell S. Ergonomic risk factors associated with clinical
dentistry. J Calif Dent Assoc [Internet]. ;30: –48.
59. Rundcrantz BL, Johnsson B, Moritz U. Cervical pain and discomfort
among dentists. Epidemiological, clinical and therapeutic aspects.
Part 1. A survey of pain and discomfort. Swed Dent J [Internet].
;14:71–80.
60. Santos CMD. Móveis ergonômicos. Rev Proteção. :62–5.
61. Santos Filho S, Barreto SM. Atividade ocupacional e prevalência de
dor osteomuscular em cirurgiões-dentistas de Belo Horizonte,
Minas Gerais, Brasil: contribuição ao debate sobre os distúrbios
osteomusculares relacionados ao trabalho. Cad Saúde Pública.
;17: –93.
62. Varkenvisser JK, Kriekaard JJ. Richtlijnen en adviezen ten behoeve
van de werkplek van de tandarts op het gebied van verlichting en
optometrie. TNO Rapp nr TM-02-C029 Soesterb TNO Tech Menskd.
.
63. Vianna R, Arita ES. Desempenho Lógico. Rev Bras Odontol.
;46:27–31.
64. Vieira SI. Manual de saúde e segurança do trabalho. 1a. Florianópo -
lis: Mestra Editora; .
65. Wagner M. Safeguarding the physical well-being of dentists. J Am
Dent Assoc. ; :16–24. https://doi.org/10. /jada.
archive. . .
K. C. K. Yui et al.
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG
C. R. G. Torres (ed.), Modern Operative Dentistry, Textbooks in Contemporary Dentistry,
https://doi.org/10. / -3- - -0_377 3
Cariology
Taciana Marco Ferraz Caneppele, Alessandra Bühler Borges,
Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres, José Roberto Rodrigues, and Thomas Attin
3.1 Introduction – 78
3.2 Etiology of Dental Caries – 78
3.3 Role of Microorganisms on the Development on Carious
Lesions – 80
3.4 Importance of the Saliva as a Protecting Factor – 81
3.5 Fluoride Action – 82
3.6 Development of the Carious Lesions – 82
3.6.1 Lesions at the Occlusal Surface – 88
3.6.2 Lesions at the Proximal and Cervical Third of Smooth Surfaces – 91
3.6.3 Lesions at the Root Surface – 91
3.7 Caries Diagnosis – 93
3.7.1 Methods for Detecting and Diagnosing Dental Carious Lesion – 95
3.7.2 Secondary Carious Lesions –
3.8 Treatment Decision –
3.9 ICDAS –
References –
78
3Learning Objectives
The learning objectives of this chapter are related to the following topics:
5Carious should be understood as a disease starting
already before a cavitation appears.
5Lesion progression is dependent on the caries risk of the
patient and may vary within individual lifetime.
5Decision about how to treat carious lesions should be
based on the knowledge of the individual caries risk.
5The final goal of the caries disease treatment is to
achieve an oral environment, in which demineralized
areas may remineralize and in which no new lesions will
appear in the future.
3.1 Introduction
Since the beginning of the history of dentistry, the treatment
of the dental caries has been focused on the restorations of
the cavities using many techniques and materials, which have
presented a great evolution throughout time. However,
patients still presented the development of carious lesions at
the margins of the restorations, called secondary caries, as
well new lesions on other dental surfaces. This happened
because the secondary caries was being considered to be a
distinct entity, closely related to the quality of the restorative
material and restorative technique. Nowadays, the secondary
caries is considered only a reflex of the caries disease that was
not completely treated, confirming the importance of the
knowledge of its etiopathogenesis so that it is possible to
establish its proper prevention, avoiding the appearance of
new lesions . Therefore, the incorporation of the knowledge coming from the cariology must be considered as the
base for the success of the restorative treatment . The
treatment of the dental caries, which historically based itself
only on the reparation of the damage, is considered, nowadays, unacceptable. The modern vision is that the dental car -
ies is a bacterial disease that produces the destruction of the
dental organ, causing lesions that are nothing more than the
clinical signs of its presence. Therefore, the treatment of the
disease must precede the treatment of the signals. In any
other way, the lack of success of the treatment surely will
happen.
> Dental caries is a bacterial disease that produces the
destruction of the dental organ, causing lesions that
are nothing more than the clinical signs of its presence.
The treatment of the disease must precede the
treatment of the lesions.
3.2 Etiology of Dental Caries
It is a proven fact that the caries disease occurs only in individuals with a diet rich in fermentable carbohydrates, especially sucrose. Among the bacteria present on the oral biofilm, there are some that are capable to metabolize those
carbohydrates and besides reproduce themselves; they produce a large quantity of acidic substances that come in contact with the dental structure. The dental enamel is essentially
built of hydroxyapatite, which is also present in the dentin,
and it is susceptible to dissolution when there is a high quantity of acids in the biofilm fluid and the pH is below a level
considered critical (pH = 5.2–5.7). On those cases, the concentration of calcium (Ca2+) and phosphate ions (HPO42−) in
the biofilm fluid becomes lower than to the product of solubility of the hydroxyapatite, promoting a physical and chemical tendency of the enamel to loose Ca2+ and HOP42− to the
oral environment, at the attempt to reach a new state of balance in function of the reached pH. This phenomenon is
called demineralization. However, a drop of the quantity of
fermentable carbohydrate in the oral cavity may reduce
microbial activity, bringing back the “normal” status with the
biofilm fluid being oversaturated with calcium and phosphate ions in relation to the dental structure. This means that
the calcium and phosphate concentration in the biofilm fluid
is higher than the product of solubility of the hydroxyapatite.
As a consequence, remineralization or at least reparation will
occur since those abounded minerals tend to be reincorporated into the dental hard tissue as a phenomenon called
remineralization . If there are more periods of remineralization than demineralization, the dental structure keeps
itself intact. However, in the cases, in which the periods of
demineralization prevail in relation to the periods of remineralization, the structural loss increases gradually, resulting
on the presence of cavities, known as carious lesions
(. Fig. 3.1 ).
The cycles of demineralization and remineralization are
influenced by many determinant factors, which turn the car -
ies a multifactorial disease. Basically, for the development of
a carious lesion, three factors are essential, and they are the
host (tooth), microbiota, and diet (substrate). Many studies
demonstrated that the caries does not develop in animals
completely without bacteria nor in animals with oral
pH
pHCa++
HPO 4--Ca++
HPO 4--reminer alization
deminer alization
biofilmenamel saliv a
.Fig. 3.1 Schematic drawing explaining the demineralization and
remineralization process that happen on the tooth surface due to the
pH oscillation of the oral environment
T. M. F. Caneppele et al.
79 3
bacteria but that are fed with a cariogenic diet through stomach canulas . It is evident that only the existence of the
three factors happening simultaneously does not result in an
instant mineral loss, but it is necessary that they interact for
some time, making time to be the fourth important factor.
Those factors have been called primary determinants for the
caries disease because they are essential to the process of the
development of the lesions [71, 75].
. Figure 3.2 illustrates the relation between the dental
biofilm and the multiple biological determinants that inter -
fere on the probability to develop a carious lesion. On the
internal and interlaced circles, the primary determinant factors for a carious lesion to occur are represented. They are the
susceptible dental structure, cariogenic microbiota, the substrate for the microorganisms, and time, so that the deminer -
alization can occur. In relation to the tooth structure, it
represents the element which will be attacked in the presence
of the caries disease. The age of the patient determines the
stage of tooth eruption and the resistance of the teeth against
the demineralization, because of the presence or absence of
posteruptive enamel maturation. The presence of fluoride on
the oral cavity turns the tooth more resistant to the acidic
attack and allows better remineralization, while the dental morphology may or may not aid the retention of the bacteria
on the surface. In relation to the microorganism, the types
present also have great influence because the existence of the
acidogenic and aciduric bacteria is essential for the process.
In addition, the adequate dental hygiene may result in the
disorganization of the biofilm, reducing the quantity of acids
produced. Depending on the concentration of fluoride on the
biofilm, the metabolic activity of the bacteria may also be
diminished. In relation to the substrate, the composition and
frequency of the diet favors or not the bacterial activity, so it
is also a decisive part of the process because they are the
nutrients so that the bacteria survive on. The adequate oral
hygiene habits can remove the food residues, reducing the
substrate available. In relation to the time, due to the diet
with high consumption of fermentable carbohydrates, there
is a variation of pH that leads to mineral loss. It is necessary
that this interaction is kept through some time so it results in
the formation of the incipient lesions initially and later on the
cavitation.
In the light blue circle, the secondary main determinant
factor is presented, which is the saliva. It is saturated in calcium and phosphate and participates in the processes of
demineralization and remineralization. Its compositions, the
SCHOLARITY
SOCIAL CLASS KNOWLEDGE
SALIVA
(COMPOSITION, FLUX,
BUFFER CAPACITY)
TIME
TOOTH
MICROBIOTA
SUBSTRATE
SALIVA
ATTITUDESINCOME
BEHAVIOR(COMPOSITION OF DIET,
FREQUENCY, HYGIENE)(AGE,
FLUORIDE,
MORFOLOGY)(TYPE, QUANTITY
FLUORIDE,
HYGIENE)CARIOUS
LESION
.Fig. 3.2 Schematic drawing of determinant factors for caries
disease. On the internal interlaced circles, the primary determinant
factors are given. On the light blue circle, the secondary determinant factor, while on the dark blue circle the confounding factors are
depicted. (Adapted from Fejerskov and Manji) Cariology
80
3salivary flow or flux, and its capacity to neutralize the acidity
by the buffering effect have a great influence on the occur -
rence or not of those lesions. On the dark blue circle, the factors that are not decisive for the disease but are tied to it in
some way are presented. They are called “confounding factors” because they do not always influence on the same way
in all societies, although the determinant factors will cer -
tainly always be the same in all populations . As examples
are the social class, the financial income, and knowledge,
which can allow greater access to information about the
causes of the disease, besides the monitoring by a clinician.
In addition, the behavior and the attitudes will favor that the
patient has healthy dietary and hygiene habits.
3.3 Role of Microorganisms
on the Development on Carious Lesions
Keyes investigation, at the beginning of the 1960s
decade, demonstrated the need of a specific microbiota for
occurrence of the dental caries. The researcher verified that
the hamster babies, which the mothers had been treated with
antibiotics during the breastfeeding period, did not develop
carious lesion, even receiving a diet with a great cariogenic
potential. Those “not contaminated” babies only developed
lesions when in contact with infected hamsters, or when
inoculated with material provided from the biofilm of those
animals. Until the decade of , it was believed that the
caries disease was the result of the collective production of
acids by the acidogenic bacterial communities on the biofilm.
This way of seeing the process was called the “non-specific
plaque hypothesis. ” However, later studies demonstrate that
the members of a colony of hamsters without caries but that
had a microbiota composed by numerous acidogenic microorganisms only developed caries when contaminated by specific Streptococcus , which came from lesions from hamster
that had active caries and were submitted to a diet rich in
sucrose . Those microorganisms, later identified as
mutans group streptococci, are cariogenic by nature and
present a potential to produce carious lesions much higher
than any other acidogenic microorganism on biofilm. Since
those first studies until today, many researches have demonstrated the role of this group of microorganisms on the etiology of the caries. The biofilms removed from the areas with
cavities are bacteriologically and biochemically different
from those coming from a healthy zone, proving that there is
a more specific microbiota on the development of the carious
lesion . Those observations gave origin to the “specific
plaque hypothesis. ” It helps to explain the results of an epidemiological study, performed in , in the United States,
when 60% of the carious lesions happened in only 20% of the
analyzed population, while only 5% of the population was
caries free . In . Fig. 3.3, the disclosed bacterial biofilm
can be seen in a patient with high caries activity.
These findings changed some concepts from the 1950s
when it was believed that Lactobacillus was the main suspect for the initiation of the carious lesions, due to its capacity to produce acid and presence in high amounts on
patients with high caries experience. However, the studies
of the microbiota of the biofilm demonstrated that
Lactobacillus represents only a reduced fraction of the total
microorganisms present on the biofilm, and it was impossible to claim that they were responsible for the presence of
carious lesions. In addition, they had a low adhesive capacity to the acquired salivary pellicle. On the other hand,
streptococci species with a high cariogenic potential were
numerically much more significant on the biofilms that
appeared right before the initial carious lesions, keeping a
relation of 10, :1, in relation to the Lactobacillus .
Additionally, streptococci presented a much higher adher -
ence capacity to the tooth surfaces. Nowadays, there is great
evidence that the mutans group streptococci play an impor -
tant role in the initiation of human caries. They are highly
acidogenic (capable to produce acids) and acidurics (capable to live in an acidic environment), and its cariogenic
potential is well established in animals. They preferably
colonize the teeth, and they are found in high proportions
in the grooves, fissures, contact areas, and other retentive
zones, in a way that its pattern of colonization happens in
parallel with the areas that are susceptible to caries .
The lactobacilli are, usually, found on the carious lesions
that already have cavitated, and its number at the saliva generally maintains a positive correlation with the caries experience. On the other hand, the rigorous restraint to the
consumption of sugars, in general, decreases significantly the
caries activity and the number of Lactobacillus in the saliva
. However, as it has already been described, everything
seems to indicate that the lactobacilli are not essentially
involved at the initiation of the caries, acting mostly as “secondary invaders” that take advantages of the acidic conditions and the retention that prevails inside the carious lesion.
This fact is corroborated by the observation that lactobacilli
are usually not detected in biofilms that cover incipient car -
ies. At these conditions, the detection of a high concentration
of Lactobacillus in the saliva (> , /ml) would work as an
excellent indicator of risk for progression of initial preexisting caries. This indicator may have an important function in
.Fig. 3.3 Disclosed bacterial biofilm
T. M. F. Caneppele et al.
81 3
the decision to treat, restoratively or not, incipient caries,
especially in cases of interproximal caries detected by radiography, and that does not allow a clinical evaluation of the
presence or absence of cavitations .
Under common circumstances, without the exaggerated
consumption of sucrose, as it happens in isolated populations
that do not have access to the modern diet with processed
food, the microbiota that colonizes the teeth presents low
cariogenic potential. The dental surface can be seen as a habitat to be colonized. As soon as the teeth erupt, the pioneer
bacteria, which produce extracellular polysaccharide capable
to adhere to the surface, will bond to the salivary pellicle.
They start to reproduce, forming an initial bacterial biofilm,
so they are considered pioneer bacteria. Among them, streptococci from the oralis group are present, which are aerobic
bacteria (e.g., Streptococcus sanguinis , Streptococcus mitis ,
and Streptococcus oralis ). Those bacteria modify the environment and allow that the biofilm becomes attractive for other
bacteria to live in, turning it more complex. In each interval,
the conditions of the environment change in a way that can
favor or disfavor the presence of certain bacterial group.
After a determined period, the biofilm reached its maximum
degree of maturity. The observation of this ecological
sequence of microorganisms gave origin to the so-called ecological plaque hypothesis.
The first ecological microbial succession happens after
the teeth erupt, and it is called the primary succession.
However, every time the bacterial biofilm is disorganized or
completely removed by brushing, it will develop itself again,
through a new ecological succession, called the secondary
succession. On the other hand, every time an ecological
succession occurs, the conditions of the environment may
favor or disfavor the development of a certain group of
microorganisms. One example of that happens in individuals with low caries activities that for some reason begin to
consume a high quantity of sucrose and to neglect the oral
hygiene. On those cases, the acidogenic bacteria, as the
mutans group streptococci and the lactobacilli, are starting
to produce acid, which will lead to a lowering of the pH of
the biofilm. These same bacteria are aciduric and resistant
to this environment. However, this hinders that the acidsensitive bacteria as the Streptococcus from the oralis group
to develop, and its quantity is drastically reduced. The
capacity for the acidogenic and aciduric bacteria to perform
a natural selection during the ecological succession allows
them to be called pH strategist .
Some studies demonstrate that the chance of an individual to develop a pathogenic biofilm is lower when the primary ecological succession occurs in a low consumption of
sucrose and the first colonizing bacteria are not being cariogenic. Therefore, some members of a dental biofilm are considered beneficial for the host, because they may play a role of
a protector against the colonization of exogenous species or
even to produce substance as bacteriocins, surfactants, and
hydrogen peroxide, which have antagonist effects on the
establishment of the Streptococcus mutans and Lactobacillus
. This prevention is called primary or true prevention.3.4 Importance of the Saliva as a Protecting
Factor
Saliva is a glandular secretion with a complex composition
presenting organic and inorganic components. The organic
components consist of a variety of proteins, carbohydrates,
and enzymes, each one having an important function of control of the oral environment. The inorganic components,
such as sodium, potassium, calcium, chlorite, bicarbonate,
and phosphate, determine the relative saturation of the fluid
in relation to hydroxyapatite. Other than those inorganic
components, many cellular elements are found in the saliva,
especially epithelial cells peeled from the mucosa, leukocytes,
and neutrophils originated from the gingival sulcus, besides
microorganisms .
Saliva is present during the development of carious
lesions, influencing in an important way the process of tooth
decay. A study showed that an extreme deficiency of saliva
results in an increase of the cariogenic activity . The
saliva acts actively on the process of demineralization and
remineralization of the dental hard tissue, through the ionic
exchange of Ca2+ and HPO42− with the biofilm and dental
mineral structure.
Saliva presents a buffering capacity, which is the capacity
of the saliva to keep its pH constant between 6.9 and 7.0. Due
to its mucinate/mucin, bicarbonate/carbonic acid, and
monophosphate/bisphosphate buffers, it counteracts the
excess of acids or bases, neutralizing the acids formed by the
bacterial metabolism . Other important protector role of
the saliva is the mechanical clearance (removing food detritus
and bacteria) through the saliva flux. Saliva also influences
the ecological balance of the oral microorganisms, since it
serves as substrate for the bacteria, interferes on the microbial adhesion by the formation of an acquired pellicle, and
has antimicrobial substances with immunological (secretory
IgA, IgG, and IgM) and non-immunological effects (lactofer -
rin, lysozyme, lactoperoxidase, and myeloperoxidase) .
The non-stimulated salivary flux varies between 0.25 and
0.35 ml/min, increasing from 1 to 3 ml/min when it is stimulated by the chewing. The saliva flux varies during the day,
coming to its minimum during sleep, with a minimum of its
protector effect, what may additionally explain the appear -
ance of rampant carious lesion in children having a baby
bottle with sucrose as a night habit. Some systemic diseases,
such as Sjögren’s syndrome, rheumatic arthritis, diabetes
mellitus, nervous anorexia, Parkinson disease, and depression, among others, have the side effect of reducing the
production of saliva. The use of some medications as antispasmodic, antidepressants, muscle relaxants, antiarrhythmic, antihistaminic, antihypertensive, diuretics, and
anti-inflammatory, among others, also reduces the salivary
flux. People with reduced saliva flux lack the protective action
of the saliva, and so, they are more prone to the development
of carious lesion.
Some clinical evidence is related to the reduction of the
saliva flux, for example, reports from patients about dry
mouth, constant thirst, difficulties to talk and to swallow, Cariology
82
3burning and tingling sensation on the tongue, and difficulty
to use total or removable prosthetic appliances. Additional
clinical signs of reduced salivary flux are oral mucosa irritability, presence of fissures and ulcers on the commissures, red
and fissured tongue, and carious lesions on tooth smooth
surfaces, usually places of self-cleaning, as the areas above
the height of curvature and incisal edge. During the manipulation of the oral cavity, it can also be verified that the clinical
mirror or a gloved finger adheres to the dried-out mucosa.
3.5 Fluoride Action
Nowadays, it is known that the cariostatic effect of fluoride is a
consequence of its presence on the organic fluids during the
cariogenic attack. Because of the pH variation on the oral
environment, the dental enamel suffers a process of constant
demineralization and remineralization. Fluoride, even in a
small concentration, interferes on the cariogenic process.
Below pH 5.5 (critical level of demineralization of the enamel),
the tooth environment (biofilm fluid) becomes unsaturated
with respect to hydroxyapatite. Thus, diffusion of enamel minerals from the tooth to the environment occurs (demineralization) to restore the ionic balance between them. The
hydroxyapatite of the enamel starts to dissolve at a pH around
5.3–5.5; However, fluorapatite is not dissolved until the pH is
below 4.5. When the oral environment pH is between 5.5 and
4.5, the enamel release calcium, phosphate, and hydroxyls to
the oral environment. At this pH range, if fluoride ions are
available, the minerals will be able to form fluorapatite and
fluoridated apatite, which will deposit on and in the dental
enamel. The fluoride presence at biofilm fluid promotes a remineralization without the need for the pH to reverse above the
critical pH for hydroxyapatite. Therefore, the availability of
fluoride ions for prolonged periods is important, even in low
concentrations. The demineralization process will depend on
the fluoride concentration on the tooth/biofilm interface and
on the pH of the biofilm fluid. The lower the pH of the environment, the higher is the concentration of fluoride needed to
hinder the demineralization process of the dental structures.
However, there is a limit for the action of fluoride ions. If the
pH is below 4.5, the biofilm fluid will become unsaturated
with respect to the two apatites (hydroxyapatite and fluorapatite); as consequence, mineral loss will happen [17, 63].
Besides the interference on the process, the demineralization and remineralization, the fluoride interferes on the
growth and the bacterial metabolism. Low levels of fluoride
can change the metabolism of the carbohydrates by the bacteria, resulting in the reduction of the production of acids
and polysaccharides and in the bacterial adherence . At
low concentration it presents bacteriostatic effects, but in
high concentration, it can have a bactericide effect.
When fluoride is applied to the dental surface in concentrations above ppm, in an acidic formulation or with a
prolonged contact to the surface, a calcium fluoride-like layer
(CaF2) is formed on the surface. That substance per se is not
stable in the environment of the oral cavity. However, under clinical conditions, the surface-deposited CaF2 is covered by
phosphate and proteins from the saliva, forming a type of
protection. This so-formed calcium fluoride-like layer shows
a low dissolution rate, making it to act as a slow fluoridereleasing agent. In case of a pH drop in the biofilm, the phosphate and protein layer of the deposit is solubilized, exposing
the soluble CaF2. The release of fluoride and calcium to the
environment promotes formation of fluorapatite right at the
time point of the acidic attack. That means that remineralization directly occurs parallel to the time point of demineralization. When the pH recovers to physiological values, the
remaining CaF2 is once again coated and is available to par -
ticipate in a new cycle of demineralization and remineralization. By this, it can be considered a continuous reserve of
fluoride, with an active participation on the dynamic of the
development of the carious lesion. In order to keep the
deposit of calcium fluoride at a high level, it is fundamental
that fluoride-containing products, such as toothpaste or
mouthwash, are frequently used.
3.6 Development of the Carious Lesions
With the formation of the bacterial biofilm on the dental sur -
face and in the presence of a diet rich in fermentable carbohydrates, acids will be formed by the bacterial metabolism,
which will reach the surface of the enamel, promoting its
demineralization. This accumulation of biofilm occurs especially in regions protected from friction with the soft tissues
and with the food bolus, as the bottom of the grooves, inter -
proximal regions, and cervical areas of smooth surfaces
below the height of curvature ( . Fig. 3.11a ). Initially, dissolution of the interprismatic enamel is started, with the accentuation of the prism prominences, creating a rough surface
with surficial porosities ( . Fig. 3.4a). The acids continue to
diffuse into intercrystallite water-filled spaces and the process keeps on, following the direction of the enamel prisms.
At the surface layer of the lesion, the level of mineral loss is
lower than in the more inner regions, due to its contact with
the mineral-rich and oversaturated saliva. After some time,
an incipient carious lesion is formed in the enamel with a
relatively intact surface, with a porosity volume of approximately 1%, called surface zone, and a subsurface porous part,
with a porosity volume of 5–25%, called the lesion body (LB).
At the deepest inner portions of the lesion, the front of
demineralization (translucent zone) is created, with a porosity volume of 1%. At this area the dissolution of the intact
enamel prisms is happening. The dissolved mineral salts at
this area, before leaching outward, temporarily accumulate
on the neighboring region, called dark zone, with 2–4% of
porosity. Afterward, the minerals diffuse to the LB and later
to the oral environment through the pores in the surface
zone. In . Fig. 3.4b, c , the histological aspect of a subsurface
carious lesion, pointing out the surface zone (arrow), and the
LB is depicted. . Figure 3.4d shows a schematic drawing of
the variation of porosities in the different layers of an initial
enamel lesion.
T. M. F. Caneppele et al.
83 3
As a consequence of the presence of this subsurface
lesion, there is a modification of the optical behavior of the
dental structure. According to the laws of optics, when there
is a difference in refractive index between two materials,
there will be an interface that deviates the light waves .
When the enamel is intact, the whole tissue has a refractive
index of 1.62 and there are no interfaces. The light travels
through the tissue without modification on its trajectory,
until it reaches the DEJ, being then reflected back. However,
the caries lesion has many porosities filled mainly with water
from saliva, which has a refractive index of 1.33. In this case,
the light waves reach multiples interfaces between the fluid
and the mineral phase, with different refractive indices. At
each interface the light is deviated and reflected, becoming
imprisoned in an “optical maze” that is over-luminous and
therefore perceived as white, creating a so-called white spot
lesion . Small subsurface lesions may not be visible when
the tooth is wet because the amount of water present on the
internal porosity of the lesion may not be capable to deviate
the light enough. However, when it is dried with a blow of
air, the water inside the porosities is replaced by air, which
has an even lower reflection index, equal to 1, making it visible for a naked eye. On the other hand, more advanced sub-surface lesions are visible even when they are hydrated
because of the high amount of water inside. When such a
lesion is dried, its visible size becomes even greater
(. Figs. 3.5a–h and 3.6a–d ). A study correlated the severity of
carious lesions and their histological depth. White spot
lesions, which require airdrying, are most likely to be limited to the outer 1⁄2 of the enamel. The depth of a white lesion
which is obvious without air-drying is located some place
between the inner 1/2 of the enamel and the outer 1/3 of the
dentin . When dried with a blow of air, active enamel
caries lesions present an opaque white, chalky, and dull sur -
face. In contrast, non-active, arrested initial lesions show a
glossy white surface after drying.
Every effort must be kept on the way to diagnose and stop
the lesion yet at this stage. At this moment preventive treatments are mandatory to interrupt and stop the bacteria colonization of the surface and to disorganize the biofilm on the
surface. However, if the surface pseudo-intact layer is
destroyed and breached, for example, by probing with a dental instrument, a bacterial invasion into the body of the lesion
will occur. In such a cavitated lesion control and removal of
the biofilm is almost impossible and the lesion is going to
progress. This means that a cavitated and not cleanable lesion,
ab
cd
.Fig. 3.4 a Scanning electron microscopy image of human enamel
surface showing on the left a white spot lesion with many pores
(arrow), contrasting with the aspect on the right, where the enamel is
intact; b histological aspect of an enamel carious lesion observed on
the optical microscopy (2.5×); c greater magnification of the lesion presented in the image b , showing the lesion body (LB) and the surface
zone (arrow) (10×); d scheme showing the levels of porosity on the
different zones of the enamel lesions (arrow, surface zone; LB, lesion
body of the; DZ, dark zone; TZ, translucent zone)Cariology
84
3
e.g., at the proximal aspect of a tooth, will be necessary to be
filled up with a restoration ( . Fig. 3.6a–d ).
In smooth surfaces, as the mesial, distal, buccal, and lingual surfaces, the carious lesions progress with a cone shape,
with the base facing the external surface of the tooth, while at
the region of the grooves, due to the inclination of the cuspid,
the lesion at the enamel progresses with cone shape with the
base facing the dentinoenamel junction ( . Figs. 3.7a and
3.8a). When the acids go through the intercrystallite spaces
and reach the dentin, even with an intact surface zone of the
lesion, the demineralization expands laterally along the DEJ, forming a second cone, with apices directed toward the
pulpal chamber, following the dentinal tubules ( . Figs. 3.7b,
c and 3.8b). If the surface is still intact, no bacterial invasion
into the lesion body will occur, and progression of the lesion
might be stopped simply by removing the bacterial biofilm
from the surface, allowing its remineralization by the saliva.
As soon as the surface zone of the lesion is fractured, it
often becomes impossible to remove the bacterial biofilm
with common oral hygiene measures, and a restoration is
indicated ( . Figs. 3.7d and 3.8c, d ). With time, all the adjacent dentin is destroyed, and only the undermined enamel is
ab
cd
ef
gh
.Fig. 3.5 Teeth with active carious white spot lesions. The clinical
aspect is modified when the tooth is wet or dry. a , c, e With the teeth
wet and the lesions seem smaller; b , d, f dry teeth showing the real size of the lesions. g , h White spot lesion on the occlusal surface, with the
surface wet and dry, respectively
T. M. F. Caneppele et al.
85 3
left (. Fig. 3.8d). When the cavity reaches the dentin, the
tubules are invaded by the bacteria, and the acids and proteolytic enzymes lead to a liquefaction necrosis process of the
outermost layer of dentin ( . Fig. 3.8d – Asterisk). Below this
very soft layer of liquefaction necrosis, an intermediary
demineralized and contaminated layer, called infected dentin, exists. As the penetration of the acids in the tubules precedes the bacterial invasion, a deeper dentin area is already
demineralized without the presence of bacteria, called
affected dentin. With the progression of the lesion, the contaminated area spreads, and when there is only 0.5 mm of
remaining tooth structure covering the pulpal chamber, the
diffusion of the bacterial metabolic reaches the pulp and can
start an inflammatory reaction, called pulpitis . If nothing
is done and the process continues, the bacterial invasion into
the pulp tissue will lead it to necrosis. In . Fig. 3.9a, and b the
clinical aspect of the necrotic dentin being removed with a
spoon excavator is depicted. More internally, when excavated, the demineralized and contaminated dentin is
removed in chips.When the enamel carious lesion at the enamel comes
close to the dentinal tissue, even before the start of dentin
demineralization, the odontoblasts react trying to obliterate
the tubules by the deposition of calcium salts inside the
lumen, forming the so-called sclerotic dentin ( . Fig. 3.7 –
red arrows) [50, 89]. This could be interpreted as an attempt
to block irritating and aggressive agents from reaching the
pulpal tissue. In . Fig. 3.10, the clinical aspect of the sclerotic dentin can be observed at the pulpal wall. It presents
an extremely hard consistence to probing and a dark brown
or black color.
With the lesion progression, the increase of dentin
demineralization stimulates the primary odontoblasts in
contact with the affected tubules. They start the focal secretion of dentin matrix tissue inside the pulpal chamber,
forming a tertiary dentin known as reactionary, which
shows tubular continuity with the secondary dentin .
With the increase of the injury intensity, the primary odontoblasts will be compromised in terms of survival until cell
death. When the pulp defense mechanism is still active,
a b
c d
.Fig. 3.6 a Anterior teeth with great accumulation of bacterial
biofilm; b aspect after removal of the biofilm with the surface still wet;
c aspect after drying with a blow of air. It can be observed that the
white spots are more visible and seem larger than when the teeth are dry. It can also be verified the presence of cavity on the cervical region
on the tooth 12; d sectioned extracted teeth showing the breaking out
of the surface zone of a white spot lesion, resulting in a cavity and
bacterial invasion in the lesion bodyCariology
86
3
stem/progenitor cells may be recruited to the injury site,
creating a new generation of odontoblast-like cells secreting
reparative tertiary dentin [7 ]. In this case there will be a
lack of tubule continuity with the secondary dentin, creating a barrier effect that will protect the pulp tissue, until the
caries process reaches this region . However, this
sequence of events only happens in the cases when the carious lesion has low-speed progression. In patients with high
caries activity, the lesions can progress so fast that there is
no time for sclerosis and much less for the formation of
reactionary or reparative dentin, increasing the risk for
development of an irreversible involvement of the pulp. In
addition, during cavity preparation of a tooth with a lesion
of fast progression, a greater chance of accidental exposure
of the pulpal tissue also occurs, due to the higher quantity
of softened dentinal tissue. In some special cases, with teeth
showing no signs of irreversible pulpitis, it may be advised
to restore the not completely carious-free cavity temporar -
ily. This intermediary step may allow remineralization of
the affected dentinal tissue, as well as formation of the
tubule’s sclerosis and of the reactionary dentin. Further
details are provided in the following chapters.
When the white spot lesion in enamel is detected before
cavitation happens, the treatment of the caries disease by intensifying preventive measures along with fluoride applications will promote the deposition of calcium salts on the sur -
face and inside the lesion. By this it may happen that small
lesions completely disappear. However, once the pores of the
surface zone are closed, minerals will not be deposited homogeneously inside the lesion body. Thus, the bigger a lesion is,
the more likely it will stay visible, even after being arrested.
Clinical studies demonstrate that only 33 to 49% of white
spot lesions disappear when being arrested. It is known that
white spot lesions become inactive as soon as no biofilm is
present on its surface. At this inactive state, white spot lesions
present a shining surface when dried with a blow of air
(. Fig. 3.11b ). During the arresting process, pigments and
dyes present in the oral cavity from the diet can deposit into
the porosity, changing the white spots to darkish or brownish
spots (. Fig. 3.12a, b ).
The activity of caries disease is related to the interaction
between the determinant factors, leading to an unbalance of
the demineralization/remineralization process with more
mineral loss than gain, due to the production of acids in the
biofilm. However, this conjuncture can be changed at any
time, and a patient with a high caries activity can be changed
to low activity, resulting in an abrupt drop of the acid production. When this happens, the existing lesions, even if
a b
c d
.Fig. 3.7 Progression of the carious lesion on smooth surface.
a Subsurface lesion limited to the enamel; b , c dentin demineralization
without the presence of cavity; d demineralization and disorganization of the dentin after cavitation. The black arrows indicate the demineralized dentin, while the red arrows indicate the sclerotic dentin
T. M. F. Caneppele et al.
87 3
cavitated, change their aspect. The active cavitated lesions of
intense acidogenic activity, called acute carious lesion, have a
large quantity of bacterial biofilm and a wet appearance, and
the dentinary tissue shows a light brown color and is
extremely soft ( . Fig. 3.13a ). Frequently there are white spots
on the enamel margins of those cavities. However, in lesions of low acidogenic activity, called chronic carious lesions, no
biofilm is visible, and the dentin looks dryer, with a darker
color and a consistency described as similar to leather
(. Fig. 3.13b ). In turn, as an acute lesion may become
chronic, the opposite may also happen, when the determinant factors of the caries disease may prevail again.
ab
cd
.Fig. 3.8 Progression of the carious lesion on the occlusal surface.
a Subsurface lesion limited to the enamel; b dentin demineralization
without the presence of cavitation; c , d demineralization and disorganization of the dentin after cavitation. The black arrows indicate
the demineralized dentin and the asterisk the necrotic dentin
a
b
.Fig. 3.9 Clinical aspect of carious dentin. a Necrotic dentin with a “porridge” aspect; b demineralized dentin removed in chipsCariology
88
33.6.1 Lesions at the Occlusal Surface
Carious lesions located at the occlusal surface of posterior
teeth have a higher prevalence than at other tooth areas, as shown in epidemiological studies [78, 79]. Clinically, it often
occurs as a localized phenomenon at one single spot of the
groove and fissure system. This happens, since the carious
lesion starts on sites where the bacterial growing is more protected against the functional contact and removal .
Therefore, two factors have been considered to be important
for the growing of biofilm and the onset of a carious lesion at
the occlusal surfaces: the eruption stage of the tooth that is
related to the functional use of the teeth and the specific
anatomy of each tooth .
Throughout the eruption process of the teeth, up to the
occlusal contact with its antagonist, these teeth are more susceptible to caries. Although the dental enamel is completely
formed at the time of eruption, it still presents high porosity.
It has been suggested that it goes through a posteruptive
enamel maturation period after its exposure to the saliva,
which will increase its resistance to demineralization [54,
96]. The nature of this maturation is still not completely
understood, but it is believed that during this period the
mineral ions and the fluoride in the oral environment diffuse
into the enamel.
.Fig. 3.10 Clinical aspect of darkened sclerotic dentin at pulpal wall
a
b
.Fig. 3.12 Darkened inactive carious lesion in enamel. a Labial surface; b proximal surface
a
b
.Fig. 3.11 White spot lesions in enamel. a The presence of lesions is associated to the places where bacterial biofilm occurs, as in cervical and
interproximal regions; b inactive lesions with shiny surface
T. M. F. Caneppele et al.
89 3
The partially erupted teeth do not participate in the chewing, since they do not contact their antagonists. Thus, accumulation of a biofilm is more likely. This come together with
the fact that a regular hygiene of these teeth with the surface
below the level of the other teeth is more demanding .
Therefore, bacterial growth can be accentuated at those sites
of not fully matured enamel ( . Fig. 3.5). As the tooth comes
close to the complete functional occlusion, the shearing
forces, coming from functional chewing, disorganize the
dental biofilm, so that no biofilm is formed on the cuspal
incline. However, the bacterial deposits, located in the deepest area of pits and grooves, are still protected against those
mechanical removal forces. Therefore, it is observed that the
visible signs of the caries develop at places where the bacterial deposits remain protected against the removal oral forces
for a long period. One of the reasons for the greater prevalence of carious lesions in molars in relation to premolars is
related to the fact that they take longer to erupt, thus staying
susceptible for bacterial adherence for longer time. The
molars take from 12 to 18 months to come in contact with
the antagonist, whereas the premolars take from 1 to 2
months.
A correlation between the morphology of the occlusal
surface and the caries onset at this area exists. In the past, it
was believed that patients with deeper dental grooves were
more susceptible to develop lesions than the ones with shallower grooves, since the bristles of a toothbrush would not be
capable to clean this region. . Figure 3.14a–f shows the basic
types of grooves that can be found in the population. Type 1
represents a shallow and open groove, while Type 2 is a nar -
row and deep one. Type 3 is the ampoule or bottle-shaped
groove, with narrowing at the entrance and an enlargement
at the base. Type 4 is a real fissure because there is no coalescence of the enamel from one cuspal incline with the other
and there is a direct contact between the environment and
the dentin . A pit is a small fault located on the tooth’s
surface. It is generally found on the intersection of two fissures or at the end of a developmental groove.
However, it was shown that a carious lesion does not
begin in the deepest part of grooves, but on the side, next to the surface ( . Fig. 3.15). For the development of the microbiota in the biofilm, it is necessary to have space and nutrition, which is less likely at the bottom of the groove Type 2
(. Fig. 3.14c ). Therefore, more important than the depth of
the pits and grooves is the form of the occlusal morphology,
which may or may not favor the retention of the bacterial
biofilm. With increasing tooth wear, teeth will show a
smoother surface, reducing the propensity to biofilm accumulation ( . Fig. 3.16a–d ). It was noticed that this fact reduces
the risk of lesion development despite the groove anatomy.
Conversely, grooves Type 3, bottle-shaped, are a concern
because this morphology allows the growth of the microbiota
in its interior ( . Fig. 3.14d ). However, this fissure type is only
seen in 10% of the teeth and is associated with the presence
of very high cusps. The presence of real fissures is another
problem because it favors the carious lesion to reach the dentin and it has a very fast progression. However, its frequency
is even smaller than the other configurations . Real fissures and pits are more common at the buccal groove of the
lower molars, where lesions progress into the dentin without
external signs, resulting later in lesions like the one observed
in 7 Fig. 5.13c .
The peculiar characteristics during the developing of carious lesions at occlusal surfaces, shaped as two cones, one over
the other, base against base, favor the expansion of the carious
lesion under clinically intact enamel. This special feature may
result in the phenomenon known as hidden caries lesion
(. Fig. 3.17a–c ) . Externally, the structure of the enamel is
kept intact, or sometimes there is a darkened aspect on the
groove, while internally the dentin can be completely compromised and the enamel undermined. Sometimes those
patients report pain when chewing and when consuming cold
or sweet food. The frequent presence of fluoride in the oral
cavity, increasing the resistance of the enamel against demineralization, is regarded as one of the factors that may propitiate the occurrence of hidden caries. In the past, before the
intense use of fluorides, the incidence of the hidden lesions
was lower, since the demineralized enamel fractured more
likely and exposed the cavity. However, the nowadays use of
fluorides is effective to keep the enamel around the grooves
a
b
.Fig. 3.13 Clinical aspect of a carious lesion. a Acute lesions; b chronicle lesionsCariology
90
3
and pits stable, thus keeping the dentin lesion hidden. Because
of that, some authors describe the great number of hidden
lesions found nowadays as the “fluoride syndrome” .
Even though the hidden carious lesion can clinically
manifest as darkened grooves and pits on the occlusal sur -
faces, the caries disease by itself is not the only reason for this
darkened aspect in those areas. Because of the retentive char -
acteristics of this region, residues coming from the diet, dead
bacteria, calculus, and many other dark coloring substances can deposit and seal those areas ( . Fig. 3.18a ). This phenomenon is called biological sealing. In . Fig. 3.18b , a transverse
cut of a darkened groove shows the presence of deposits,
without any evidence of caries. Therefore, the mere presence
of a darkened groove should not be considered as a sign for
caries.
> Merely the presence of a darkened groove should not
be considered as a sign for caries.
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 3.14 a Groove types. (Adapted from Roberson et al. );
b shallow and large groove; c narrow and deep groove; d bottleshaped groove; e macroscopic aspect of the buccal surface on a mandibular molar showing a pit at the end of the groove suggesting
the presence of a fissure; f existence of a direct connection between
the oral environment and dentin, representing a real fissure
T. M. F. Caneppele et al.
91 3
3.6.2 Lesions at the Proximal and Cervical
Third of Smooth Surfaces
The establishment of the proximal contact points hinders the
deposition of a bacterial biofilm exactly at this region.
However, below the contact area, the bacteria are protected
against removing oral forces, and together with a gingival
retraction, this place can favor the appearance of clinically detectable lesions. The shape of the proximal white spot is
determined by the biofilm location between the marginal
gingiva and the contact area, resulting in a lesion of an elliptic
or “kidney” shape. The cervical margin of the lesion is formed
following the contour of the marginal gingiva ( . Fig. 3.19a–
d). On the buccal and lingual surfaces, the deposit of bacterial biofilm happens in the region below the height of contour
(crest of curvature), where the friction with the food bolus is
not capable to remove it, following the edge of the marginal
gingiva ( . Fig. 3.20a–c ). From the necessity of intervention
point of view, lesions of smooth surfaces should not be
treated in an invasive approach as long as they are not cavitated. Those lesions may arrest if the bacterial biofilm is regularly disorganized and eating habits are changed. On the
buccal and lingual surfaces, the direct vision allows an easy
decision, and it is only mandatory that the surface is perfectly
clean. However, at the proximal surfaces, the verification of
surface integrity is more difficult.
3.6.3 Lesions at the Root Surface
The retraction of the gingival margin is a consequence of an
inadequate oral hygiene and the loss of the periodontal inser -
tion happening with age. As the gingival margin retracts, the
.Fig. 3.15 White spot lesion progressing at the side of the groove
a b
c d
.Fig. 3.16 Occlusal macro-morphology. a , b Irregular surface that favors the deposit of biofilm; c , d worn teeth impairing biofilm depositionCariology
92
3
enamel-dentin junction becomes exposed. This tooth region
is very irregular and represents the propitious area for bacterial accumulation. Consequently, most of the root caries start
at this area . Root exposure, especially in wide interproximal spaces, favors the growth of an undisturbed, protected
bacterial biofilm. The root caries comprehends an ongoing
sequence of clinical manifestation, starting from minuscule
areas of slightly softened and discolored dentin up to yellowbrownish extended areas, hard or softened, which can sometimes surround the entire root surface ( . Fig. 3.5a). The
lesions may or may not present a cavity. Besides the mutans
group streptococci and the lactobacilli, present in lesions at
other regions, the root carious lesion also may be colonized
with filamentary bacteria of the genus Actinomyces , which
secretions have a proteolytic effect. Patients with periodontal
disease often also suffer from root carious lesions.
a
b
c
.Fig. 3.17 a–c Hidden carious lesion with a minimal superficial opening and large cavitation in dentin
a
b
.Fig. 3.18 a Darkened grooves by deposit of pigments; b biological sealing inside the groove
T. M. F. Caneppele et al.
93 3
Initial root carious lesions appear as a radiolucent zone
on the root cement. Traumatic brushing, e.g., horizontal
brushing of the teeth with great pressure or scraping of the
root surfaces, damages and removes the cement exposing the
dentin. Therefore, initiation of the carious lesion happens
directly in the dentin, which was exposed to the oral environment. In contraposition to the initial lesions at the enamel,
the root carious lesions, even at its initial development, can
present a softened surface pattern. This results from the
microorganism that penetrates through the surface zones of
the lesions and because of collagen fibers that are partially
exposed by demineralization. Due to the specific microbiota,
the dentin destruction spreads much faster than in enamel
(. Figs. 3.21a–c and 3.37c, d ).
The root carious lesions can be classified as active or inactive [ 73]. The active lesions are defined as an area that demonstrates a yellowish or slightly brownish appearance, with
undefined borders. Mostly, this kind of lesion shows a visible
bacterial biofilm and presents a softened or leathery consistency when probing with moderate pressure ( . Fig. 3.22a ).
Inactive or arrested lesions present defined borders, with a
root surface with dark brown or black discoloration. When
probing with moderate pressure, this kind of lesion appears
smooth, bright, and hard ( . Fig. 3.22b, c ).3.7 Caries Diagnosis
For a long-lasting and profound treatment of caries, it is
important to detect the respective etiological and determinant factors in the patient and not only to treat lesions
that are already cavitated. The diagnosis of caries is not
the end point of treatment but a moment to start with
prognostic considerations and therapeutic decisions.
Many diagnostic methods are used, and they serve the
purpose to determine the presence of the disease and its
extension in a patient, allowing to choose the most suitable treatment alternative, to monitor the disease progression, to evaluate the efficacy of the treatment, and to
determine the presence of factors that may favor the
establishment and the progression of the caries. The main
objective when obtaining diagnostic information is to
improve the patient’s health, and not only to find symptoms and local conditions . The sooner the activity of
the disease can be identified, the more favorable will be
the prognosis, with greater chances of the re-establishment of the health without damage and sequela. Thus, a
precise diagnosis of the activity lesions is indispensable,
since this estimation will serve as an indicator for the progression of the disease allowing the adequate treatment.
ab
c d
.Fig. 3.19 Carious lesion aspect at the proximal surface. a White spot; b brownish spot; c , d cavityCariology
94
3
An ideal diagnostic tool should be trustworthy and capable to detect carious lesion at an initial stage, able to differentiate between reversible and irreversible lesions, and should
permit its documentation. If the aim of the diagnosis is the
early detection of the carious lesion, the clinician must detect
the demineralized areas on the enamel yet in the stage of
incipient white spot or at least before the lesions become a
cavity. If detected at this stage, lesions might be remineralized or arrested, especially with the help of fluoride applications . In addition, an ideal diagnostic method should
have accessible costs, guarantee the comfort of the patient,
and be fast and easy to use. It must also to be used in every
site of teeth with the same efficacy.
In recent times, knowledge of the total number of teeth
that presented carious lesions (prevalence), or the number
of new cases that happened during a defined period (incidence), were regarded as the main factors to estimate the
caries activity of a patient. That approach was only focused
on the signs of the disease and not on the etiology . The
caries disease does not start at the moment, when clinically
visible lesions appear, but much before that time point.
Therefore, the activity of the caries and its associated cariogenic factors must be considered to avoid progression of
existing or onset of new lesions. For optimal prevention, a
broader evaluation of the patient’s conditions is necessary, including the information about the patient’s diet, salivary
factors, and microbiota composition, thereby determining
if the patient has a high or a low caries risk [2 , 71, 90, 95].
Laboratorial exams to determine the buffering capacity,
salivary flux, and the number of Streptococcus mutans and
Lactobacillus were improved so that they become simpler,
faster, and easier to be conducted in the daily practice.
However, the often high costs and the limited gain of precise information have turned those tests frequently inacceptable . Measurement of the stimulated saliva flow,
collecting saliva during 5 min, may reveal patients with
hyposalivation or xerostomia, which indicates the necessity
of taking greater care of the teeth, medical exams, and
intensifications of the preventive measures .
Additionally, evaluation of the pH and the buffering capacity of the saliva may provide information about the caries
risk of a patient . High or very high lactobacilli counts
are associated, in many cases, with the high frequency of
ingestion of sugar or even a great number of the open carious lesions . The presence of high amount of
Streptococcus mutans in the saliva is related to the risk of
getting new lesions and could be a useful tool for motivation of the patient [4 , 22, 41, 59, 70, 86]. However, general
recommendations for using of the bacterial counting tests
as a risk assessment tool cannot be justified yet due to lack
a
b
c
.Fig. 3.20 Carious lesion on the buccal surface. a Opaque active lesions; b , c inactive shiny lesions with cavitation
T. M. F. Caneppele et al.
95 3
of well-designed studies [82, 92]. During the clinical examination, high-risk patients very often present multiple primary or secondary carious lesions, multiple endodontic
treatments and/or the lost teeth, and restorations on smooth
surfaces or on the root, besides a precarious oral hygiene
and complete lack of information. In contrast, the typical
low-risk patient does not present primary or recurrent
lesions, does not have a lack of teeth due to extractions or
endodontic treatment caused by caries, and presents no or
little restored surfaces and an adequate oral hygiene, with
high or good degree of information.
Tip
High caries-risk patients very often present multiple
primary or secondary carious lesions, multiple
endodontic treatments and/or the lost teeth, and
restorations on smooth surfaces or on the root, besides a
precarious oral hygiene and complete lack of
information about prevention.
> The caries disease does not start at the moment when
clinically visible lesions appear, but much before that
time point.3.7.1 Methods for Detecting and Diagnosing
Dental Carious Lesion
The word diagnostic has a Greek origin (diagnostikós), and it
means “knowledge or determination of a disease by mean of
signals and symptoms. ” Nowadays, diagnosis of the carious
aims to decide if a demineralization is present, to investigate
the depth of mineral loss and the presence of cavities, besides
to the information, whether the process is progressing on a
fast or slow speed or if it is arrested . For a minimally
invasive dentistry approach and maximum preservation of
tooth structure, the earliest detection of the carious lesion is
required. When detected in its initial stages, the lesion progression can be stopped . Precise diagnosis of noncavitated lesions is extremely valuable, as an estimation of
caries activity, to detect circumstance that needs to be treated
with a more intensive preventive program .
Many methods can be used to determine the presence or
the absence of carious lesions. To analyze how precisely a
diagnostic method reflects reality, dichotomous analysis can
be performed (presence or absence of the disease), and the
results can be compared with another evaluation, called validation standard or “gold” standard. The diagnostic decisions
can be positive or negative for the absence of a lesion, and
depending on the real state, four types of results can be
obtained:
a
b
c
.Fig. 3.21 a–c Root carious lesion at proximal surface with preservation of enamel and destruction of the adjacent dentinCariology
96
3
5True positive decisions – The diagnostic method used
was positive for the presence of the lesion, and the
validation standard confirmed this result.
5True negative decisions – The diagnostic method used
was negative for the presence of the lesion, and the
validation standard confirmed this result.
5False-positive decisions – The diagnostic method used
was positive for the presence of the lesion, and the
validation standard did not confirm this result.
5False-negative decisions – The diagnostic method used
was negative for the presence of the lesion, and the
validation standard did not confirm this result.
This way, sensitivity of a method, its capacity to diagnose
correctly cases in which the lesion really exists (true positive results), and the specificity of a method, its capacity to
correctly diagnose the cases where the lesion is absent
(true negative), can be defined. Ideally, a diagnostic
method must not be invasive and must give reliable and
repeatable results, with a high level of sensitivity and specificity. Unfortunately, none of the available methods present a % precise result in relation to the existence or not
of lesions on all surfaces .3.7.1.1 Anamnesis
Diagnosis of caries and caries risk starts already with the
anamnesis of the patient. The patient needs to be asked
about the existence of pain symptom in tooth, spontaneous
or provoked. Some patients report pain when consuming
cold or sweet food or drinks, or when they touch the tooth.
The temperature variation produced by the cold and variation of the osmotic concentration by the sugar provoke a
dentin fluid movement, which leads to hypersensitivity and
pain. Presence of pain to a simple touch of a tooth may be
signs of pulpal inflammatory process, which must be fur -
ther investigated.
3.7.1.2 Visual Examination
The visual examination is the simplest way to check for
abnormalities or diseases of dental structures. It is selfevident that a removal of the entire bacterial biofilm and/or
extrinsic stains should precede the examination. Cotton rolls
must be placed and the surface must be completely dried
with a blow of air. A good illumination of the operating field
is also fundamental. The teeth must be analyzed with a clinical mirror of good quality, preferably to the ones with a
reflexive area on the surface of the mirror, also called first
a
b
c
.Fig. 3.22 Carious lesion at the cervical region. a Active; b , c inactive
T. M. F. Caneppele et al.
97 3
surface mirror ( . Fig. 4.41a–c ). All tooth surfaces should be
inspected. Plaque disclosing agents may help to determine
the presence and quantity of bacterial biofilm. The eruption
stage of teeth should also be evaluated, and presence of gingiva partially covering the occlusal surface of an erupting
tooth should be noted, since it can increase the retention of a
biofilm. After the tooth cleaning, cotton roll isolation, and
drying, the existence of dark groove and groove with white
spot lesions at the entrance has to be verified.
In . Fig. 3.23, a human tooth extracted with occlusal
dark-colored grooves is shown. After it was sectioned in two
parts, none of them present a carious lesion, showing that the
dark discoloration was only due to staining. In . Fig. 3.24,
the darkened areas were associated with white spot lesions
that were arrested and then stained. Even though there was a
demineralization of the dentin, a cavity was not created, and
the lesion was arrested. In . Figs. 3.25 and 3.26, teeth with
some grooves only stained and other with cavities are shown.
This corroborates the before-mentioned fact that darkening
of grooves is not a good indicator for the presence of a carious lesion. A darkened groove can simply be a biological
sealing or an inactive white spot lesion, which was stained by
dyeing substances in the diet. However, it can also be related
with cavities and hidden carious lesions on dentin, which
aggravates the diagnosis.
Carious lesions are cavitated when the collapse of the
undermined enamel has happened. In those cases, diagnosis
is simple, and the coloration of the dentin should be analyzed, which may give a hint to the caries activity. A dentin
lesion with light brown color and wet appearance indicates
an active lesion (acute), while a darkened and dry dentin may
serve as an indicator for an inactive lesion or little activity
(chronic) ( . Fig. 3.27a, b ).
Diagnose is much more impaired for un-cavitated
lesions with an apparently intact enamel surface. An indicator for the presence of a lesion in dentin is the presence of
opacity through the enamel adjacent to a darkened groove
(. Fig. 3.28). Another indicator for the presence of dentin
lesions are microcavities that may be associated with white spots (. Fig. 3.29a, b ). However, some studies showed that
when microcavities are clinically detectable in grooves, in
fact, only 31–42.7% of real lesions exist in the underlying
dentin. In contrast, when the microcavities were associated
to the presence of adjacent white spots, dentin lesions
were existent in 78–91.2% of the cases. This means that the
.Fig. 3.23 Teeth with darkened grooves showing the absence of
lesions on the transversal section
.Fig. 3.24 Teeth with discolored groove showing the presence of
arrested and pigmented carious lesions in enamel, without cavitation
.Figs. 3.25 and 3.26 Teeth with discolored groove showing the
absence of lesions, on the transversal section in certain region of the
central groove, and cavitated lesion at other sitesCariology
98
3
association of white spots and microcavities is a strong
indicator of the need of intervention on an occlusal lesion
. The visual exam of the occlusal surface by itself has a
sensitivity of 62% and a specificity of 84% .
On the proximal surfaces, the visual exam can be effective
in the cases where the lesion has already considerably developed toward the marginal ridge. An alteration in color right
below the ridge can be observed. In more advanced lesions,
even a rupture of the ridge might appear ( . Figs. 3.30a, b and
3.31a, b ). All teeth must be also observed from the buccal and
lingual aspects, searching for any changes in color and translucency.
At root carious lesion on the buccal or lingual surfaces,
the visual exam must determine whether the lesion is active
or inactive. However, the main difficulty is found at proximal
surfaces, where there is no access to direct vision, and complementary examinations are necessary.
3.7.1.3 Tactile Examination
In the past, it was recommended for diagnosing occlusal
lesions that a very sharp exploratory probe was moved
through the bottom of the grooves. Retention of the probe
should indicate carious lesions needed to be treated. However, it was demonstrated that 30–60% of the pits and
grooves, where the instrument gets stuck, did not present
carious lesions. The instrument may get retained only
because of the occlusal anatomy, leading to a wrong diagnosis, as shown in . Fig. 3.32a–d . The probing can also cause
destruction of the surface zone of a white spot lesion,
thereby creating a cavity with bacterial invasion into the
lesion body [21, 24]. In addition, when probing all grooves,
cariogenic bacteria can be transferred from one place to
another, contamination sites which were previously free
from this kind of bacteria . Some studies also demonstrate that the use of probing is not more precise than the
visual examination by itself, to detect occlusal incipient
lesions, showing low sensitivity . Therefore, the explor -
atory probe should only be used at open lesions to check the
consistency of the dentin tissue. Probing of intact surfaces
of root caries lesions with a sharp probe may create also
small cavities, thus reducing the chance of remineralization. Therefore, a periodontal probe with a blunt tip must
be used, such as a WHO ball-ended probe, making possible
to feel the consistency of the tissue, without damaging the
surface. On the proximal surfaces, the tactile exam can be
performed with a dental floss. In case the dental floss comes
to rip when passing this region, a cavity with sharp edges
might be present in the region.
3.7.1.4 Radiographic Examination
The radiographic examination is the most important auxiliary tool to diagnose carious lesion, showing whether a cer -
tain loss of dental mineral is present or not. It presents the
advantages of being not invasive, allows the detection of hidden lesions, and is helpful to follow progression or regression
of lesions. However, it is not capable to detect lesions at early
stages, because the little mineral loss at this stage is not high
enough to be visible on a radiographic image . In addition, it does not directly distinguish between presence and
absence of cavitation. However, the depth of the lesion as
depicted on a radiograph mostly correlates with the status of
the surface. That means, the deeper a lesion is on an X-ray,
the more probable a cavitation is present. Due to the overlapa
b
.Fig. 3.27 Open occlusal carious lesions. a Acute carious lesion; b chronic carious lesion
.Fig. 3.28 Presence of opacity under enamel
T. M. F. Caneppele et al.
99 3
ping of images, there is a risk of a false-positive result, gener -
ating images of ambiguous interpretation.
With respect to occlusal surface lesions, the radiographic
examination is able to detect 33% of incipient carious lesions
in dentin and % of deep caries lesions. The occlusal changes are observed on a radiography, when the demineralization has histologically reached the medium third of the
dentin (2–3 mm beyond the DEJ). At this stage an invasive
treatment might be required . In general, the time from
the onset of an occlusal lesion until reaching a radiographic
a
b
.Fig. 3.29 a Presence of the micro-cavitation and opaque areas below the enamel (arrow); b carious tissue removed by cavity preparation
a
b
.Fig. 3.30 Clinical signs of a carious lesion at the proximal surfaces. a Darkened aspects under the marginal ridge; b breakage of the marginal
ridge
a
b
.Fig. 3.31 Clinical signs of a carious lesion at the proximal surfaces of anterior teeth. a Darkened aspect under the marginal ridge; b open
cavityCariology
3
evidence in dentin can take from 3 to 9 years . In
. Fig. 3.33a–d , radiographic images of lesions of the occlusal
surfaces are shown. Monitoring of existing lesions can be
conducted as an alternative to invasive treatments. In patients
with high caries risk, radiographic examination might be
advisable to be performed every 1–2 years, whereas in
patients with low risk, it can be performed every 2–4 years.
Indication to an invasive treatment has a direct relation
with the presence of a cavitation, which is not accessible to
regular removal of biofilm with oral hygiene measures. A
cavitation often makes it impossible, at least at proximal
regions, to remove the bacterial biofilm, thus rendering control of the lesion impossible. In those cases, a restoration will
turn the previously cavitated surface into a smooth surface,
which could be adequately kept clean. Following these considerations, only cavitated and not accessible lesions must be
restored. White spot lesion should be treated with preventive
measures. However, at the proximal surfaces being in contact
with adjacent teeth, the surface of a lesion could not be
directly checked. Thus, decision taking must be based on
indirect methods as radiographic examination. To get confir -
mation if a proximal lesion is cavitated or not, it might be
helpful to perform a tooth separation, using orthodontic
rubbers for 1–2 days. After this the teeth may be separated
enough to allow direct vision to the proximal surfaces. In studies, injection of a silicone impression material into the
proximal space is often done. After curing and removal, the
presence or absence of cavitation could be verified in the
impression ( . Fig. 3.48a–i ).
Based on the radiographic image, the caries lesion on the
proximal surface can be classified according to its depth in
one of six scores. For that, enamel is divided into two halves,
while the dentin is divided in three thirds ( . Fig. 3.34). When
nothing is seen, the score E0 is applied. When the lesion is
located on outer half of the enamel, it is classified as E1, while
when reaching the inner half of the enamel, it is scored E2.
The lesions located on the outer third of dentin are D1, while
reaching the middle third of dentin, they scored as D2.
Finally, when located on the inner third of dentin, they
scored as D3 . Studies tried to correlate the depth of the
lesion, according to the radiographic image, and the presence
of cavitation. They observed that E1 lesions had almost no
cavitation, while E2 was cavitated in only 10–19.3% of the
cases [3, 80]. However, 32% of D1 lesions were cavitated,
while 72% of lesions extending into the inner 2/3 of the dentin (D2 and D3) also showed cavitation . In addition,
some studies observed that when the radiolucency reaches
the inner third of dentin (D3), cavitation was present in %
of the cases [3, 67, 80]. Taking this into consideration, the
depth of a carious lesion on a radiographic image allows to
ab
cd
.Fig. 3.32 Retention of the exploratory probe in the groove due to the occlusal anatomy. a Occlusal view; b retention of the probe;
c, d transversal cut of the area, where the probe got stuck, showing the absence of lesion
T. M. F. Caneppele et al.
3
estimate the cavitation risk, selecting between an invasive or
noninvasive intervention. Therefore, invasive restorative
treatments are not recommended until radiolucency has
reached dentin. In . Fig. 3.35a–e , examples of X-rays of various situations are given. It should however be noted that the
radiographic examination of the proximal surfaces has high
specificity (95%) but only a moderate sensitivity (59%) .It has to be noticed that lesions visible on a radiography
have more deeply progressed histologically. . Figure 3.36
presents a relation between the histological, radiographic,
and clinical aspects of a carious lesion at proximal surfaces.
In summary, when the carious lesion in enamel has histologically reached at least half of the thickness of the enamel,
it is not visible clinically nor radiographically. Only when it
has reached more than half of the thickness of the enamel
histologically, it will appear as a radiolucent area in the outer
half of the enamel and clinically as a white spot. Only the
lesion that is radiographically already in dentin shows association to clinical or histological presence of a cavitation.
The radiographic examination is also valuable, in cases,
in which a lesion is hidden inside a periodontal pocket. Those
lesions present a very fast progression, and the patients
should be monitored radiographically more often than
patients with a low caries risk. In . Fig. 3.37a–d , X-rays with
radiolucent areas suggesting carious lesions at root surfaces
are depicted.
Nowadays, besides the radiographic films, sensors are
available that transfer the information of the image directly
to a personal computer. The advantage of digital radiographies is the possibility to process the image by a software,
adjusting the contrast and brightness, allowing a better
observation of the details, and performing more precise diagnosis . There is also a possibility of using a computerab
cd
.Fig. 3.33 Radiographic images suggestive of carious lesions at the occlusal surfaces (arrows)
D3D2D1E1E2
.Fig. 3.34 Classification of caries lesions according its depth. The
enamel is divided into two halves (E1 and E2), while the dentin is
divided in three thirds (D1, D2, D3)Cariology
3
aided detection tool, which is a software analyzing tooth
density and demineralization patterns for interproximal car -
ies (Logicon Caries Detector, Carestream Dental, Atlanta,
GA, USA). It extracts characteristics of the images from the
digital radiography and correlates it with a database of known
lesions, allowing to obtain more information from digital
radiography than with the naked eye. This software analyzes shades of gray and is capable to localize and classify proximal
carious lesions, indicating the depth of the lesions . The
image shows superimposing lines representing the borders of
the lesion over the image from the digital radiography,
besides graphics indicating changes of mineral density and
the probability of the presence of a carious lesion [32, 93]. A
study showed a sensitivity of 90.5% and specificity of 88.3%
ab
c
ed
.Fig. 3.35 Radiolucent images of proximal surfaces of posterior teeth. a Lesion on the outer half of the enamel, E1; b inner half of the enamel,
E2; c outer third of the dentin, D1; d middle third of the dentin, D2; e inner third of dentin, D3
T. M. F. Caneppele et al.
3
when the software was used . The author highlighted that
the software use promoted 20.2% of improvement on the
sensitivity, in relation to when it was not employed .
3.7.1.5 Fiber-Optic Transillumination
The principle of the fiber-optic transillumination (FOTI) is
based on the fact that the teeth present different light transmission indexes that may vary accordingly to its state of
healthiness, the presence or not of carious lesions, calculus,
and restorative materials. Taking into account that a carious
lesion presents a lower light transmission index than the
intact structure, an area affected by caries will be seen, when
transilluminated, as a dark shadow that follows the external
contour of the lesion . With this examination tool, dental
calculus appears as a dark area involving the cervical third of
the tooth. For adequate use of FOTI, teeth should be clean
and the light of the dental unit must be turned off. A lightemitting device with an optical fiber probe tip is used, with
interchangeable tips of various diameters, or even a low-level
laser device emitting visible red light.
For the detection of the proximal lesion in anterior teeth,
the probe tip must be applied on the lingual aspect, and the
alteration of the light transmission is observed on the labial
side, or vice versa ( . Fig. 3.38a, b ). On the proximal areas of
posterior teeth, a small probe tip with 0.5 cm in diameter
must be used to get information of the proximal tooth sur -
face (. Fig. 3.38c, d ). The tooth must be dry and the probe tip
be positioned below the proximal contact point, touching the
gingiva from buccal or lingual sides. The changes in light
transmission can be observed from the occlusal aspect, on
the marginal ridge. If a lesion is present, a darkened shadow
will appear. This method diagnoses most of the proximal
carious lesions in dentin. For the occlusal surface lesions, a
probe tip of 2 mm in diameter must be positioned next to the
margin of the gingiva on the buccal or lingual surface. The
changes on the light transmission will be visible as shadows on the occlusal surface. However, this could lead to
ambiguous results, due to the specific morphology of this
region. Nevertheless, FOTI can be an auxiliary to the visual
exam to detect extensive hidden lesion in dentin [65, 75, 94].
Transillumination can also be used at anterior teeth to verify
the presence and the extension of composite restorations and
recurrent caries at the gingival margins. The transillumination method presents the advantage of not being invasive,
being simple and comfortable for the patients, and not
requiring radiation, being very valuable when a radiography
is not possible to be performed.
An innovation of FOTI method was the introduction of
computer-assisted image analysis of the transilluminated
area, called digital imaging fiber-optic transillumination
(DIFOTI, Electro-Optical Science, Irvington, NY , USA). For
that, the light from a probe is placed on one side of a tooth,
and the image in the non-illuminated opposite side is captured by a camera and then analyzed by a software. This
method has the potential to detect initial lesion and to evaluate its progression, besides the possibility of image documentation . Under in vitro conditions, the diagnostic accuracy
of DIFOTI in detecting early approximal enamel lesions is
greater than that of film and digital radiography, while the
potential for detecting lesions in dentin is similar for all three
methods [ 10].
While the FOTI and DIFOTI use visible light, the possibility of using near-infrared light was also investigated
. It was observed that longer wavelengths showed lower
light scattering inside the tooth structure, being able to
penetrate more deeply and produce a higher contrast
between the caries and the sound hard tissue [38, 51]. Thus,
the near-infrared light transillumination (NILT) method
was created, and a new camera was developed, named
DIAGNOcam (KaVo, Biberach, Germany). The camera has
two light sources, using a wavelength of nm, which are
placed buccally and lingually to the tooth to be examined,
illuminating the crown from cervical to occlusal and not
directly into the interproximal space. A digital video camera is located above the occlusal surface and shows the
scene live on the screen, in monochromatic grayscale, being
possible to capture different stages of interproximal enamel
and dentin lesions and cracks, which are clearly visibly as
darker shadows ( . Fig. 3.39). Studies showed a sensitivity of
72.73–99.2% for lesion on DEJ [56, 98] DIAGNOcam is
more capable of detecting initial proximal lesions than
digital radiography and also has a higher sensitivity for
dentin lesions .
3.7.1.6 Electrical Conductance Measurements
This method is based on the principle that the electrical conductance of the enamel is directly related to the degree of the
porosity of the tissue. In principle, intact enamel is a good
electrical insulator. During development of a carious lesion,
mineral loss results in an increase of the porosities that, in
general, are filled with water and saliva ions. With the
increase of the size of the pores, a network of interconnected
water-filled paths allows the passage of electrical current,
HISTO PAHOL OGY
NAKED EY E
NAKED EY EWHITE SPO T
CAVITYPROBE
.Fig. 3.36 Schematic drawing of the histological stages of a carious
lesion correlating with the radiographic and clinical examination.
Histological aspect of the lesion is always bigger than the clinical and
radiographic. (Adapted from Darling )Cariology
3
reducing the insulating characteristic of the dental enamel.
Therefore, the greater the demineralization degree of the
enamel, the greater the electrical conductivity is . The
device indicates the dental structural integrity through visual
and sound signals. It presents an electrode that is placed on
the dental surface and a handpiece, which is given to the
patient to hold, closing the electrical circuit of low intensity (3 μA) (. Fig. 3.40a, b ). A study showed a sensitivity of 61%
and specificity of 86% for the diagnosis of enamel lesions on
the occlusal surfaces and sensitivity and specificity values
both of 76% for lesions in dentin . Examples available on
the market are the Electronic Caries Monitor III (ECM III;
LODE, Groningen, The Netherlands) and the CarieScan
(CarieScan Limited, Dundee, Scotland).
a b
cd
.Fig. 3.37 Radiographic images associated with carious lesion on the root surfaces
T. M. F. Caneppele et al.
3
3.7.1.7 Fluorescence Measurements
This method is based on the principle of fluorescence of
chromophores naturally incorporated in the mineralized
dental hard tissues or originating from bacteria. When those
chromophores, e.g., porphyrin or porphyrin derivatives, are
stimulated by light with specific wavelengths, they absorb incident light and emit a light with another color, called fluorescence.
For the principle of QLF (quantitative light-induced fluorescence), it is important to notice that tooth fluorescence is
caused by the presence of the chromophores inside enamel
and dentin. When a sound tooth is irradiated with blue light,
the chromophores inside the dentin are excited, shining with
green dentin back-illumination. Due to the carious process,
the enamel is getting more porous, leading to scattering of the
dentin back-illumination in the enamel. Thus, the illumination is reduced in the area of the white spot lesion, providing a
“dark” reflection of the tooth at this site. The reflected light is
captured by a camera and analyzed by software that quantifies
the mineral loss (Inspektor Dental Care, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands). . Figure 3.41a, b shows an extraoral camera for
obtaining images of whole arcs of teeth (e.g., frontal, sides,
occlusal, and lingual) and an intraoral QLF camera for zooming in on specific element surfaces. The dental fluorescence
information can be stored in a computer and used for monitoring of initial lesions [5 ]. As mentioned, the incipient lesions
appear as dark spots, while more extended lesions ( . Fig. 3.41d )
and the biofilm ( . Fig. 3.41f ) appear in red, indicating the
presence of bacteria. This can easily be shown to the patient,
increasing the motivation for preventive daily practices .
The DIAGNOdent device (KaVo, Germany) works with a
different principle. It irradiates the tooth with red light at
ab
cd
.Fig. 3.38 Transillumination of a carious lesion. a , b Interproximal area of anterior teeth; c , d interproximal area of posterior teeth
.Fig. 3.39 Transillumination of caries lesion on the proximal surface
(arrow) using DIAGNOcam (KaVo). (Image kindly provided by Dr. Pune
Nina Paqué (Zurich University – Switzerland))Cariology
nm coming from a diode laser. When the probe is directed
to a tooth surface, it induces fluorescence from chromophores,
which can be captured and measured. The results are presented on an electronic screen with values from 0 to 99. The
lower the mineral content of the structure, the more chromophores are incorporated and the greater the fluorescence is. A direct correlation exists between the measured value and the
size of the lesion ( . Fig. 3.42a ) [28, 75]. It however shows
some problems in the detection of lesions when organic, fluorescent residues in the grooves and pits are present, giving a
false-positive result. Therefore, prophylaxis with a sodium
bicarbonate abrasive blast or bristle brush with pumice should
a
b
.Fig. 3.40 Device for caries detection using electrical conductance measurement (CarieScan)
a b
cd
.Fig. 3.41 Quantitative light-induced fluorescence. a Extraoral QLF
camera for obtaining images of whole arcs of teeth (Qraycam,
Inspektor Research Systems); b intraoral QLF camera (Qraypen,
Inspektor Research Systems); c image under natural light showing proximal lesions (arrows); d under blue light, the red fluorescence of
the caries lesion (arrows) helps the diagnosis; e image of the lower arch
under natural light (the biofilm is not visible); f red fluorescence of the
biofilm in molars and tongue under the blue light
T. M. F. Caneppele et al.
3
be performed before the reading, to remove the residues of
organic material. For the use of this device, the surface to be
evaluated needs to be cleaned and dried. It has a sensitivity to
detect lesions in enamel on the occlusal surface of 79% and a
specificity of 74% . It is not adequate for diagnosis of
recurrent caries next to restorative materials, and it is not
capable to differentiate active from inactive lesions .
The Canary System (Quantum Dental Technologies,
Toronto, Canada) uses a low-power pulsed laser light, which
is converted to heat to detect caries lesions ( . Fig. 3.42b ).
Usually, caries modifies the thermal properties and luminescence of teeth. As a lesion grows, a corresponding change of
those parameters appear. When the light from The Canary
System is absorbed, these two phenomena are observed,
namely, the occurrence of fluorescence (luminescence) and
the release of heat (photothermal effect). The reflected heat
from a demineralized caries lesion site is increased, and the
fluorescence signal of a caries-affected tooth is decreased [1,
49]. The temperature rise is only 1–2 °C, and it does not cause
harm on the tooth. A study showed a sensitivity of 93.3% and
specificity of 82.5 for proximal lesions . However, at the moment there is a lack of independent studies for giving a
final judgment of the system.
A new generation of intraoral cameras came to the mar -
ket with multiple functions. They can be used as regular
intraoral cameras, with illumination provided by white LEDs,
or as special diagnostic tools when the illumination is provided by colored LEDs, capable to induce tooth fluorescence.
They also offer some software to analyze the collected images
and help the clinician with the treatment decision. One
example is Soprolife (Acteon, La Ciotat, France), an intraoral
camera that has blue LEDs capable to induce the autofluorescence, helping to identify caries-affected areas. The software
can work on the image, and the caries lesions are detected as
red color, while the surrounding tissue is displayed in black
and white. Another example is VistaCam iX (Durr Dental,
Bietigheim-Bissingen, Germany), which has interchangeable
heads intended for specific uses . The “Proof ” head emits
violet light ( nm) that stimulates bacterial metabolites,
causing them to glow red. The healthy enamel can be identified by green fluorescence. A software shows caries via a color
scale and numerical values ( . Fig. 3.43 ).
ab
.Fig. 3.42 Device to quantification of the induced fluorescence by laser. a DIAGNOdent; b The Canary System .Fig. 3.41 (continued)
efCariology
3
3.7.1.8 Reflection and Refraction
Measurement
The technology for measurement of the reflection and the
refraction of the tooth using LED light source (Midwest
Caries I.D., Dentsply Professional, Y ork, PA, USA) has been
developed to detect caries lesions. The functioning of the
device is based on the fact that the whole enamel, due to the
layering of adjacent prisms, presents a translucent crystalline
nature, which allows light to pass through it. When there is a
demineralization, the crystalline structure is degraded, nar -
rowing the prisms and leaving spaces between them. As a
result of that, carious enamel is less translucent than sound
enamel. To detect a carious lesion, the device emits a light
that comes from an LED and penetrates through the enamel.
It uses three separated optic fibers inside the probe, the first
emits green light, the second emits red light, and the third is
a receptor fiber, to collect the light reflected by the tooth. If
the enamel is sound, the light is absorbed by the tooth and
the green light remains turned on. If a demineralization is
present, the light will be reflected, refracted, or spread. The
receptor fiber will capture this light, and the green light will
be turned off, while the red one will be turned on. At the same time, a sound signal will be emitted, alerting the user
that the structure has changed ( . Fig. 3.44). This method has
shown its capability to diagnose 92% of the occlusal lesions
and 80% of the proximal lesions . For the detection of the
proximal lesions, the probe needs to be directed parallel to
the long axis of the tooth over the marginal ridge.
The same VistaCam iX (Durr Dental), previously discussed for fluorescence evaluation, has also a “Proxi” inter -
changeable head intended for detection of proximal caries by
reflection of infrared light (λ = nm) ( . Fig. 3.45a ). That
wavelength makes healthy enamel appear translucent, while
caries lesions, by reflecting more waves, create a light opaque
appearance on the image ( . Fig. 3.45b ) .
3.7.1.9 Image Magnification Method
It seems obvious that magnification of the image sizes of the
tooth structure helps to improve diagnosis and detection of
irregularities. Studies comparing caries detection and diagnosis performed by dentists with naked eyes, with the results
obtained using magnifications aids, showed better results for
the groups using the support of magnifications [31, 90]. The
videoscope method uses an intraoral camera to aid the diaga b
cd
.Fig. 3.43 Intraoral camera inducing the tooth’s autofluorescence.
a View of the occlusal surface of a caries-affected tooth under natural
light; b scheme showing the occlusal surface being illuminated by
violet light, causing red fluorescence of the caries lesion. (Picture kindly provided by Dürr Dental SE, Germany); c image obtained by VistaCam
(Dürr Dental) showing red glowing on the caries-affected area. d Image
analyzed by software, converting the fluorescent emission to different
colors according to the caries lesion depth
T. M. F. Caneppele et al.
3
nostic process ( . Fig. 3.46a, b ). Its advantage is that it gener -
ates an image 5–10 times bigger than the naked eye, and that
is part of a computer system, which allows adjustment of
brightness and contrast of the image. Similar to the visual
exam with naked eyes, the tooth surface must be clean and
dry. Some studies demonstrated that this method increases
the sensitivity but it reduces the specificity. Other possibilities to get magnified images are the use of operative microscopes, or magnifying lenses and loupes ( 7 Fig. 4.57a , b).
3.7.1.10 Temporary Elective Tooth Separation
Due to the difficulty of diagnosing carious lesions at proximal
surfaces, the technique of the temporary elective tooth separation can be a help, allowing direct visible access to the proximal surface. It can be performed by the immediate or delayed
technique. The immediate technique uses mechanical separators or wooden wedges to separate the teeth ( . Fig. 3.47a–c ).
Initially a topical anesthesia is applied on the interdental gin-gival papilla, and the separator is placed and slowly closed.
However, there is some discomfort, and if it is not done carefully, it can cause damage to the periodontal tissues.
The slow or delayed technique consists in using orthodontic rubber band separators ( . Fig. 3.48). They can be
positioned by two dental tweezers or two pieces of dental
floss (. Fig. 3.49a–i ). When it is placed, the rubber ring must
surround the proximal contact. It should stay in position for
24 h (incisors), 3 days (premolars), and up to 1 week (molars).
The space gained varies from 0.35 to 1 mm. After this period,
there is a direct vision to the proximal surface allowing for
diagnosis of caries lesions or cavities ( . Figs. 3.49f and 3.50b ).
Also, a light silicone impression material can be injected into
the interproximal space, using an impression syringe with a
thin tip ( . Fig. 3.49g ). The impression can be used for
checking presence of cavitation at this proximal area
(. Fig. 3.49i ). After the rubber ring is removed, space will
close itself in about 48 h.
Red indicator fiber
Green indicator fiber
Receptor fiber
.Fig. 3.44 Midwest Caries ID (Dentsply)Cariology
3Besides the abovementioned supplementary tools for
detecting and diagnosing caries, there are others on the mar -
ket or in developmental state, which are not described in this chapter. Generally, it should be noticed that there is no
instrument or device, which alone provides enough information for a correct detection and diagnosis of caries. They
should be seen as supplementary devices to support the
visual and radiographic evaluation.
3.7.2 Secondary Carious Lesions
Patients may present carious lesion at the margins of existing restorations, generally called secondary carious lesions.
It is nowadays considered just another primary carious
lesion, located near to an existing restoration. They can be a
result of mistakes during the restorative procedures, as the
incorrect use of the matrix and wedge system or the incor -
rect placement of the restorative material into the cavity,
resulting in defective spaces at the interface, or the incor -
rect use of the adhesive system and light-curing, leading to
the formation of marginal gaps. One important reason for
the appearance of new secondary lesions is the fact that
only the carious lesion was treated, and not the disease of
the patient, thus leaving the caries risk on high level.
Therefore, new lesions will happen, and many of them will
begin on the interface between tooth and restorations,
because it is a propitious region for biofilm retention.
Clinical studies observed that in adults, secondary carious
lesions are eight times more frequent than the primary
ones, especially on those who are more than 50 years old
[11, 37]. Thus, secondary carious is the greatest reason for
the failure of restorations.
The difficulties on the diagnostics of the secondary lesions
are, in some aspects, similar to the one of the primary lesion.
As with primary lesions, there is a difficulty in differentiating
whether the lesion is active or inactive. There is no current
method providing an insight into the activity of secondary
lesions. Wall lesions are secondary carious lesions, which
occur at the interface between the restorative material and
the cavity wall. The color next to the amalgam restoration
represents a problem for proper diagnosis, since the gray or
bluish appearance can either be because of amalgam corro-a
b
.Fig. 3.45 Detection of caries lesion by reflection of infrared light.
a Scheme of light emission and reflection by the Proxi head of
VistaCam iX (Dürr Dental). b Image of the proximal surface. The healthy
enamel appears translucent, while the caries lesions, by reflecting more
waves, show a light opaque appearance (arrows). (Images kindly
provided by Dürr Dental SE, Germany)
a
b
.Fig. 3.46 a Intraoral camera; b camera in position to obtain an image
T. M. F. Caneppele et al.
3
sion or due to secondary lesions . On the other hand,
with composite restorations, the interfacial staining and the
presence of darkened areas under the enamel, next to the
margins, can be an indicator that marginal microleakage is
going on, and it can be associated to the presence of secondary lesions ( . Fig. 3.51a–f ). However, marginal staining of
composite restorations should not be considered as the key indicator for existence of secondary caries. With time, all
adhesive interface soaks some water and saliva, accompanied
by discoloring agents. Thus, marginal staining must not be
mixed up with secondary caries.
Lesions at proximal surfaces represent 94% of secondary lesions at amalgam restorations and 62% at composite
restorations . Due to superimpositions on a radiograph,
they cannot in all cases be detected on X-rays .
Therefore, the radiography must be used in conjunction
with a meticulous clinical examination, including probing
of the margins, to determine if the lesion has or has not a
cavity [ 11]. During probing, it must be verified if there is
lack or excess of restorative material on the margins, as well
the presence of the marginal ditches. For that, the probe
must be moved from the surface of the restoration toward
the tooth structure, and vice versa, crossing the interface. If
the probe gets stuck on both ways, there is a ditch on the
interface. If it gets stuck only toward the restoration, there is
an excess of restorative material, and it should be removed.
If it gets stuck only toward the tooth, there is a lack of material. On those cases of lack of material and ditch, a restor -
ative intervention will only be necessary if there is an
exposure of dentin. In . Fig. 3.51a–f , clinical images of secondary carious lesions are shown, while in . Fig. 3.52a–d
radiographic images are presented.
a
b
c
.Fig. 3.47 Immediate dental separation. a Ivory (for anterior teeth) and Eliot (for posterior teeth) separators; b Ivory separator in position;
c Eliot separator in position
.Fig. 3.48 Orthodontic rubber band separators with different
diametersCariology
3
3.8 Treatment Decision
For treatment decision after caries diagnoses, many factors
must be considered. Firstly the caries risk of the patient
must be taken into consideration and should be addressed.
In case of lesions imposing risk to pulpal vitality, a possible
approach might be to close cavities temporarily, e.g., with
glass ionomer cement, thus achieving an oral environment
stabilization (OES). This reduces the oral bacterial load and
allows for interventions to reduce the carious risk before
final treatment. The goal is to achieve an oral environment, in which demineralized areas may remineralize and in
which no new lesions will appear in the future. In case of
unclear situations, which do not definitively indicate an
active cavitated carious lesion, which is inaccessible to
hygiene measures, or in patients with low caries risk, a more
restrictive and defensive attitude should be applied. Under
those circumstances the indication to perform restorative
procedures should be postponed and reevaluated after
monitoring. It should be considered that progression of initial carious lesion may take some years before approaching
inner dentin areas . .Fig. 3.49 Delayed dental separation technique followed by
impression. a Radiography showing radiolucent image on the mesial
surface; b darkened aspect under the marginal ridge; c –e placing the rubber ring with dental floss straps; f separation was reached;
g, h silicone injection into the space; i mold showing the presence of
cavitation (arrow)
ab
cd
ef
T. M. F. Caneppele et al.
3
> Individuals present individual caries risk, which should
be considered and addressed by dentists.
3.9 ICDAS
The International Caries Detection and Assessment System
(ICDAS) is a scoring system for clinical detection and assessment of dental caries lesion. Its aim is to obtain quality infor -
g
ih
.Fig. 3.49 (continued)
a
b
.Fig. 3.50 a, b Tooth separation that allowed enough space to have a direct view to the cavity, without the need of impression
Tip
5Consider the caries risk and activity before treat -
ment decision.
5Use different methods for caries diagnosis to prove
presence or absence of cavitated caries lesions.
5Establish individual regimes to maintain intraoral
conditions favoring oral health.Cariology
3
mation for an appropriate diagnosis, prognosis of caries, and
clinical management. Based on the measurement of surface
characteristic of the lesion, mainly by visual analysis, the
potential histological depth and activity of the lesion is considered, helping the decision-making process about the most
recommended treatment. The system has two criteria, which
are the detection and the activity of the lesions. The original
ICDAS was created in , but several improvements were
performed, and the second version became available in ,
named ICDAS II [20, 81, 88, 99].The system has two categories, which are coronal primary
caries and root caries. For the coronal caries, the lesion is
identified by two digits: the first is related to the level of previous dental treatments performed on the tooth and receives
codes ranging from 0 to 9 ( . Table 3.1), and the second digit
is used to identify the lesion extension and receives codes
ranging from 0 to 6 ( . ) [20, 81].
However, the detailed description of the lesion extension
is done separately, based on the place where the lesion is
located and the presence of previous restorations, since the
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 3.51 Secondary carious lesions. a , b Lesion at the interface
with the buccal cavosurface margin being probed; c , d observation of a
secondary lesion on the buccal wall, seen through transparency on the buccal enamel and more evident on the occlusal view; e caries lesion
(red arrow) detected after removal of the restoration on the distal
surface of the canine; f staining of the tooth-restoration interface
T. M. F. Caneppele et al.
3
visual signs associated with each code can vary, resulting in
four headings:
5Pits and fissures
5Smooth surface with contact – mesial or distal surfaces
that have contact with adjacent teeth and require visual
inspection from the occlusal, buccal, and lingual
directions 5Free smooth surfaces – buccal and lingual surfaces and
mesial and distal surfaces that have no adjacent teeth
and allow direct examination of buccal, lingual, mesial,
and distal surfaces
5CARS – caries associated with restorations and
sealants
a b
cd
.Fig. 3.52 a–d Radiographic images of a secondary carious lesions at the gingival wallsCariology
3
. Tables 3.3, 3.4, 3.5, and 3.6 describes the application of the
codes for each situation of coronal primary caries. For the
second categories of ICDAS II, related to the root caries, the
system is divided into two groups, depending if the surface
has or no restoration. Despite that, the codes are basically the
same (. ) [20, 81, 88].
The ICDAS II system also assesses the caries activity to
determine the caries risk status and the prognosis of the
treatment. That allows to identify patients who may require intensive preventive intervention. . Table 3.8 shows the
activity criteria for coronal caries. For root caries, the color,
perception on probing, appearance, texture, cavitation, and
location can help the determination of the lesion activity, as
described on . [20, 81].
In addition to the detection and assessment system, the
International Caries Classification and Management System
(ICCMS) was proposed for handling the patients with regard
to caries prevention, aiming to promote health and preservation of tooth structure. Besides the assessment of the caries
process, it proposes a risk-adjusted preventive care, control
of non-cavitated lesions, and conservative restoration of the
cavitated ones. The key elements of ICCMS are classification
of the lesions according to their severity and activity, management of preventive care plan and risk status, and riskbased recall interval including monitoring and review,
creating an optimal personalized caries management plan for
optimal long-term health outcomes . . Second digit of the ICDAS II coding system,
related to the lesion extension [20, 88, 99]
Code Lesion extension
0 Sound surface
1 First visual change in enamel
2 Distinct visual change in enamel
3 Localized enamel breakdown (without clinical visual
signs of dentinal involvement)
4 Underlying dark shadow from dentin
5 Distinct cavity with visible dentin
6 Extensive distinct cavity with visible dentin . Description of the ICDAS II codes for pit and
fissures [20, 88, 99]
Code Description
0 There should be no change in enamel translucency after 5 seconds of air-drying
1 When seen wet there is no evidence of any
change in color. After 5 seconds of air-drying, a
carious opacity or discoloration is visible that is
not consistent with the clinical appearance of
sound enamel and is limited to the confines of
the pit and fissure area
2 When wet there is a carious opacity and/or brown
carious discoloration which is wider than fissure
(the lesion is still visible when dry)
3 When wet there is a carious opacity and/or
brown carious discoloration which is wider than
fissure. Once dried for approximately 5 seconds,
there is carious loss of tooth structure at the
entrance to, or within, the pit or fissure/fossa,
but dentin is not visible in the walls or base of
the discontinuity
4 This lesion appears as a shadow of discolored
dentin visible through an apparently intact
enamel surface, which may or may not show
signs of localized breakdown. The darkened area
may appear as gray, blue, or brown in color and is
seen more easily when the tooth is wet
5 Cavitation in opaque or discolored enamel
exposing the dentin beneath
6 The cavity is deep and wide and dentin is clearly
visible . First digit of the ICDAS II coding system, related
to the previous dental intervention [20, 88, 99]
Code Previous intervention
0 Surface not restored or sealed
1 Partial sealant
2 Full sealant
3 Tooth colored restoration
4 Amalgam restoration
5 Stainless steel crown
6 Porcelain or gold or PFM crown or veneer
7 Lost or broken restoration
8 Temporary restoration
96 Tooth surface cannot be examined
97 Tooth missing because of caries
98 Tooth missing for reasons other than caries
99 Unerupted
T. M. F. Caneppele et al.
3
. Description of the ICDAS II codes for smooth surface with contact [20, 88, 99]
Code Description
0 There should be no change in enamel translucency after 5 seconds of air-drying
1 When seen wet there is no evidence of any change in color. After air-drying a carious opacity is visible that is not consistent
with the clinical appearance of sound enamel and is seen from the buccal or lingual surface
2 When wet there is a carious opacity and/or brown carious discoloration and the lesion is still visible when dry. Lesion may
be seen when viewed from the buccal or lingual direction. When viewed from the occlusal direction, this opacity may be
seen as a shadow confined to enamel, seen through the marginal ridge
3 Once dried for approximately 5 seconds, there is distinct loss of enamel integrity viewed from the buccal or lingual
direction
4 This lesion appears as a shadow of discolored dentin visible through an apparently intact marginal ridge, buccal or lingual
walls of enamel. This shadow may appear as gray, blue, or brown in color and is often seen more easily when tooth is wet
5 Cavitation in opaque or discolored enamel with exposed dentin
6 Obvious loss of tooth structure; extensive cavity may be deep or wide and dentin is clearly visible on both walls and at the
base. The marginal ridge may or may not be present
. Description of the ICDAS II codes for free smooth surfaces [20, 88, 99]
Code Description
0 There should be no change in enamel translucency after 5 seconds of air-drying
1 When seen wet there is no evidence of any change in color. After air-drying a carious opacity is visible that is not consistent
with the clinical appearance of sound enamel
2 When wet there is a carious opacity and/or brown carious discoloration and the lesion is still visible when dry. The lesion is
located in close proximity of the gingival margin
3 Once dried for 5 seconds, there is carious loss of surface integrity without visible dentin
4 This lesion appears as a shadow of discolored dentin, which may or may not show signs of localized breakdown. This
shadow may appear as gray, blue, or brown in color and is often seen more easily when tooth is wet
5 Cavitation in opaque or discolored enamel with exposed dentin
6 Obvious loss of tooth structure; extensive cavity may be deep or wide and dentin is clearly visible on both walls and at the
base. An extensive cavity involves at least half of a tooth surface or possibly reaching the pulp
. Description of the ICDAS II codes for CARS. The details are related to the lesions adjacent to a restoration/sealant margin [20,
88, 99]
Code Description
0 A sound tooth surface adjacent to a restoration/sealant margin. There should be no evidence of caries
1 When seen wet there is no evidence of any change in color. After air-drying a carious opacity or discoloration is visible that
is not consistent with the clinical appearance of sound enamel.
2 If the restoration margin is placed on enamel, tooth must be viewed wet. When wet there is an opacity consistent with
demineralization that is not consistent with the clinical appearance of sound enamel. The lesion is still visible when dry. If
the restoration margin is placed on dentin, discoloration can be seen that is not consistent with the clinical appearance of
sound dentin
3 Cavitation at the margin of the restoration/sealant less than 0.5 mm, in addition to either an opacity or discoloration
consistent with demineralization
(continued)Cariology
3
. Description of the ICDAS II codes for root caries [20, 88, 99]
Code Characteristic of the lesion
E If the root surface cannot be visualized directly, then it is excluded
0 The root surface does not exhibit any unusual discoloration that distinguishes it from the surrounding root areas nor
does it exhibit a surface defect at the CEJ or root surface. The root surface has a natural anatomical contour
1 There is a demarcated area on the root surface or at the CEJ that is discolored, but there is no cavitation (loss of
anatomical contour <0.5 mm) present
2 There is a demarcated area on the root surface or at the CEJ discolored, and there is cavitation (loss of anatomical
contour≥ 0.5 mm) present
. Activity criteria for coronal primary caries according to ICDAS II [20, 88, 99]
ISDAS code Characteristics of the lesion
Active lesion Inactive lesion
1, 2, or 3 Surface of enamel is whitish/yellowish opaque with loss of
luster; feels rough when the tip of the probe is moved
Lesion is in a plaque stagnation area, i.e., pits and fissures, near
the gingival and approximal surface below the contact pointSurface of enamel is whitish, brownish, or black
Enamel may be shiny and feels hard and smooth
when the tip of the probe is moved
For smooth surfaces, caries lesion is typically
located at some distance from the gingival margin
4 Probably active
5 or 6 Cavity feels soft or leathery on gently probing the dentin Cavity may be shiny and feels hard on gently
probing the dentin
. Activity assessment criteria for root caries lesions according to ICDAS II [20, 88, 99]
Parameters Active lesion Inactive lesion
Color Yellowish or light brown Darkly stained
Perception on probing Soft or leathery Hard texture
Appearance White matte Shiny
Texture Rough surfaces Smooth surfaces
Cavitation Non-cavitated or cavitated Cavitated
Location Close adjacent to the crest of the gingival More distant from the gingival crestCode Description
4 Tooth has a shadow of discolored dentin which is visible through an apparently intact enamel surface or with localized
breakdown in enamel but no visible dentin. This shadow may appear as gray, blue, orange, or brown in color and is often
seen more easily when tooth is wet
5 Distinct cavity adjacent to restoration/sealant
6 Extensive distinct cavity with visible dentin . (continued)
T. M. F. Caneppele et al.
3
Conclusion
The chapter underlines the understanding of caries as a pro -
gressing disease, which could be stopped at early stages and
most often be prevented by adequate interventions. Caries is
a disease caused by acidogenic biofilm due to nutritional
imbalances. The enamel demineralization promotes the loss
of hydroxyapatite from the tooth structure and development
of lesions. Starting as subsurfacial and porous areas of
enamel, with whitish appearance, they can progress to cavitation and result on complete destruction of the tooth struc -
ture. Therefore, the early diagnosis and preventive treatment
is recommended. The role of saliva and fluoride on caries
prevention must be understood by the clinicians and the car -
ies risk of each patient determined. The association of differ -
ent methods of diagnosis can help to detect the lesion,
arresting them whenever possible or allowing a conservative
restorative treatment to be performed.
References
1. Abrams SH, Sivagurunathan KS, Silvertown JD, Wong B, Hellen A,
Mandelis A, et al. Correlation with caries lesion depth of the canary
system, DIAGNOdent and ICDAS II. Open Dent J. ;11: –89.
https://doi.org/10. / .
2. Adams AB. Caries risk assessment. Chronicle. ;58:10–3.
3. Akpata ES, Farid MR, Al-Saif K, Roberts EAU. Cavitation at radiolucent areas on proximal surfaces of posterior teeth. Caries Res [Inter -
net]. ;30: –6. https://doi.org/10. / .
4. Alaluusua S, Savolainen J, Tuompo H, Grönroos L. Slide-scoring
method for estimation of Streptococcus mutans levels in saliva.
Scand J Dent Res. ;92: –33.
5. Angmar-Månsson B, ten Bosch JJ. Optical methods for the detec -
tion and quantification of caries. Adv Dent Res. ;1:14–20.
https://doi.org/10. / .
6. Angmar-Månsson BE, Al-Khateeb S, Tranaeus S. Caries diagnosis. J
Dent Educ. ;62: –80.
7. Smith A(T)J, Cooper PR. Cellular signaling in dentin repair and
regeneration. In: Vishwakarma A, Sharpe P , Shi S, Wang X-P , editors.
Stem cell biology and tissue engineering in dental sciences: Else -
vier; . p. –17.
8. Anusavice KJ. Management of dental caries as a chronic infectious
disease. J Dent Educ. ;62: – .
9. Anusavice KJ. Present and future approaches for the control of car -
ies. J Dent Educ. ;69: –54.
10. Astvaldsdóttir A, Ahlund K, Holbrook WP , de Verdier B, Tranæus
S. Approximal caries detection by DIFOTI: in vitro comparison of
diagnostic accuracy/efficacy with film and digital radiography. Int J
Dent. ; : . https://doi.org/10. / / .
11. Axelsson P . Diagnosis and risk prediction of dental caries. Chicago:
Quintessence; .
12. Ball IA. The “fluoride syndrome”: occult caries? Br Dent J.
; :75–6.
13. Baratieri LN. Dentística. Procedimentos preventivos e restauradores. 2nd ed. Santos; .
14. Carvalho JC, Ekstrand KR, Thylstrup A. Dental plaque and caries on
occlusal surfaces of first permanent molars in relation to stage of
eruption. J Dent Res. ;68: –9. https://doi.org/10. /
.
15. Carvalho JC, Ekstrand KR, Thylstrup A. Results after 1 year of nonoperative occlusal caries treatment of erupting permanent first
molars. Community Dent Oral Epidemiol. ;19:23–8. 16. Carvalho JC, Thylstrup A, Ekstrand KR. Results after 3 years of nonoperative occlusal caries treatment of erupting permanent first
molars. Community Dent Oral Epidemiol. ;20: –92.
17. Cury JA. Uso do flúor e controle da cárie como doença. In: Baratieri
LN, editor. Odontol restauradora Fundam e Possibilidades. São
Paulo: Santos; . p. 33–68.
18. Darling AI. The pathology and prevention of caries. Br Dent J.
; : –96.
19. Denis M, Atlan A, Vennat E, Tirlet G, Attal J-P . White defects on
enamel: diagnosis and anatomopathology: two essential factors for
proper treatment (part 1). Int Orthod. ;11: –65. https://doi.
org/10. /j.ortho. .02. .
20. Dikmen B. ICDAS II Criteria (International Caries Detection and
Assessment System). J Istanbul Univ Fac Dent. ;49:63. https://
doi.org/10. /jiufd. .
21. van Dorp CS, Exterkate RA, ten Cate JM. The effect of dental probing
on subsequent enamel demineralization. ASDC J Dent Child.
;55: –7.
22. Edelstein BL, Ureles SD, Smaldone A. Very high salivary
Streptococcus mutans predicts caries progression in young children. Pediatr Dent. ;38(4): –30.
23. Ekstrand KR, Kuzmina I, Bjørndal L, Thylstrup A. Relationship
between external and histologic features of progressive stages of
caries in the occlusal fossa. Caries Res. ;29: –50. https://doi.
org/10. / .
24. Ekstrand K, Qvist V, Thylstrup A. Light microscope study of the effect
of probing in occlusal surfaces. Caries Res. ;21: –74. https://
doi.org/10. / .
25. Fejerskov O, Baelum V, Ostergaard ES. Root caries in Scandinavia in
the ’s and future trends to be expected in dental caries experience in adults. Adv Dent Res. ;7:4–14. https://doi.org/10. /
.
26. Fejerskov O, Manji F. Risk assessment in dental caries. In: Bader JD,
editor. Risk assess dent. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Dental College; . p. –7.
27. Fejerskov O, Kidd EAM. Dental caries: the disease and its clinical
management: Blackwell Munksgaard; .
28. Ferreira-Zandoná A. A detecção de lesões cariosas através da fluo -
rescência. Rev ABO-PR. ;2:22.
29. Firestone AR, Sema D, Heaven TJ, Weems RA. The effect of a
knowledgebased, image analysis and clinical decision support system on observer performance in the diagnosis of approximal caries
from radiographic images. Caries Res. ;32: –34. https://doi.
org/10. / .
30. Fitzgerald RJ, Keyes PH. Demonstration of the etiologic role of
streptococci in experimental caries in the hamster. J Am Dent
Assoc. ;61:9–19.
31. Forgie AH, Pine CM, Pitts NB. The use of magnification in a preventive approach to caries detection. Quintessence Int. ;33:13–6.
32. Forner Navarro L, Llena Puy MC, García Godoy F. Diagnostic perfor -
mance of radiovisiography in combination with a diagnosis assist -
ing program versus conventional radiography and radiovisiography
in basic mode and with magnification. Med Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal.
;13:E261–5.
33. Fox PC, van der Ven PF, Sonies BC, Weiffenbach JM, Baum
BJ. Xerostomia: evaluation of a symptom with increasing significance. J Am Dent Assoc. ; : –25.
34. Fried D, Glena RE, Featherstone JD, Seka W. Nature of light scatter -
ing in dental enamel and dentin at visible and near-infrared wave -
lengths. Appl Optics. ;34: –85. https://doi.org/10. /
AO.34. .
35. Gakenheimer DC. The efficacy of a computerized caries detector in
intraoral digital radiography. J Am Dent Assoc. ; : –90.
36. Gibbons RJ, Depaola PF, Spinell DM, Skobe Z. Interdental localization of Streptococcus mutans as related to dental caries experience.
Infect Immunity. ;9: –8.Cariology
3 37. Goldberg J, Tanzer J, Munster E, Amara J, Thal F, Birkhed D. Crosssectional clinical evaluation of recurrent enamel caries, restoration
of marginal integrity, and oral hygiene status. J Am Dent Assoc.
; : –41.
38. Hall A, Girkin JM. A review of potential new diagnostic modalities
for caries lesions. J Dent Res. ;83. Spec: C89–94.
39. Hamilton IR. Biochemical effects of fluoride on oral bacteria. J Dent
Res. ;69: –7. https://doi.org/10. /00220345900690S128.
40. Heaven TJ, Weems RA, Firestone AR. The use of a computer-based
image analysis program for the diagnosis of approximal caries from
bitewing radiographs. Caries Res. ;28:55–8. https://doi.
org/10. / .
41. Hemadi AS, Huang R, Zhou Y, Zou J. Salivary proteins and microbiota as biomarkers for early childhood caries risk assessment. Int J
Oral Sci. ;9:e1. https://doi.org/10. /ijos. .35.
42. Hillman J, Socransky S. The theory and application of bacterial
interference to oral diseases. In: Myers HM, editor. New biotechnology in oral research. Basel: Kager; . p. 1–17.
43. Hintze H, Wenzel A, Danielsen B, Nyvad B. Reliability of visual examination, fibre-optic transillumination, and bite-wing radiography,
and reproducibility of direct visual examination following tooth
separation for the identification of cavitated carious lesions in contacting approximal surfaces. Caries Res [Internet]. ;32: –9.
https://doi.org/10. / .
44. van Houte J. Microbiological predictors of caries risk. Adv Dent Res.
;7:87–96. https://doi.org/10. / .
45. Huysmans MC, Longbottom C, Pitts N. Electrical methods in occlusal caries diagnosis: an in vitro comparison with visual inspection
and bite-wing radiography. Caries Res. ;32: –9. https://doi.
org/10. / .
46. Ivar Andreas M. Reaction patterns in human teeth: CRC Press; .
47. Jablonski-Momeni A, Jablonski B, Lippe N. Clinical performance of
the near-infrared imaging system VistaCam iX Proxi for detection of
approximal enamel lesions. BDJ open. ;3: . https://doi.
org/10. /bdjopen. .12.
48. Jay P . The reduction of oral Lactobacillus acidophilus counts by the
periodic restriction of carbohydrate. Am J Orthod. ;33: –84.
49. Jeon RJ, Mandelis A, Sanchez V, Abrams SH. Nonintrusive, noncontacting frequency-domain photothermal radiometry and luminescence depth profilometry of carious and artificial subsurface lesions
in human teeth. J Biomed Opt. ;9: –19. https://doi.
org/10. /1. .
50. Johnson M. Unmasking the changing face of dental caries. Dentistry.
;16:5–7.
51. Jones R, Huynh G, Jones G, Fried D. Near-infrared transillumination
at -nm for the imaging of early dental decay. Opt Express.
;11: –65.
52. Keyes PH. The infectious and transmissible nature of experimental
dental caries: findings and implications. Arch Oral Biol. ;1: –
IN4. https://doi.org/10. / - (60) -1. Pergamon
53. Kite OW, Shaw JH, Sognnaes RF. The prevention of experimental
tooth decay by tube-feeding. J Nutr. ;42:89– . https://doi.
org/10. /jn/42.1.89.
54. Kotsanos N, Darling AI. Influence of posteruptive age of enamel on
its susceptibility to artificial caries. Caries Res. ;25: –50.
https://doi.org/10. / .
55. Krasse B, Jordan HV, Edwardsson S, Svensson I, Trell L. The occur -
rence of certain “caries-inducing” streptococci in human dental
plaque material with special reference to frequency and activity of
caries. Arch Oral Biol. ;13: –8.
56. Kühnisch J, Söchtig F, Pitchika V, Laubender R, Neuhaus KW, Lussi A,
et al. In vivo validation of near-infrared light transillumination for
interproximal dentin caries detection. Clin Oral Investig.
;20: –9. https://doi.org/10. /s00784- - -4.
57. Larmas M. Simple tests for caries susceptibility. Int Dent J.
;35: –17.
58. Larmas M. Saliva and dental caries: diagnostic tests for normal dental practice. Int Dent J. ;42: – . 59. Leal SC, Mickenautsch S. Salivary streptococcus mutans count and
caries outcome-a systematic review. J Minim Interv Dent J Minim
Interv Dent. ;
60. Lederer A, Kunzelmann K-H, Heck K, Hickel R, Litzenburger F. In vitro
validation of near-infrared transillumination at nm for the
detection of caries on proximal surfaces. Clin Oral Investig. ;
https://doi.org/10. /s00784- - -0.
61. Lussi A. Validity of diagnostic and treatment decisions of fissure car -
ies. Caries Res. ;25: – . https://doi.org/10. / .
62. Lussi A, Schroeder A. Methods for the diagnosis and follow-up of
caries. When to drill? Schweiz Monatsschr Zahnmed. ; :
–70.
63. Maltz M, Parolo CCF, Jardim JJ. Cariologia clínica. In: Toledo OA, editor. Odontopediatria Fundam para a prática clínica. 2nd ed. São
Paulo: Editorial Premier; . p. –50.
64. Mandel ID. The functions of saliva. J Dent Res. ;66: –7.
https://doi.org/10. /00220345870660S203.
65. Marinho VA, Pereira GM. Cárie: Diagnóstico e plano de tratamento.
Rev Univ Alfenas. ;4:27–37.
66. Mejàre I, Källestål C, Stenlund H. Incidence and progression of
approximal caries from 11 to 22 years of age in Sweden: a prospec -
tive radiographic study. Caries Res. ;33:93– . https://doi.
org/10. / .
67. Mejàre I, Malmgren B. Clinical and radiographic appearance of
proximal carious lesions at the time of operative treatment in
young permanent teeth. Caries Res. ;94:19–26.
68. Mejàre I, Stenlund H, Zelezny-Holmlund C. Caries incidence and
lesion progression from adolescence to young adulthood: a pro -
spective 15-year cohort study in Sweden. Caries Res. ;38: –
41. https://doi.org/10. / .
69. Mjör IA, Qvist V. Marginal failures of amalgam and composite resto -
rations. J Dent. ;25:25–30.
70. Nanda J, Sachdev V, Sandhu M, Deep-Singh-Nanda K. Correlation
between dental caries experience and mutans streptococci counts
using saliva and plaque as microbial risk indicators in 3–8 year old
children. A cross Sectional study. J Clin Exp Dent. :e114–8.
https://doi.org/10. /jced. .
71. Newbrun E. Problems in caries diagnosis. Int Dent J. ;43: –
42.
72. Nissan R, Segal H, Pashley D, Stevens R, Trowbridge H. Ability of bac -
terial endotoxin to diffuse through human dentin. J Endod.
;21:62–4. https://doi.org/10. /S0099- (06) -4.
73. Nyvad B, Fejerskov O. Root surface caries: clinical, histopathological
and microbiological features and clinical implications. Int Dent J.
;32: –26.
74. Orland FJ, Blayney JR, Harrison RW, Reyniers JA, Trexler PC, Wagner
M, et al. Use of the germfree animal technic in the study of experimental dental caries. J Dent Res. ;33: –74. https://doi.org/10.
/ .
75. Pereira AC. Odontologia em Saúde Coletiva – Planejando Ações e
Promovendo Saúde. Porto Alegre: Artmed; .
76. Pitts NB. Monitoring of caries progression in permanent and primary posterior approximal enamel by bitewing radiography.
Community Dent Oral Epidemiol. ;11: –35.
77. Pitts NB. The diagnosis of dental caries: 3. Rationale and overview of
present and possible future techniques. Dent Update. ;19:
32–8.
78. Pitts NB, Chestnutt IG, Evans D, White D, Chadwick B, Steele JG. The
dentinal caries experience of children in the United Kingdom, .
Br Dent J. ; : –20. https://doi.org/10. /sj.bdj. .
79. Pitts NB, Evans DJ. The dental caries experience of 14-year-old children in the United Kingdom. Surveys coordinated by the British
Association for the Study of Community Dentistry in /95.
Community Dent Health. ;13:51–8.
80. Pitts NB, Rimmer PA. An in vivo comparison of radiographic and
directly assessed clinical caries status of posterior approximal sur -
faces in primary and permanent teeth. Caries Res. ;26: –52.
https://doi.org/10. / .
T. M. F. Caneppele et al.
3
81. Pitts N, Ismail A, Martignon S, Ekstrand K, Douglas G, Longbottom
C. ICCMS Quick Reference Guide for Practitioners and Educators.
.
82. Prabhakar A, Akanksha G, Deepak M, Sugandhan S. Diagnostic
applications of saliva in dentistry. Marwah N, editor. Int J Clin
Pediatr Dent. ;2:7–14. https://doi.org/10. /jpjournals- - .
83. Ricketts DN, Kidd EA, Wilson RF. Electronic diagnosis of occlusal car -
ies in vitro: adaptation of the technique for epidemiological pur -
poses. Community Dent Oral Epidemiol. ;25: –41.
84. Roberson TM, Heymann H, Swift EJ. Sturdevant’s art and science of
operative dentistry. 5th ed. St. Louis: Mosby; .
85. Rock WP , Kidd EA. The electronic detection of demineralisation in
occlusal fissures. Br Dent J. ; : –7.
86. Saravia ME, Silva LAB, Silva RAB, Lucisano MP , Echevarría AU,
Echevarría JU, et al. Evaluation of chair-side assays in high microbio -
logical caries-risk subjects. Braz Dent J. ;26: –5. https://doi.
org/10. / - .
87. Seddon RP . The detection of cavitation in carious approximal sur -
faces in vivo by tooth separation, impression and scanning electron
microscopy. J Dent [Internet]. ;17: –20. https://doi.
org/10. / - (89) -6.
88. Shivakumar K, Prasad S, Chandu G. International caries detection
and assessment system: a new paradigm in detection of dental car -
ies. J Conserv Dent. ;12:10–6. https://doi.org/10. / . .
89. Stanley HR, Pereira JC, Spiegel E, Broom C, Schultz M. The detection
and prevalence of reactive and physiologic sclerotic dentin, reparative dentin and dead tracts beneath various types of dental lesions
according to tooth surface and age. J Oral Pathol. ;12: –89. 90. Strassler HE, Sensi LG. Technology-enhanced caries detection and
diagnosis. Compend Contin Educ Dent. ;29: –5, , .
91. Tabak LA, Levine MJ, Mandel ID, Ellison SA. Role of salivary mucins
in the protection of the oral cavity. J Oral Pathol. ;11:1–17.
92. Thenisch NL, Bachmann LM, Imfeld T, Leisebach Minder T, Steurer
J. Are mutans streptococci detected in preschool children a reliable
predictive factor for dental caries risk? A systematic review. Caries
Res. ;40: –74. https://doi.org/10. / .
93. Tracy KD, Dykstra BA, Gakenheimer DC, Scheetz JP , Lacina S, Scarfe
WC, et al. Utility and effectiveness of computer-aided diagnosis of
dental caries. Gen Dent. 59: –44.
94. Vaarkamp J, Ten Bosch JJ, Verdonschot EH, Tranaeus S. Quantitative
diagnosis of small approximal caries lesions utilizing wavelengthdependent fiber-optic transillumination. J Dent Res. ;76: –
82. https://doi.org/10. / .
95. Weyne S. Cariologia. In: Baratieri LN, editor. Dent Procedimentos
Prev e Restauradores. São Paulo: Santos; . p. 1–42.
96. Wöltgens JH, Bervoets TJ, Witjes F, Driessens FC. Effect of posteruptive age on Ca and P loss from human enamel during deminer -
alization in vitro. Arch Oral Biol. ;26: –5.
97. Young DA. New caries detection technologies and modern caries
management: merging the strategies. Gen Dent. 50: –31.
98. Zhou Q, Peng CF, Qin M. Near infrared light transillumination for
detection of incipient proximal caries in primary molars. J Peking
Univ Heal Sci. ;51:59–64. https://doi.org/10. /j.issn.1671167X. .01. .
99. Criteria Manual: International Caries Detection and Assessment
System (ICDAS II). Workshop held in Baltimore; .
Cariology
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG
C. R. G. Torres (ed.), Modern Operative Dentistry, Textbooks in Contemporary Dentistry,
https://doi.org/10. / -3- - -0_4123 4
Instruments and Equipments
Sergio Eduardo de Paiva Gonçalves, Cesar Rogério Pucci,
Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres, and Anuradha Prakki
4.1 Introduction –
4.2 Active Hand Instruments –
4.2.1 Instrument Design –
4.2.2 Type of Instruments, According to the Shape of the Blade –
4.2.3 Instrument Formulas –
4.2.4 Sharpening of Hand Instruments –
4.3 Rotary Cutting Instruments –
4.3.1 Handpieces –
4.3.2 Parts of the Rotary Instrument –
4.3.3 Types of Rotary Instruments –
4.3.4 Materials Used on the Fabrication of Rotary Instruments –
4.3.5 Basic Shape of Burs, Diamond Points, and Mounted Stones –
4.3.6 Factors Related to the Use of Rotary Instruments –
4.3.7 Safety Procedures –
4.4 Oscillatory Abrasive Instruments –
4.4.1 Oscillatory Handpieces –
4.4.2 Types of Diamond Points –
4.5 Complementary Instruments –
4.5.1 Clinical Mirror –
4.5.2 Tweezers and Forceps –
4.5.3 Exploratory Probe –
4.5.4 Mixing Spatula –
4.5.5 Instrument for Filling and Modeling –
4.5.6 Condensers –
4.5.7 Carvers –
4.5.8 Burnishers –
4.5.9 Intraoral Carriers –
4.5.10 Scissors –
4.5.11 Matrix Retainer –
4.5.12 Clamps, Clamp Forceps, and Rubber Dam Punch –
4.5.13 Pliers –
4.5.14 Dappen Dishes –
4.5.15 Carpule Syringe –
4.6 Vision Magnifiers –
4.7 Airborne-Particle Abrasion –
4.8 Laser –
4.8.1 Erbium Lasers –
4.8.2 Nd:YAG Laser –
4.8.3 Safety Procedures –
References –
4
Learning Objectives
The learning objectives of this chapter are related to the following topics:
5An overview on the evolution of operative instruments
related to the techniques and materials.
5The description, design, formula interpretation, and
clinical applicability of the available active hand
instruments.
5To understand the shapes, types, and compositions of
different rotary instruments and the associated cutting
tips: burs, diamond points, and mounted stones.
5The description of the two main oscillatory devices
available, sonic and ultrasonic, and the applicability and
technology involved with the fabrication of agglutinated
or deposited diamond points.
5The description and clinical applicability of several
complementary dental instruments.
5To understand the technology, clinical applicability, and
limitations of alternative methods for tooth preparation
such as air abrasion and laser. For the later, distinction
between Er:YAG and Nd:YAG lasers is highlighted.
4.1 Introduction
The history of dentistry has followed concomitant to the history of medicine, where men have searched for a solution to
mitigate humanity’s greatest evil: the pain. The development
of instruments that allowed for interventions aiming for
reestablishing the health of individuals committed by some
illness has been noticed in archeological findings and artistic representations ( . Fig. 4.1a). Archeological evidence of
dental treatment dates as far back as years B.C., but
little is known about the methods and the equipment that
was used by then [4 ]. However, before the development of
anesthesia, the procedures represented on old paintings
seem true torture rituals, executed by barber surgeons as
part of the routine of the towns. Those picturesque scenes
were sensibly illustrated by great master painters that
reported the panic expressions of those submitted to the
interventions. Also, the surgical accessories, the applied
techniques, and the work conditions have been artistically
reported ( . Fig. 4.1b–d ) .
The fact that the dental enamel is the hardest tissue of all
biological systems represents a great obstacle for the procedures performed on the tooth structure [5 ]. The instruments that were mostly used until the nineteenth century
were the tooth extraction forceps, spoons to remove tartar,
and spatulas for cauterization of sores. Many hand instruments were developed by the dentists themselves, in accor -
dance to their necessities. However, they were rough,
awkward, and did not follow a pattern. Professor Greene
Vardiman Black, considered to be the father of the modern
dentistry, was responsible for the development of many
hand instruments for dental purposes. Later, the development of rotary instruments allowed a great advance on the
technique for tooth preparation while reducing the need to use hand instruments. Nevertheless, in some specific situations, the hand instruments continue to represent the
instrument of choice for better results in complementation
to the rotary instruments [5 ].
The instruments used in operative dentistry, according to
their purpose, can be classified into active or complementary
. The active instruments, also called excavators, cutters,
or principals, are the ones used to shape the preparation outline. They are capable of removing parts of the tooth structure by cutting or by abrasion. Active instruments can be
hand, rotary, or oscillatory. The hand instruments are the
ones in which the cutting action happens by the movement
of the dentist’s hand. The rotary instruments are the ones that
are attached to rotating engines or turbines, which can be a
blade bur or an abrasive point. The oscillatory instruments
are represented by diamond points that are attached to sonic
or ultrasonic devices that oscillate in contact with the tooth
causing abrasion. They also have a reciprocating action, per -
forming back-and-forth movements. The complementary
instruments (also called non-cutting or accessories) are the
ones used during clinical inspection and restorative procedures. This chapter will also present alternative equipments
to perform tooth preparations such as air abrasion and laser
devices.
4.2 Active Hand Instruments
Active hand instruments or more commonly called hand
cutting instruments are used to cut, cleave, and create a flat
surface on the tooth structure or to complete the action of
rotary instruments during the tooth preparation. They can
be divided into excavators and chisels. The excavators are
used to remove carious tissue, while the chisels are primar -
ily used to cut the enamel. Before the rotary cutting instruments were available, the dentist was capable of making
cavity preparations with a well-defined shape only with
hand instruments . In his book published in [6 ],
Professor Black presented a group of 96 cutting instruments, which could be condensed into an academic set of 44
instruments, or a more reduced one with 35 instruments. At
that time, adhesive dentistry and the high-speed air tur -
bines were not available. Since the restorative materials that
existed were limited to cohesive gold and silver amalgam,
the longevity of the restorations depended on the retention
and resistance obtained with the hand instruments .
Although with fundamental role, the use of hand cutting
instruments is very reduced nowadays, and in this book we
only recommend the use of three of them. In a specific situations, if only the drills are used to create a cavity preparation, an excessive quantity of a healthy tooth structure
would be removed to get adequate margins. In class II box
preparations, for instance, the use of burs on margins could
increase the risk of damaging the adjacent tooth structure.
The hand instruments allow this finishing to be performed
without damaging the adjacent tooth, as it is explained in
7 Chap. 10 .Instruments and Equipments
4
For many years, the carbon steel was the primary material
used in the fabrication of hand instruments, because they
were harder and maintained sharpness better than stainless steel. However, the sterilization of carbon steel instruments in autoclave, the most recommended method
currently, causes its darkening by corrosion and the formation of rust . Stainless steel has become the material of
choice for hand instruments, as they all need to be sterilized in steam or dry heat between each patient and also
because the properties of the stainless steel have significantly improved. There are hundreds of stainless steel for -
mulations, all incorporating significant quantity of
chromium, some carbon, and iron. The chromium is
responsible for the resistance to corrosion and the brightness of the material, while the carbon is responsible for its
hardness . To increase the durability of the cut, some
instruments may receive an active edge made of tungsten
carbide ( . Fig. 15.18a , b). Although it is harder, the carbide
is brittle and cannot be incorporated to all shapes of cutting edges . During the manufacturing process, the
instrument receives thermal treatment known as temper -
ing, allowing adequate resistance and flexibility. For this
reason, hand cutting instruments must not be heated over
flames because the tempering and the essential properties
of the metal will be lost .4.2.1 Instrument Design
Despite the application, the hand instrument is composed of
three parts, and they are the handle, the shank, and the blade
(. Fig. 4.2a) [9, 25]. They can be single-ended (with one
blade) or double-ended (with blades on both sides)
(. Fig. 4.2a , b).
The blade or active part can present many shapes, characterizing the type of cutting instrument. The bevel, an oblique
part on the blade’s edge, is essential because it determines the
efficiency of the cut . The tip of the blade is called the primary cutting edge of the hand instrument, also known as the
ab
cd
.Fig. 4.1 a Representation of instruments on archeological findings (Egypt, Kom Ombo temple, first century AD); b the dentist (Théodore
Rombouts); c the dentist surgeon (Peter Angilis); and d the campaign dentist (S. Cox)
BLADE SHANK HANDLE
SINGLE-ENDED
DOUBLE-ENDEDa
b
.Fig. 4.2 Parts of the hand instruments (handle, shank, and blade).
a Single-ended instrument; b double-ended instrument
S. E. de Paiva Gonçalves et al.
4
working end ( . Fig. 4.3). The thin sides of the blade can also
present bevels; they cut tooth structure and are called secondary cutting edges. The blade also has two flat sides, and
the one that has the bevel angle at the borders is called the
dorsum of the blade, while the opposite side is called the face
(. Fig. 4.3). Therefore, the acute cutting angle of the blade is
the junction of the face with the bevel . Most of the hand
instruments are single-beveled, thus with one face and one
dorsum. There are, however, instruments with bevels on both
sides, called bibeveled, used to prepare mechanical retention
in cavity preparations. These have a very limited application
today and will not be used on the preparations mentioned in
this book. For non-cutting instruments, the part corresponding to the blade is called nib. The working surface or the end
of the nib is known as face.
The shank, intermediary, or neck connects the blade and
the handle. It can be straight or angulated so that the working
end of the blade is closer to the long axis of the instrument at
a distance of 2–3 mm ( . Fig. 4.4a–c ). Besides easing the
access of the blade to the cavity that is being prepared, it also
promotes the stability during the use of the instrument.
. Figure 4.4a represents the image of an unbalanced singleangled instrument (mon-angle), where the edge of the blade
is located farther from the center of the instrument. Its blade
must be relatively short and must be used with minimum
force because there is a tendency of the instrument to rotate.
. Figure 4.4b shows instrument with double angulation (binangle), in which the edge of the blade approaches the long
axis of the handle in approximately 2 mm. It allows balance
to ease the control of the instrument during the application of force avoiding rotation. . Figure 4.4c represents an instrument with three angles (triple-angle). The instruments that
have two or more angulations are called contra-angled [5, 18,
25]. As the contra-angulation has the aim to compensate for
the tendency of the instrument to rotate on the hand of the
operator, it is also called the compensation angle [5, 23].
.Fig. 4.3 Nomenclature of parts of the blades
ab c
.Fig. 4.4 Types of shank and its importance on the position of the
primary cutting edge in relation to the long axis of the instrument.
a Mon-angle; b bin-angle; c triple-angleInstruments and Equipments
4The handle corresponds to the greatest part of the instrument. Usually, it is straight, with a circular, hexagonal, or octagonal section, and knurled on all surfaces to facilitate the grasping
of the instrument ( . Fig. 4.5a, b) . There are also rubberpadded handles to ease the grasp ( . Fig. 4.5c, e). The standard
metallic instruments have a diameter of approximately 5–6 mm.
The necessary force to hold them, using a movement like tweezers with the fingers, favors the osteomuscular lesions such as
the carpal tunnel syndrome. Trying to give more comfort to the
dentist, the industries began to develop handles that are thicker,
with the diameter varying from 7.9 to 9.5 mm ( . Fig. 4.5d, e). A
drawback with this type of handles is that they take more space
on the tray of the instruments [19, 25]. The series number, the
formula of the instrument, and the manufacturer are registered
on one of the surfaces, on the non-knurled spaces. The series
number indicates the position of the instrument on a specific
collection, while the formula consists of a group of numbers
that identify the characteristics of the instrument.
4.2.2 Type of Instruments, According
to the Shape of the Blade
Based on the shape of the blade, the hand cutting instruments (excavators and chisels) can be of different types
according to the following description.4.2.2.1 Enamel Hatchets
The hatchets have the cutting edge of the blade directed in
the same plane that the long axis of the handle. The enamel
hatchets are a kind of chisel with just one bevel. The shank
can have one or more angles. It is always a double-ended
instrument, and on one end the face of the blade will be
turned to one of the sides and, on the other end, turned to the
other direction; therefore, one end cuts on the right and the
other on the left ( . Fig. 4.6a, b). They are used on the finishing of the cavosurface angles of the buccal and lingual walls
of the proximal box and on the cavities for amalgam on posterior teeth ( . Fig. 10.15a –d). The movement applied with
the instrument is similar to the one applied on a hatchet to
cut wood ( . Fig. 4.6b ) [18, 23, 25].
4.2.2.2 Hoes
The hoe excavator has the primary cutting edge of the blade
perpendicular to the long axis of the handle ( . Fig. 4.7a, b).
The shank can have one or more angles. They are used for
planning cavity preparation walls similarly to a hoe for gar -
dening [18, 23, 25]. The side of the bevel on the edge of the
blade determines the way of its movement during use
(. Fig. 4.7a – arrows).
4.2.2.3 Straight or Curved Chisels
Chisels present the primary cutting edge perpendicular to
the long axis of the handle, similar to the hoe. However, generally, they may not present an angle on the shank. When an
angle is present, it is very small, around 12.5° (Wedelstaedt
design) ( . Fig. 4.8 ) [6, 25].
4.2.2.4 Spoon Excavator
It is also known as dentin spoon, because of its shape being
similar to the cutlery ( . Fig. 4.9a, b). They present a curved
blade and a cutting edge shaped as semicircle, which gives
the instrument an external convexity and an internal concavity (. Fig. 4.9b). The face of the blade is on the concave side.
Similar to the hatchet, the cutting edge of the blade is directed
in the same plane that the long axis of the handle. The spoons
are always double-ended instruments with the blade of the
instrument curved to the left in one end and to the right in
the other end [6, 25]. They can present an enlarged tip, on the
a
b
c
d
e
.Fig. 4.5 Types of handles of hand instruments. a Circular crosssectional handle (Mocar); b hexagonal cross-sectional handle (Duflex);
c rubber material-covered handle (Thompson); d thicker handle
(Hu-Friedy); e silicon handle (LM-dental)
ab
.Fig. 4.6 a Enamel hatchet; b wood hatchet
S. E. de Paiva Gonçalves et al.
4
shape of a drop or circle ( . Fig. 4.9a). Spoons are used to
inspect the presence and consistency of dentin carious tissue,
as well to remove it. They can also be used as auxiliaries on
carving the amalgam restorations, shaping the developmental grooves [18, 23].4.2.2.5 Gingival Margin Trimmer
They are chisels similar to the enamel hatchets, except for
the fact that the blade is curved and the primary cutting
edge has an additional angulation ( . Fig. 4.10a – 1 and 2).
ab
.Fig. 4.7 a Mon-angle hoes. The arrows correspond to the direction of use; b garden hoe
.Fig. 4.8 Chisels (to the left the Wedelstaedt chisel and to the right
the straight chisel)
a
b
.Fig. 4.9 a Dentin spoon of different shapes (1, Black; 2, Gillett; 3,
Darby-Perry); b oblique view showing the concave cutting side and the
convex sideInstruments and Equipments
4
The bevel of the cutting edge is always outside the curvature, and the face of the blade is on the internal side of the
curvature ( . Fig. 4.10b ). They are double-ended instruments, with the curvature facing opposite sides, in which
one of the ends cuts to the right and the other to the left
(. Fig. 4.10b ). They are indicated for planning the cavosur -
face gingival margin of the proximal boxes of class II amalgam preparations ( . Fig. 10.12a , b). To adapt to the margin
of those preparations, there are trimmers for the mesial
boxes and others for the distal boxes. For these, differently
of the enamel hatchet in which the primary cutting edge of
the instrument forms a right angle with the long axis of the
blade, those edges present various angles ( . Fig. 4.10a – 1
and 2 versus 3). Therefore, a set of gingival margin trimmers is composed of two instruments or four ends: one
instrument to trim the mesial box, which one end can be
moved to the right and the other end to the left, and another
instrument to trim the distal box, with ends that can also be
moved to the right or to the left ( . Figs. 10.12a , b and
10.13e , f).4.2.3 Instrument Formulas
Analyzing the shape of a blade and the angles on the shank,
one can identify with a relative accuracy the type of hand
instruments. However, those terms are only descriptive and
imprecise because they do not indicate the size or the angles.
For a complete identification, Dr. Black developed a system
that attributes numerical formulas to the instruments using
the metric system for the dimensions and centigrate degree to
indicate the angles [6 ]. The centigrate degree is obtained
dividing the circle into parts, different from the traditional
division of the circle in parts ( . Fig. 4.11). In a circle
divided into parts, a right angle corresponds to 25 parts.
However, some instruments do not use the formula proposed
by Black, and the engraved number can indicate the number
of the instrument on a determined collection or a reference
from the manufacturer. Besides numbers, letters can be part
of the formula of the hand cutting instruments. Letters indicate the place of the bevel and they can be L, R, or S. To inter -
pret the letters, the instruments should be observed from
behind, with the end of the handle facing the operator. The
letter L indicates that the bevel is positioned on the left side of
the instrument, and the letter R indicates that the bevel is on
the right side. The letter S (special) indicates that the bevel is
located opposite to the side of the corresponding instrument
without the letter (reverse bevel or special) [5 , 18, 23].
4.2.3.1 Three-Number Formula
For the instruments with the primary cutting edge in right
angle with the long axis of the blade, as on the hatchets and
hoes, a three-number formula is used ( . Fig. 4.12). The first
a
b
.Fig. 4.10 Gingival marginal trimmers. a Lateral view of a trimmer
for a mesial box (1) and distal box (2) in comparison with an enamel
hatchet (3); b view from the cutting edge where it can be observed in
the direction of cut (red arrows). The bevels are pointed by the blue
arrows90100
10
20
30
40
.Fig. 4.11 Circle dived on centigrade degrees
S. E. de Paiva Gonçalves et al.
4
number represents the width of the blade in tenths of millimeters, the second number represents the length of the blade in
millimeter, and the third number represents the angle that the
blade forms with the long axis of the handle in degrees .
4.2.3.2 Four-Number Formula
For instruments in which the primary cutting edge does not
form a right angle with the long axis of the blade, as on the
gingival margin trimmers, a four-number formula is used.
The first number represents the width of the blade in tenths
of millimeters, the second number represents the angle that
the primary cutting edge forms with the long axis of the
handle, the third number represents the length of the blade
in millimeter, and the fourth number is the angle that the
long axis of the blade forms with the handle ( . Fig. 4.13). On
the gingival margin trimmers, the angle of the primary cutting edge (second number) between 90° and ° indicates
that it must be used on the distal boxes, while the angle
between 75° and 85° indicates use on mesial boxes [6, 25].
The instruments that present the second numbers of ° or
75° are used for the preparation of cast metal restorations, as
those preparations must present very leaned marginal bevels.
The instruments with the second number of 95° or 80° are
indicated for amalgam restorations as they can produce
lightly beveled margins .
4.2.4 Sharpening of Hand Instruments
The sharpening is an important step for the good use of cutting hand instruments. A dull instrument causes pain and
discomfort to the patient and to the operator because of the
greater force required to perform the work, increases the
working time and risks of accidents, and reduces the quality
and precision of the dental preparation. The dentist or his
assistant must always pay attention to the sharpening quality
of the instruments. It should be performed after sterilization,
to avoid that accidental injuries result in cross contamination.
Instruments should be again sterilized prior to the clinical use.
The sharpening of an instrument can be evaluated by
visual inspection of the cutting edge under proper lighting. The presence of shiny surface indicates that the edge is “dull”
or rounded. Sharpening can also be tested, with slight pressure, against a plastic cap of a needle, anesthetic tube, or the
cannula of a saliva ejector. A dull blade will slide across the
plastic surface, while a sharp blade will cut the material
obstructing the movement . The sharpening can be done
manually, over an abrasive stone, or mechanically with a
rotary sharpening stone [18, 19, 23]. Different abrasive stones
can be used, with fine or medium grit, depending on how
much grinding is necessary for sharpening. The Arkansas
stone is a natural mineral that contains microcrystals of
quartz, which has a very small grit and is excellent for the
final sharpening. The silicon carbide (SiC) is an industrial
abrasive more commonly used on abrasive paper, which can
also be found as stone, generally available in medium and
coarse grits. The aluminum oxide can also be used on the
production of sharpening stones, which will present coarse,
medium, or fine grits. The Arkansas, silicon carbide, and aluminum oxide stones are only adequate for hand cutting
instruments made of steel. The instruments with the cutting
blade made of tungsten carbide are harder and require sharpening with diamonds. Metallic blocks covered with thin diamond particles by electrodeposition technique are the only
ones that serve to sharpen such instruments .
The sharpening is performed in many different ways for
each hand instrument. When chisels, hatchets, hoes, and
margin trimmers are sharpened, the cutting edge bevel is
placed parallel to the flat stone, which must be supported by
a stable surface ( . Fig. 4.14a ). The instrument is pushed or
pulled so that the acute cutting angle is moved forward with
a moderate force, toward the face of the blade, and with little
or no force on the backstroke ( . Fig. 4.14b , c). Care should
be taken not to change the angle of the bevel during the
sharpening, resting the fingers that hold the instrument very
well onto the stone. As the bevel of the instrument must be
made with a 45° angle with the face of the blade, it must be
positioned with an angle of 45° with the sharpening surface
of the stone. In general, unless the instrument is too neglected,
only two or three strokes are necessary. A fine mineral oil can
be used to lubricate the stone, which improves the quality of
the sharpening, hindering the filling of the stone pores and
avoiding the heating that could change the tempering of the
.Fig. 4.12 Instrument with a three-number formula
.Fig. 4.13 Instrument with a four-number formulaInstruments and Equipments
4
blade [23, 25]. With continuous use, the pores of the stone
can become clogged by the residues of the abrasion. To clean
it, a piece of cloth soaked in oil can be used. If extremely
clogged, a cloth soaked in alcohol can also be used .
When spoons and other round instruments, such as discoid and cleoid sculptors, are sharpened, the instrument is
rotated, while the blade goes over the stone. The discoid and
the spoon, which have round cutting edge, can be sharpened
with a continuous rotation of the blade ( . Fig. 4.14d ). In relation to the cleoid, shaped as a claw, the rotary movement
begins in one of the sides until it reaches the tip. Then, the
movement on the opposite direction is performed on the
other side, beginning from the lateral until it reaches the tip.
For mechanical sharpening, SiC abrasive discs or stones
can be used in low-speed handpieces. It is important to
remember that the angle of the bevel must always be respected
(. Fig. 4.15a ). The instruments that have one of the sides
convex and the other flat, such as the dentin spoons and the
discoid and cleoid sculptors, can be sharpened using flat
stone, making the grinding on the flat side, which is the face
of the blade ( . Fig. 4.15b , c). This method of sharpening also
turns the blade thinner, and care should be taken to avoid
that it becomes so thin that it can easily break .
When the instruments need to be sharpened during an
operatory procedure, they should be sharpened with a sterile stone. When a stone is sterilized, it should not have oil on the
surface because the oil may thicken during the sterilization
process, forming a varnish-like coating that will prevent the
abrasion needed for sharpening to happen. When the sharpening stone is sterilized, only water should be used as lubricant. In
addition, it can be washed on an ultrasonic cleaner after use to
remove the metal filings before the next sterilization cycle .
4.3 Rotary Cutting Instruments
The rotary instruments represented a great impulse for the
development of the dentistry that is practiced today. The possibility to grind and cut the hard tissues with great speed
allowed for a sensible improvement on the quality of the
work and relief for the patient’s suffering . There is a variety of types and shapes of rotary instruments, such as differ -
ent turbines and engines that can power them.
4.3.1 Handpieces
The rotary cutting instruments need some type of mechanical device to make them turn, known as handpieces. To reach
the level of development that we have today, those equipab
cd
.Fig. 4.14 a Grasping for sharpening; b , c more intense movement for sharpening toward the face of the blade on instrument with flat bevel;
d movement of traction and rotation for instruments with curved blades
S. E. de Paiva Gonçalves et al.
4
ments went through a great evolution. The precursors of the
current rotary instruments date from the year , and
most were developed for individual use by the inventor .
For example, the so-called bur ring, developed by Amos
Westcott in , that rotated with the movement of the
thumb and the indicator fingers of the operator . Pushed
by the development of the sewing machine that used pedals
from Isaac Singer, the inventor James Beall Morrison created
a foot engine, with a treadle that was pressed by the dentist
and the rotation that was transferred to a handpiece by a
series of pulley. It was patented in and later manufactured by the American company S.S. White ( . Fig. 4.16a ). In
, the S.S. White launched on the market the first electricpowered handpiece, invented by George F. Green, where the
engine was incorporated to the handle of the instrument
. Later on, different handpieces for dental use that had
separated electrical engines were developed. In these, rotation was transferred to the handpiece using belts
(. Fig. 4.16b ). However, effective equipment for enamel
preparations only became available after , when the
speed of 10, rotations per minute (rpm) was used for the
first time, associated with the development of more effective
rotary instruments.
The greater impact on the development of the handpieces
came with the development of the contra-angles with tur -
bines inside the head or the instrument. The first model launched out on the market in was moved by the circulation of the water . In , John Borden introduced the
first air-driven turbine, and it was an immediate success
because of the high speed that it could reach. Nowadays,
most of the handpieces for dental use are equipped with a
turbine powered by compressed air, even though there are
some on the market that are moved by an electrical engine.
They can be classified according to its rotational speed, measured in rpm. Since its introduction in dentistry, the engines
have received many classifications based on their speed.
However, with the evolution of technology and the increase
of the power of those equipments, the classifications were
changed. Nowadays, the turbines and electrical engines available on the market can be classified in a very simple manner
in low and high rotation speed.
The low-speed turbines, also known as micromotors, turn
on a speed between and 20, rpm. They have a regulator ring on the end near the attachment of the rose, where it
is possible to control the maximum speed or to invert the
direction of rotation ( . Fig. 4.17a – arrow). The micromotors
can be attached to two types of handpieces. One of them is
known as the straight handpiece and is used outside the
mouth because the long axis of the bur coincides with the
long axis of the handpiece ( . Fig. 4.17a , b). The other handpiece is known as the contra-angle. As the hand instruments,
its head is first turned outward and then toward its long axis.
ab
c
.Fig. 4.15 Sharpening with rotary instruments. a Flat-blade instruments; b , c curved-blade instrumentsInstruments and Equipments
4
This allows the tip of the bur to be positioned a few millimeters away from the long axis of the instrument, creating a balance (. Fig. 4.17c , d). In addition, it allows the bur to be used
inside the oral cavity, reducing the opening of the mouth that
is needed to access even more remote regions of interest.
There are three types of contra-angles, according to its capacity to transmit rotation from the motors to the tip of the bur,
and they are the conventional (1:1 ratio), the speedreducing
(18:1 or 20:1 ratio), and the speed multiplier (1:5 ratio). On
the conventional, the speed of the micromotor is transmitted
without modifications on the tip of the bur. On the reducing,
the speed decreases in 18–20 times or even more, depending
on the specification of the manufacturer. They are very commonly used in implants and endodontics procedures, and
they are largely recommended on the insertion of intradentinary pins. On the multiplier, the speed is multiplied in five
times, and it is indicated specially for the finishing of cavity
preparation for indirect restorations, as it can reach an inter -
mediate speed between lowand highspeed rotation,
improving the control and reducing the vibration.
The coupling of the burs on the contra-angle is performed
through a notch at the end of the shank, which allows a hook
to latch onto it in the upper part of the handpiece’s head (. Fig. 4.18a–d ). However, there are already in the market
some contra-angles that allow the grip of burs by friction,
which are commonly used in high-speed handpieces. Burs
are removed when pressing a button, instead of opening a
lock. To connect the bur on the straight handpiece, first it is
necessary to unlock the fixation clamp, turning the lock
placed on the middle of the handpiece. The bur is placed and
then the lock is activated ( . Fig. 4.19a–d ).
Since it allows a greater tactile sensation to the operator,
the use of low speed reduces its risks of accidental pulp exposure, if it is used in an intermittent way. Currently, the lowspeed handpieces have hoses to promote refrigeration during
the cut. However, the water blow hinders the visibility and
minimizes the tactile sensation during the use, so it can be
used intermittently without water, and with a reduced speed.
The low-speed handpiece is capable of cutting the hard tissue, but it produces an unpleasant experience for the patient
and for the dentist due to the vibration. Nowadays, the use of
low speed is limited to the final removal of caries on dentin,
finishing of the preparation, prophylaxis, and polishing
maneuvers.
The high-speed handpieces or turbines were launched
onto the market in . A handpiece can be considered of
ab
.Fig. 4.16 Early rotary instruments. a Foot treadle dental engine developed by J. B. Morrison; b electrical dental engine
S. E. de Paiva Gonçalves et al.
4
high speed when they produce a speed higher than ,
rpm, and they can reach to a rotation up to , rpm
(. Fig. 4.20a ). They are used in almost all procedures that
require cutting hard dental structures, as the dental preparation itself; removal of old direct or indirect metal restorations, resin, or ceramic; reduction of cuspid; axial cut for the
prosthetic preparation; and even the finishing of restorations
with the multi-bladed burs. They must be used on an inter -mittent way and under refrigeration with an air/water spray
to avoid tissue overheating. They must ideally have three
spray outlets to refrigerate the active tip of the bur, especially
inside a cavity ( . Fig. 6.8a, b). The coupling of the bur is per -
formed by friction of the shank into the head. There are two
ways of removing the bur from the instruments. On the
most modern systems, there is a button that when pressed,
releases the bur. This is known as the push-button system
ab
cd
.Fig. 4.17 a Low-speed micromotor associated with the straight handpiece (arrow – regulation ring). b Grasping of the straight handpiece;
c micromotor associated with the contra-angle; d grasping of the contra-angle
ab
.Fig. 4.18 Latch contra-angle handpiece. a Opening of the latch; b , c placing of the bur; d closure of the latchInstruments and Equipments
4
(. Fig. 4.20a , b). On the older systems, there is a wrench bur
remover ( . Fig. 4.21a–f ). Some manufacturers produced
high-speed handpieces with optical fibers to conduct the
light from a bulb in the delivery unit to the tip of the instrument, improving the illumination of the operating field.
More recently, some handpieces were developed with an
electric generator, attached to the air-driven turbine, that feeds a LED producing white light. They present an advantage that can be used in any type of dental equipment
(. Fig. 4.20c ). Some handpiece brands also offer the possibility to illuminate the tooth with UV light, which can help
the identification of residues of fluorescent restorative materials, during the replacement of defective composite restorations (. Fig. 4.20d ).
ab
cd
.Fig. 4.19 Fixation of the rotary instrument on the straight handpiece. a Opening of the straight handpiece lock; b , c insertion of the diamond
point; d locking the rotary instrument .Fig. 4.18 (continued)
cd
S. E. de Paiva Gonçalves et al.
4
Both low-speed contra-angle and the high-speed handpieces must be sterilized in the autoclave for the control of
cross contamination. The care with the lubrication becomes
even more important due to the sterilization process, to avoid
drying of the bearings. They must be lubricated before and
after the process of sterilization. The excess lubricant oil must
be removed before the instrument is used, by making it rotate
for about 15 s outside the mouth.
> To avoid the overheating and maintain them in
adequate working condition, handpieces should be
lubricated prior to use with appropriate mineral
oil-based lubricants, available in bottles or in spray.
The vibrations and the noise are related to the speed of the
turbines and can cause discomfort to the patient and dentist
and eventual hearing lesions to the clinician. The vibratory
waves can be described according to the frequency and
amplitude. The frequency is the number of oscillations in an
interval, while the amplitude is the distance between two
consecutive wave peaks, and there is a reverse relation
between both. When a bur is used on a speed of up to 10,
rpm, the amplitude is high and the frequency is low, transmitting a higher vibration sensation to the patient. There-fore, one should never let the bur come to stop while in
contact with the tooth of the patient, because the sensation
will be very unpleasant. The rotary movement should always
start or stop before the contact with tooth structure. Likewise, one should never go in or come out of the mouth with
the motor working, because of the risk of hurting the soft
tissues.
Tip
The rotary movement should always start or stop
before the contact with tooth structure. In addition, it
should never go in or come out of the mouth with the
motor working, because of the risk of hurting the soft
tissues.
When the speed of the turbine is superior to 60, rpm, the
amplitude reduces and the frequency increases. On those situations, the patient stops feeling the vibration of the bur, but
begins to notice the noise, which is acute and uncomfortable.
The noise can cause shivering and discomfort to the patient
and acoustic lesions and psychological lesions to the cliniab
cd
.Fig. 4.20 a Examples of high-speed push-button handpieces; b
insertion of the bur while pushing the lock button; c high-speed
handpiece with independent light source (LED/E-generator, MASC Dental, NSK); d handpiece with UV light source (Cobra LED Ultra Vision,
Gnatus)Instruments and Equipments
4
cians, who are exposed to the noise all day long and for many
years. Noise above 75 db can cause hearing damage, and tur -
bines of high speed can generate 70 and 94 db . To minimize the deleterious effects of the noises on the patient and
the clinician, handpieces with low levels of noise emission
should be used. Those should also be used in an intermittent
way, in a way that the periods of silence are greater than the
periods of noise. The other option is to work with ear protectors while the turbines are being used, which can also be per -
formed by the patient using earphones, for example. The
sound reflexes can be attenuated in the clinic using materials
that protect from the noise on the floor, walls, and ceiling. > To minimize the deleterious effects on hearing,
handpieces with low levels of noise emission should be
used. Ear protectors are also recommended.
4.3.2 Parts of the Rotary Instrument
The rotary instruments present three parts, and they are the
shank, neck, and head ( . Fig. 4.22a ). The shank is the longest
part of the instrument and serves to connect it to the rotary
device. To connect to the straight handpiece attached to the
low-speed micromotor, the shank is long and smooth. For the
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 4.21 FG high-speed handpiece associated with a wrench bur remover. a –c Sequence of bur placement; d –f sequence of bur removal
S. E. de Paiva Gonçalves et al.
4
straight attachments/nose cones and Doriot-type lowspeed
handpieces, the shank is long, named HP type. For the contraangle low-speed handpiece, the shank is short and has a latch,
being called right angle/latch type or RA/CA. For the highspeed handpiece, the shank is thinner, is shorter, and does not
have latches, because the connection happens by friction, being
called friction grip or FG ( . Fig. 4.22b ). There are burs with
short, conventional, or long shanks, depending on the necessity
of the access ( . Fig. 4.22c ). The neck, also called intermediary, is
the portion between the shank and the head, which is the active
part of the instrument. Its length and diameter are vital for the
balance of the instrument and consequent transmission of the
vibration. It has the function to improve the access and the visibility to the area to be prepared. The metallic alloy that the neck
is made of is also very important for the quality of the instrument, because it is subjected to high stress due to its thinner
diameter. Its length varies according to the access, the visibility,
and the freedom to use the active part of the instrument, and it
can be short or long ( . Fig. 4.22c ). The active part or head cor -
responds to the functional end of the instrument. The shape
and the material from which they are made differentiate its
function and the way of action. The high-speed rotary instruments can also be used in low-speed contra-angles, using a
latch-type contraangle adapter, as it can be seen in . Fig. 4.22d .4.3.3 Types of Rotary Instruments
The rotary instruments used in the cavity preparation to
receive a restoration can be classified, according to the way
they act, as cutting or abrasive.
4.3.3.1 Cutting Rotary Instruments
It is called a cutting instrument the one that is capable of
separating a part of a whole by means of a blade or a sharp
edge, which concentrates the force on a small area and results
on the propagation of a fracture along the surface touched by
the blade, causing the formation of the shavings. The cutting
rotary instruments are called burs and can be manufactured
in carbon steel, which was the material used on the first
rotary instruments, or tungsten carbide which only became
available on the market in . The burs have successive
blades that when touching the tooth structure remove shavings, similar to what is observed on hand instruments, but on
a more efficient way. . Figure 4.23a shows a scheme of a bur
blade cutting a substrate and generating the shavings. For the
blade to begin the cutting action, it must be sharp and have
hardness and elasticity modulus greater than the material to
be cut. The high hardness and the elasticity modulus are
essential for the concentration of the applied force on a small
ab
cd
.Fig. 4.22 a Representation of the parts of the rotary instruments
(shank, neck, and head); b types of shanks (1, straight handpieces; 2,
contra-angle; 3, high-speed); c types of high-speed rotary instruments (1, short shank; 2, regular shank; 3, long neck; 4, long shank); d latchtype contra-angle adapter for use of high-speed rotary instruments on
low-speed contra-angleInstruments and Equipments
4
area of the blade’s edge, which must be higher than the shear
resistance of the material to be cut . The mechanical distortion of the dental structure due to the blade produces heat,
and it is mandatory to use refrigeration, especially in high
speed [ 23].
In . Fig. 4.23b , there is a schematic cross-sectional view
of a bur for typical dental use, with six blades, showing the
names of the faces and angles. The real cutting action of a bur
happens on a very small region on the edge of the blade. Each
blade has two sides or faces, and they are the rake and clear -
ance faces. The rake face is on the same direction of the cut,
while the clearance face is on the opposite side. They also
have three important angles, and they are the rake, edge, and
clearance angles. The edge angle usually is not acute. It is
around 90° to allow resistance to the blade and increase the
longevity and the cut efficiency of the bur. The rake angle is
formed between the rake face of the blade and a line that
passes through the center of the instrument and the edge of
the blade (radius of the bur). It is said to be negative when the
rake face is in front of the radius. The scheme of the bur
shown in . Fig. 4.23b has a negative rake angle, as most of
the burs for dental use, increasing the durability and allowing
a good performance in high and low speed. A positive cutting angle would produce an edge angle that is more acute,
allowing it to be used only to cut soft surfaces, such as carious
dentin. If they were used to cut hard tissues, as enamel or
healthy dentin, the edge would quickly become an irregular
surface, chip, and dull . The clearance angle eliminates
the friction of the clearance face and allows a stop to avoid
that the tip of the bur excessively penetrates into the tooth
structure, besides allowing the space to the shavings being
cleared .
The cutting efficiency and the roughness of the resulting
surface will depend also on the number of blades. The conventional burs have 6 blades, but this number can vary to 12,
30, or even 40 ( . Fig. 4.24a , e, f). The higher the number of
blades, the lower the cutting efficiency, but the smoother is
the resulting surface. For this reason, the so-called multibladed burs, that is, the ones with more than six blades, are
used for finishing and polishing of the restoration. Before the development of the high-speed turbines, crosscut burs were
very popular, which have transversal cuts on the blades to
increase the cut efficiency ( . Fig. 4.24c ) . This principle is
justified by the fact that on crosscut burs, a smaller area of the
blade will be touching the surface at the cutting moment,
which results on a greater pressure and consequently higher
cut efficiency. Nowadays, this bur design is no longer used for
cavity preparations, but on burs designated to cut metal,
named transmetal burs, indicated to remove metallic restorations. The blades can be disposed parallel to the long axis of
the burs on a spiral shape. The spiral disposition results on a
smoother surface, even though it reduces the cutting efficiency (. Fig. 4.24d ).
4.3.3.2 Abrasive Rotary Instruments
The abrasive rotary instruments are the ones capable of
removing material from a structure by the action of friction
or fragmentation. They present irregular particles, harder
than the substrate to be abraded, deposited on a stainless
steel head. During its friction with the surface, it causes fragab cd ef
.Fig. 4.24 Burs with different number of blades. a , b Regular bur
with 6 blades; c crosscut bur with 6 blades; d bur with 12 spiral blades;
e bur with 12 straight blades; f bur with 30 straight blades
ab
.Fig. 4.23 a Cutting action of a blade; b cross-sectional scheme of a dental bur and its parts. (Adapted from Phillips )
S. E. de Paiva Gonçalves et al.
4
mentation and consequent grinding ( . Fig. 4.25a , b). The
grinding happens because of multiple points of individual
hard particles that are protruded from the surface, instead of
a continuous blade. Those particles have many sharp edges
that are randomly oriented over the surface of the instrument
head.
The material that suffers the abrasion can be classified
into ductile or brittle. The ductile materials are less hard and
suffer deformation or distention when they are pressed by
the abrasive particles. The brittle materials are harder, and
they break when they are submitted to tensions. The dentin is
an example of ductile material, specially the carious one,
while the enamel is brittle. When the abrasive instruments
are used over ductile materials, some parts can be removed in
chips, but most parts move laterally from the way that is followed by the abrasive particle, forming a type of crest of
deformed material on the surface ( . Fig. 4.25a ). The repeated
deformation hardens the distorted material until it becomes
brittle, fracturing and removing it. The burs are preferable to
cut ductile material, like carious dentin. The interaction of
brittle materials with diamonds or other abrasive particles
occurs differently. The removal of the material results from
fracture by tension which produces subsurface cracks
(. Fig. 4.25b ). The diamonds are more effective to grind
brittle materials and are superior to the burs to remove dental
enamel [ 23]. Examples of abrasive rotary instruments are
diamond points, stone points, and the abrasive discs.
Diamond Instruments
The diamond abrasive instruments or diamond points were
developed in . They were fabricated in stainless steel
with the shape of heads similar to the burs. Over the head, an
agglutinant layer is applied by means of an electroplating
process that connects the steel to the diamond particles with
different dimensions. This way, when the instrument spins,
the irregular diamond particles are rubbed over the substrate,
causing the grinding. They represent the class of rotary instrument that is most used on daily practice, because they
can easily grind enamel and dentin. Grinding with diamond
instrument should be performed with new points and under
refrigeration.
The size of the diamond particles electroplated has direct
relation with the efficiency of the grinding and the roughness
of the resulting surface. The greater the particle size, the more
efficient the abrasion will be and the rougher will be the sur -
face. Conversely, the smaller the particles, the smoother the
resulting surface will be. In general, six diamond grades can
be found on the market, and they are identified by colored
rings on the shank, resulting in super coarse ( μm, black
ring), coarse ( μm, green ring), medium or conventional
( μm, without a colored ring), fine (30 μm, red ring), extra
fine (15 μm, yellow ring), and ultrafine grit (8 μm, white ring)
diamond points. The medium grit is the most used on dental
preparations. The coarse or super coarse grits are indicated
when a great quantity of material need to be removed, such
as old restorations. The thin, extra fine, and ultrafine grit
points serve to finish and polish the composite resin restorations (. Fig. 4.26a–c ).
With time, especially if insufficient refrigeration is used,
the diamond points can become clogged by the deposit of
residues between the diamond particles, which reduces its
grinding effectiveness. The clogging is characterized by the
presence of a whitish material on the surface of the point that
is visible by naked eyes ( . Fig. 4.27a ). To solve this problem,
the point can be briefly rotated over a specific ceramic stone,
and the abrasive capacity is restored ( . Fig. 4.27b , c). The systematic use of ultrasonic bath to clean the instruments also
prevents the clogging.
However with prolonged use, the diamond particles will
eventually become rounded, or they will debond from the
a
b
.Fig. 4.25 Action of an abrasive grinding particle over a substrate.
a Ductile materials; b brittle material. (Adapted from Phillips )
ab c
.Fig. 4.26 Diamond points of different particle sizes. a Regular grit;
b fine grit; c extra fine gritInstruments and Equipments
4
agglutinant, reducing the grinding efficiency ( . Fig. 4.27d ).
On the attempt to compensate for the insufficient abrasion,
the dentist tends to apply more pressure on the instrument.
This can cause overheating of the tooth structure, with risk of
damage to the pulp tissue. The diamond points must be
constantly replaced, and in some countries they are used only
once.Mounted Stones
They are naturally or artificially obtained stones made by
hard abrasive agents, mounted on a metallic shank that can
be adapted to a straight handpiece, contra-angle, or high
speed (. Fig. 4.28a , b). They are indicated for the finishing of
restorative procedures performed directly inside the mouth
or in laboratory.
a b
c d
.Fig. 4.27 a Diamond point clogged with residues after abrasion
with insufficient refrigeration; b stone diamond instrument cleaning
(Limpapontas – KG Sorensen); c the same point shown in A immedi-ately after cleaning; d deterioration of the diamond points (1, new; 2,
worn head showing the loss of many diamond particles)
ab
.Fig. 4.28 Mounted stones with different shapes. a Arkansas stones; b silicon carbide stones
S. E. de Paiva Gonçalves et al.
4
The Arkansas stones have white color and are naturally
obtained from a rock called novaculite, original from the
state of Arkansas (United States). They have been used for
centuries to sharpen cutting metallic instruments. Those
stones present microcrystalline quartz in its composition,
which gives its abrasive property . They present excellent
performance, but they cannot be dry sterilized, as they may
lose the crystallization water and deteriorate. They must be
sterilized in humid heat (autoclave) or chemically.
Artificial stones can be made with SiC or aluminum
oxide. The SiC stones usually present a greenish color,
although some have black color. The aluminum oxide stones
can have various colors, as white, pink, beige, blue, and gray,
depending on the composition. Besides the abrasive type,
they can also vary according to the size of the particles, cor -
responding to the desired indication. The artificial stones can
be sterilized in dry or humid heat. The usual fabrication process requires to carefully press the abrasive particle onto the
desired shape and to heat until it becomes solid. To keep the
cutting edges of the sharp particles, the fabrication process
results on a porous material. The properties of the stones
depend on the volume and the size of the pores and on the
composition and size of the abrasives that were used .
Abrasive-Impregnated Rubber
They are rotary instruments with the active head made of
rubber, on which many different types of abrasive particles
are interspersed such as SiC, aluminum oxide, or diamond
powder. The abrasive rubber rotary instruments are used to
polish restorations directly in the mouth or in laboratory.
Depending on the particle size of the abrasive agent, it allows
for a more or less rough surface. In general, they are sold in
kits with decreasing abrasivity. Each abrasivity is identified
by a different color. They can be used to polish metallic or
amalgam restorations, composite resin, or ceramic. The abrasive rubbers are available in various shapes, and the most
common are the points (cones), cups, and discs, as those can
allow the access to different sites intended to be polished
(. Fig. 4.29a–c ). Recently abrasive rubber spiral wheels were
launched on the market, with the advantage of reaching difficult areas ( . Fig. 4.29d ).
With prolonged use, the tapered points wear off, impair -
ing the access to certain areas of the occlusal surface, such as
the cusps inclines and the bottom of the developmental
grooves. Those points can have their shape recovered by gently rotating it over an abrasive surface, as a diamond dresser
(KG Sorensen) ( . Fig. 4.29e –g), a stone used for sharpening
hand instruments, or a SiC disc ( . Fig. 11.18a –c). The diamond dresser can also be used to correct the shape of
mounted stones, due to the greater hardness of the diamond
particles.
Abrasive Discs
The abrasive instruments can also be found on the shape of a
disc. They are available in many diameters (1/2, 5/8, 3/4, and
7/8 inches) and require some type of mandrel so they can be
used. Many are made using a metallic or plastic disc, over which an agglutinant and a layer of abrasive are applied. For
this reason, they are called abrasive-coated instruments
(. Fig. 4.30a , b). The discs made over a plastic base are used
for polishing flat surfaces of composite restorations on anterior teeth, while the diamond metallic discs are used in laboratorial work. To create a smooth surface, they are presented
in kits of discs in decreasing abrasivity identified by different
colors.
There are discs made completely by abrasive stone, similar to a mounted stone. They are much used to finish or to cut
metallic pieces outside the mouth and are generally called
Carborundum discs ( . Fig. 4.30c ). However, the word
Carborundum does not refer exactly to an abrasive material,
but to the name of a company founded by Edward Goodrich
Acheson in , after he invented the SiC, the first artificial
abrasive.
4.3.3.3 Accessory Rotary Instruments
Some rotary instruments frequently used on daily practice
are not abrasive by themselves, but are used with abrasive
pastes. Among them are some rotary bristle brushes and the
rubber and felt instruments ( . Fig. 4.31a1–4, b). The brushes
present plastic bristles and can have a flat or conic tip, gener -
ally named Robinson’s brushes. The rubber instruments can
have a conic or a cup shape, while the felt instruments can
have the shape of a disc or of a cone. The brushes as well as
the rubber cups and cones are used for dental prophylaxis
and for polishing of restorations. The felt discs are available
in various diameters. They are indicated to polish composite
restorations on anterior teeth. The felt cones are indicated to
polish the occlusal surfaces of composite resin restorations or
on the lingual surfaces of the maxillary anterior teeth.
The accessory rotary instruments are used with abrasive
pastes such as pumice, calcium carbonate (Spanish white),
zinc oxide, aluminum oxide, or diamond, among others,
depending on the purpose. As for the other abrasive instruments, to reach a well-polished surface, a sequence of
pastes that contain abrasive grains with decreasing sizes
must be used, to reduce the substrate roughness on each
change. There are some brands of felt discs that already
come impregnated with an abrasive agent ( . Fig. 4.31b ,
asterisk), as well as of brushes that already contain silicon
carbide abrasive particles on the bristle composition
(. Fig. 4.31a , – 5 and 6).
4.3.4 Materials Used on the Fabrication
of Rotary Instruments
The hardness of a cutting or grinding instrument is an essential property. Of course, the cutting instrument must be harder
than the substrate. . Table 4.1 shows the hardness of some tissues, abrasives, instruments, and materials involved in dental
treatment. Previously, the burs were made of carbon steel
because the hardness was almost three times higher than that
of the enamel. However, it frequently suffered from oxidation
and quick loss of cut. In , the tungsten carbide burs were Instruments and Equipments
4
ab
cd
ef
g
.Fig. 4.29 Abrasive-impregnated rubber with different shapes. a Points; b cups; c discs; d abrasive rubber spiral wheels, e rubber point with
head worn after use; f sharpening of the rubber point with the diamond dresser (KG Sorensen); g rubber point after the reshaping
S. E. de Paiva Gonçalves et al.
4
launched onto the market, with a hardness almost six times
greater than the enamel . Those showed a much greater
durability and do not suffer from oxidation. Because the milling process of tungsten carbide is difficult and the material is more brittle, just the head of the bur is made with this material,
while the shank is made with stainless steel. The diamond par -
ticles present great grinding efficiency as it is one of the hardest
materials in nature, about 20 times harder than the enamel.
ab
c
.Fig. 4.30 Abrasive discs. a Abrasive-coated discs; b diamondcoated metallic disc; c discs made of abrasive stone
ab
.Fig. 4.31 Accessory rotary instruments. a Robinson brushes (1 and 2); rubber cups and cones (3 and 4); brushes with bristles impregnated by
silicon carbide (5 and 6); b felt discs and cones (∗ disc impregnated by abrasive agent)Instruments and Equipments
4
4.3.5 Basic Shape of Burs, Diamond Points,
and Mounted Stones
The head of rotary instruments is manufactured with some
shapes and characteristics to attend specific clinical applications. The basic shapes of the burs, diamond points, and
abrasive stones are round (spherical), cylinder (straight fissure), cone (taper or tapered fissure), and inverted cone
(short or long) ( . Fig. 4.32a , b). The cylinderand coneshaped instruments may have a flat, round, bevel, or point
end. Many other shapes are available, but most are modifications of the basic shapes. Another significant characteristic of
the burs and the diamond points is related to the rounding of
the corners formed between the end and the sides of the
instrument head. This characteristic creates round internal
line and point angles on a preparation, which avoids stress
concentration, reducing the chances of fracture of the tooth
structure. The burs and the diamond points are identified by numbers proposed by the American National Standards
Institute/American Dental Association (ANSI/ADA) and by
the International Organization for Standardization (ISO
), which is related to the shape, diameter, and length of
the head, as well as the diameter and length of the shank. It is
useful to know the diameters and the length of the bur as a
reference to measure the amount of grinding and the distances inside the tooth . The use of each type of bur or
diamond point is presented in the corresponding chapters
along with the corresponding restorative technique ( 7 Chaps.
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, and 17).
4.3.6 Factors Related to the Use of Rotary
Instruments
The axial rotation speed of a rotary instrument is the speed
that is developed following the longitudinal axis of the instrument. However, when cutting or grinding is performed on
any dental tissue, the peripheral speed of the border of the
instrument that touches the tooth surface is more important
than the axial speed, being called cutting speed. The cutting
speed increases as the diameter of the instrument increases.
Therefore, a diamond disc of 20 mm of diameter turning on
an axial speed of 24, rpm will have a peripheral speed on . Knoop microhardness of some material and tooth
tissues [5 ]
Material/tissue Knoop
microhardnessUse
Diamond Abrasive rotary
instrument
Silicon carbide
(SiC) Abrasive rotary
instrument
Tungsten carbide Burs
Aluminum oxide Abrasive rotary
instrument
Carbon steel Burs
Silicon dioxide
(silica) Air abrasion
Feldspathic
Porcelain460 Restorative material
Enamel Tooth structure
Stainless steel Hand cutting
instruments
Amalgam Restorative material
Dentin 70 Tooth structure
Hybrid composite
resin55 Restorative material
Cement 40 Tooth structure
Microfiller
composite resin30 Restorative material
Silver 30 Restorative material
Gold 24 Restorative material
Acrylic resin 20 Temporary indirect
restorations
a
b
.Fig. 4.32 Basic shapes of the rotary instruments (1, spherical or
round; 2, cylinder os straight fissure; 3, cone; 4, long inverted cone;
5, short inverted cone). a Diamond points; b burs
S. E. de Paiva Gonçalves et al.
4
the cutting edge of 25 m/s. For a bur of 2 mm in diameter to
have the same peripheral speed and consequently have the
same cutting efficiency, there is the necessity of an axial speed
of , rpm [18, 23]. With the current practice of minimally invasive dentistry, the use of rotary instruments with
small diameter became very popular, which makes the use of
a high-speed handpiece important so that an adequate cutting or grinding efficiency is obtained .
Another very important point in relation to the action of
the rotary instrument is the concentricity. It is the symmetry
of the instrument head and is related to the neck and the
shank. If the head or the bur presents an eccentricity during
use, the neck probably is leaned in relation to the long axis of
the shank, or the connection of the shank to turbine may
have a problem. Any detected eccentricity caused by one of
those factors must be solved immediately, because it reduces
the cutting effectiveness and produces an irregular cut of the
tooth structure and more vibrational effects. This may gener -
ate working difficulties to the dentist and great discomfort to
the patient.
The torque represents the capacity of the rotary instrument to resist the tendency of stopping the movement due to
the pressure produced by the contact between the instrument and the cutting surface [9 ]. The torque is measured in
N/cm or g/cm, and the current turbines have a torque of
11–20 g/cm. When the cut or grinding of the tooth structure
is performed, part of the kinetic energy from the burs in contact with the tooth is transformed into heat. One must therefore avoid to produce exaggerated pressure with the
instrument as it may cause excessive heating and compromise the pulpal vitality. Therefore, the torque level of the
handpieces must be limited so that the instrument stops
before an exaggerated heat is produced . Besides the cutting pressure, the friction heat has a direct relation to the
rotation speed, type, size, quality, and time of use of the cutting or grinding instrument. When it turns more than
rpm, all instruments must be refrigerated to avoid pulpal
damage. The recommended refrigeration is with water/air
spray that must be directed to the head of the bur. Apart
from allowing the dissipation of frictional heat, the refrigeration during the cut acts as a cleansing agent of debris gener -
ated during the cut.
4.3.7 Safety Procedures
Almost all procedures that use operatory instruments
involve some risk to the patient, dentist, and assistant. This
can be related to eye lesions because of particle projection,
ear lesions because of the noise, and the constant inhalation
of toxic substances or infectious agents. Specifically to the
patient, there is the risk of pulpal damage due to heating or
accidental exposure, besides soft tissue injuries. However,
the use of adequate security measures can reduce most of the
risk [ 23].
During the use of rotary instruments, particles of old restorations and dental fragments can be displaced and pro-jected towards the eyes of the dentist or assistant, causing
irritation and even serious damages. This can be avoided
with the use of proper safety glasses with lateral protection
. Even the individuals that use corrective glasses must
wear safety glasses, over the corrective glasses, or use protection glasses with the necessary degree of correction.
The aerosol created by the cutting procedures (containing saliva or blood, for instance) can contaminate the dentist and his auxiliary staff, causing cross contamination
through the working area and equipment. For this reason,
the use of surgical masks is mandatory for the dentist and
assistant to avoid aspiration of the contaminants present in
the aerosols. It is worth mentioning that the patients can
eventually have infectious diseases such as hepatitis, tuber -
culosis, and meningitis. Another measure that can contribute with the protection of the dentist and assistant is to
work under rubber dam isolation, even during the cavity
preparation.
The rotary instruments must be sterilized before use.
For this reason, some manufacturers produce burs and diamond points for single use that are previously sterilized by
gamma radiation. The burs can be sterilized by dry or
humid heat or even using antimicrobial solutions. However,
the chemical sterilization tends to lead to instrument corrosion. When sterilized in a stove or autoclave, the burs must
be positioned in bur block holders, which also allows for
better organization and localization during clinical procedures (. Fig. 4.33 ).
4.4 Oscillatory Abrasive Instruments
The oscillatory instruments for dental use are metallic
shanks with heads covered by diamond and attached to an
oscillating device. Instead of producing a rotary movement, they vibrate or oscillate in different directions, promoting the friction of the head with the tooth structure,
resulting in grinding. The oscillatory handpieces can work
by vibration, as in the cases of sonic or ultrasonic devices,
or by back-and-forth reciprocating linear motion, called
the EV A system.
.Fig. 4.33 Burs block holders for sterilization of the rotary
instrumentsInstruments and Equipments
44.4.1 Oscillatory Handpieces
The oscillatory handpieces produce vibrational waves that
can generally be classified into mechanical and nonmechanical. The mechanical waves are the ones that propagate in a
deformable or elastic environment. As examples, the sound
waves, waves on a spring, or waves on the water can be mentioned. They originate from a disturbance in a region of an
elastic environment. If the environment has elastic proper -
ties, the disturbance is transmitted successively from one
point to another. The particles of the environment vibrate
only around its position of equilibrium, without a whole displacement. The nonmechanical waves, such as the electromagnetics, do not need a material environment for its
propagation. An example is the light, which can go through
the vacuum in the interstellar space.
The sound waves are characterized by vibrations (variations of pressure) on the air. A healthy human being can hear
and distinguish sounds on the approximate range of frequency from 20 to 20, Hz. The ultrasound is a sound with
a frequency superior to the one that the human ear can
notice. The sonic waves are inside the range of human per -
ception, while the waves below 20 Hz are known as infrasound. The researchers noticed that the use of instruments
that oscillated in very high frequencies could be useful in
many dental applications, as on the removal of calculus or on
the cavity preparation. Nowadays, there are two types of
vibrational oscillating devices available for dental purposes,
and they are sonic and ultrasonic. The oscillating devices
with reciprocating movements produce a back-and-forth
movement, promoting friction of the abrasive agents with the
surface to be worn.
4.4.1.1 Sonic Devices
On the sonic systems, the work is generated from a pneumatic pressure applied internally on an axis supported over
rubber rings. The exit of the air happens through the holes
that exist on the axis, over which a steel bushing is fixated
and will rotate by the pressure of the air, keeping intermittent
contact with the external surface of the axis. The turning of
the bushing over the axis transmits an oscillatory movement
to the handpiece attached to the instruments, with an
approximate frequency of – Hz, depending on the
brand. Besides the air for propulsion used to rotate the bushing, there is a water connection with exit on the handpiece
tip. The refrigerating air jet avoids overheating, keeps the
work surface clean, and reduces the sensitivity after the treatment. The movement amplitude of the vibration wave can be
adjusted in some devices. The greater the amplitude, the
greater is the effectiveness of the grinding. The SONICflex
LUX /L (KaVo) device allows that the amplitude is
adjusted by the operator to μ m (finishing and delicate
procedures), μ m (cavity preparation), or μ m (faster
and more aggressive preparations). Other examples of
devices are the SONICborden N (KaVo) and the
Cavitador Sonico Air Scaler (Microdont) ( . Fig. 4.34a , b).4.4.1.2 Ultrasonic Devices
The work in ultrasonic devices is generated by transducers.
Briefly, the transducer is a device that converts one type of
energy into another. The ultrasonic transducers convert electrical energy into mechanical energy. There are two types of
transducers that can produce ultrasonic movement, the magnetoelectric or magnetostrictive as well as the piezoelectric
systems.
The magnetostrictive system consists of the passage of
electricity over special metallic blades, creating vibrations
and producing heat during the use, which requests more
refrigeration. This technology was used on the firstgeneration
devices. The piezoelectric effect was discovered by Pierre and
Jacques Curie, in , and it consists of a variation on the
physical dimension of specific crystalline materials that were
subjected to electrical field. When a piezoelectric material is
put into an electrical field, the electrical charge of the crystalline net interacts with it and produces mechanical tensions.
The quartz and the tourmaline, natural crystals, are piezoelectrics. However nowadays, special ceramic chips made of
polycrystalline lead zirconate titanate (PZT) are used on
these devices. The crystal to be used as a transducer must be
cut in a way that an alternated electrical field, when applied
on it, produces variations on its width. Those variations produce a movement of the faces of the crystal, originating sound
waves. Each transducer has a natural resonance frequency so
that the smaller the thickness of the crystal, the greater the
vibration frequency. Most of the ultrasonic devices available
in the market use a piezoelectric system ( . Fig. 4.35 ).
It is important to mention that patients and dentists that
have a heart pacemaker should not use ultrasonic devices,
due to undesirable interferences that they can produce to the
heart’s rhythm. This problem is more critical with the use of
magnetostrictive devices, but on a safer way, it is wise to
advice clinicians and patients who have a heart pacemaker
not to work with nor undergo treatment with any ultrasonic
device .
4.4.1.3 Reciprocating Movement Devices
These devices use a working principle called the vertical
reciprocating action, which is based on the conversion of the
rotary movement of the turbines on a back-and-forth movement, repeated many times in a continuous way. The amplia
b
.Fig. 4.34 Sonic devices for the cavity preparation a SONICborden
N (KaVo); b Air Scaler (Microdont)
S. E. de Paiva Gonçalves et al.
4
tude of this movement can vary from 0.8 to 1.4 mm,
depending on the brand of the device, and is known as the
EV A system. They promote a grinding action similar to a
sandpaper, but on a much smaller scale. It can be associated
with many types of diamond or plastic points, for different
applications, such as for finishing and polishing or cavity
preparation. The most common type is the point with the
pyramidal section, similar to a wooden wedge, that adapts
into interproximal spaces to polish or remove restoration
overhangs. The contra-angle EV A Prophylactic Head (KaVo),
Ti-Max EV A (NSK), and EV A-F (Brasseler) are examples of
this technology ( . Fig. 4.36 ).
4.4.2 Types of Diamond Points
The diamond points used in sonic or ultrasonic oscillating
devices can be made by agglutination of natural diamonds,
similar to a rotary diamond point, or by deposition of the
newly formed diamond directly onto the shank.
4.4.2.1 Points with Agglutinated Diamonds
The diamond points for use in oscillating devices can have
many different shapes, depending on the desired clinical
application, as it can be observed in . Fig. 4.37. On these
points, the natural diamond particles are bonded to the
metallic head by means of an electroplating process. The
SONICflex LINE Tips kit, produced by the KaVo company
(Germany), is recommended for the use in sonic devices. It
has many points for various applications in operative dentistry, such as the preparation of minimally invasive occlusal
cavities, proximal surfaces with difficult access, removal of
carious tissue, or the preparation of marginal bevels. It can
also be used in the preparation of indirect restorations, where
the buccal and lingual walls of the proximal boxes need to be
prepared with an ideal angulation and standardized cavosur -
face margin ( . Fig. 15.11a –h). The recommended points for
proximal surfaces present diamond deposition on only one
side, which avoids the undesired grinding of the adjacent
tooth. The EMS company (Switzerland) also produces points with agglutinated diamonds in many shapes to be used in
ultrasonic devices, while the Intensiv company (Switzerland)
produces many points with agglutinated diamond to use
with the contra-angle of reciprocating action on the EV A
system.
4.4.2.2 Points with Deposited Diamonds (CVD)
Another alternative for the manufacturing of diamond
instruments is the deposition of artificial diamonds directly
over the metal head of the instrument, through a process
called chemical vapor deposition or CVD. The points made
by this process were developed by the DIMARE (Diamonds
and Related Materials) group from the National Institute of
Space Research (INPE) in Brazil, based on experiments that
produced the columnar growth of diamonds on metal
threads with a small diameter . The CVDVale company
patented this technology for dental use in ultrasonic device,
.Fig. 4.35 Ultrasonic device (CVDent – CVDentus)
.Fig. 4.36 Handpiece of the EVA system (Ti-Max – NSK)
.Fig. 4.37 Diamond points with various shapes produced by
agglutination of diamond particles (SONICflex LINE Tips – KaVo)Instruments and Equipments
4
and the points were launched onto the market in . The
metal heads of CVD points are made of molybdenum. The
vapor chemical deposition happens due to methane and
hydrogen gases inside a reactor, under vacuum and high
temperature.
Those points have a thick and well-bonded layer of diamond on the active head, without the need of an agglutinant for connection ( . Fig. 4.38a , b). They are very durable,
resisting to the ultrasound vibrations when grinding hard
materials. The points have various shapes and grits and
work together with the adapters that promote the connection with the ultrasonic devices ( . Fig. 4.39a–c ). They are
indicated for cavity preparation, removal of amalgam or
composite restorations, and bone grinding. The many
shapes and angles allow for adequate use in different applications. As these points promote the grinding through
vibration, they do not require long-axis symmetry and balance. This allows the production of heads with flat shapes or
with multiple angles, improving significantly the access to
remote sites.
The use of diamond instruments with the ultrasonic
device, on the range of frequency between 25, and 35,
Hz, produces changes on the structure where the waves
propagate. The particles of the environment where the waves
are applied are energized, causing vibration and transmission
of energy also in the form of waves to the adjacent particles
. In the liquid environment, the waves are transmitted and
dissipated with little resistance, causing the formation of air
bubbles ( . Fig. 4.40 ).
When the ultrasonic technology is clinically used for
grinding of the tooth structure or in the removal of old restorations, significant differences in relation to the use of
rotary high-speed handpiece are noticed. These include the pressure applied, the direction of the grinding head, and the
use of a continuous contact with the tissue or substrate. In
relation to the pressure applied, while on the rotary highspeed instruments, the increase of pressure increases the
removal of the structure; with the sonic and ultrasonic
points, the increase of pressure significantly decreases the
grinding effectiveness. That increases the working time and
reduces the durability of the instrument. This is attributed to
the fact that the pressure applied by the dentist on the handpiece counteracts the anteriorposterior vibration that naturally happens on the device, decreasing the effectiveness of
the grinding. The ideal pressure for the handling of an ultra -
sonic device is the weight of the handpiece itself, avoiding an
extra pressure from the operator.
The reduced pressure is considered to be a factor that
contributes to the reduction of tooth sensitivity during the
use of ultrasonic points . Some studies demonstrated that
the use of ultrasonic devices for cavity preparation is more
comfortable for the patient. It allows for a psychological
reprogramming and an improvement of the pain threshold,
when compared to the use of high-speed rotation, reducing
the need of anesthetics in some procedures [10, 15]. The
reduction of sensitivity should not reflect in complete elimination of the anesthetic procedure. The variations among
patients in relation to the pain threshold, the psychological
preparation, and the depth of the cavity preparation should
be taken into consideration on the choice of treatment.
Besides reduced pressure, lower teeth sensitivity can be due
to reduced dentinal fluid movement and heating of the tooth
structure. This is because in CVD devices, the water used in
irrigation slightly warms up as it passes through the handpiece, avoiding thermal discomfort to the dentin [7, 14, 28].
An in vivo study has compared the dentin-pulp complex
ab
.Fig. 4.38 Microscopic image of the CVD diamond point surface a , in comparison with a point with agglutinated diamonds b
S. E. de Paiva Gonçalves et al.
4
response between the use of CVD point for ultrasonic device
and the diamond point for high-speed handpiece in human
molars. It concluded that none of the systems caused significant changes to the odontoblastic layers .
The abrasion speed of the CVD systems is slower than the
rotary instruments. Therefore, procedures that require the
cut of big amounts of substrate, such as prosthetic tooth preparations, removal of metallic or ceramic prosthesis, or
endodontic access, are not indicated for ultrasonic points
. The ultrasonic system presents an average of 2 minutes
longer working time in comparison to the rotary high-speed
handpiece . However, amalgam restorations become loose
during removal with the ultrasonic device, which turns the
work easier.
All the points have a 60° angulation, and some models have
double angulation. Under the action of the ultrasonic device,
the active end vibrates back and forth on the same plane
defined by the point. This movement results in areas with distinct grinding effectiveness around the head. The anterior and
posterior areas of the head cause a greater impact and faster
grinding over the surface to be worn than the sides of the head.
Both lateral surfaces are in a perpendicular plane to the anterior-posterior movement generating no impact. The oscillations of the sides produce a more characteristic movement of
polishing, resulting in a smoother surface. In a comparative
evaluation, moving the head forward grinds out faster than
backward. In general, the most efficient grinding happens
when the device is moved toward the head side. To increase
the efficiency of grinding, the head must be constantly moved,
but this movement cannot be associated with pressure. To start
a cavity preparation, the movement must begin with slight
ab
c
.Fig. 4.39 Points with various shapes with CVD diamonds. a Regular grit; b fine grit; c adapter for the CVD diamond point to connect the
device
.Fig. 4.40 Formation of bubbles during the use of the ultrasonic
diamond pointsInstruments and Equipments
4pressure and circular movement, for the tip of the head to
achieve a more effective grinding. However, to enlarge the cavity, an anterior-posterior movement must be used, also with a
slight pressure and avoiding the lever movement.
Another advantage of the use of the ultrasonic device is
its selective grinding. It only works on hard tissues, without
harming the soft tissues. That is why no harm or bleeding of
the lips, cheeks, and tongue, as well as no piercing of the rubber dam, polyester matrix strips, or gauze and cotton rolls, is
usually observed.
4.5 Complementary Instruments
Most of the complementary instruments to the restorative
procedures are similar in appearance to the hand cutting
instruments, but with differences in the blade. The amalgam
carver, for example, has blades for sculpting instead of blades
for dental cutting. For the non-cutting instruments, the blade
is replaced by nibs with various applications. In the amalgam
condenser and burnisher, the blade is replaced by flat and
dull nibs, respectively. Special spatulas are used for mixing
materials and others to carry the protecting or restorative
materials into the cavity. Other complementary instruments
include the clinical mirror, exploratory probes, tweezers, and
pliers, besides the anesthetic syringe and small pots, as presented here .4.5.1 Clinical Mirror
For the procedures performed in the mouth, it is important
that the dentist has a perfect vision of the operating field.
Whenever possible, the direct vision must be used. However,
in specific areas of the mouth, the indirect vision obtained
with a clinical mirror is the only option to allow for an adequate visualization of the operating field. The indirect vision
helps clinicians to keep a correct work posture, without the
need to lean the body forward or sideward. The mirror also
allows for light reflection, which helps illuminate the area
that is being examined or treated . The clinical mirror
also serves to put away the cheeks, tongue, or lips to aid for
the access and visualization . For clear vision, the reflexive surface of the mirror must be above the glass, on the socalled first-surface mirror ( . Fig. 4.41a ). Some mirrors
present the reflexive surface under the glass, which is called
the second-surface mirror, resulting in distortions and double and less clear images (ghost images and waviness)
(. Fig. 4.41b ). To differentiate both types, an instrument
should be put in contact with the mirror ( . Fig. 4.41a ). If the
instrument touches the image, it is a first-surface mirror.
Clinical mirrors have a circular shape and are presented in
several sizes, related to determined reference numbers
(3–1.95 cm, 4–2.23 cm, and 5–2.43 cm). The most commonly
used in adults are the numbers 4 and 5. For the areas of hard
access or for children, the number 3 can be useful
ab
c
.Fig. 4.41 a First-surface mirror; b second-surface mirror; c clinical mirror with different sizes
S. E. de Paiva Gonçalves et al.
4
(. Fig. 4.41c ). Most mirrors have flat surfaces creating a 1:1
sized image, while others have a concave surface, which
slightly increases the image size .
4.5.2 Tweezers and Forceps
The tweezers are other indispensable item in the routine of a
dentist. The clinical tweezer is useful to hold small items,
such as cotton rolls, and carry them into the mouth
(. Fig. 4.42a , b). Another very useful instrument is the
Halstead hemostatic mosquito forceps, which is similar to a
tweezer but with a lock, and is used to firmly insert or remove
items, such as the interproximal wooden wedges
(. Fig. 4.42d ). The Miller articulating paper forceps was created to bring into the mouth the articulating paper, in
between the dental arches, to mark the contact between
opposing teeth ( . Fig. 4.42c ).
4.5.3 Exploratory Probe
The exploratory probe or dental explorer is a pointed instrument used for tactile examination of irregularities on the tooth
surface and restorations, and determination of the consistency
of tissues. The most used type has the shape of a hook
(. Fig. 4.43e ). Another common type presents a straight end
with a fold in a straight angle ( . Fig. 4.43g ). In general, these
two tips are associated with the same instrument. Another useful probe is known as “cow horn” or “pigtail” ( . Fig. 4.43d ).
There are also probes with straight end for endodontics
(. Fig. 4.43a –c) or probes with dull end for checking the root
surfaces, on the diagnose of carious lesions or periodontal disease (. Fig. 4.13f ). Most of the instruments available in the mar -
ket are double-ended, presenting different tips on each side.4.5.4 Mixing Spatula
A great variety of restorative materials need to be mixed with
a spatula, over a paper block or a glass plate, before use. The
spatulas are available in different sizes and thickness, depending on the application ( . Fig. 4.44a–d ). The large spatulas are
used to mix large amounts of materials, while the small ones
are for reduced quantities, such as in the case of protective
lining materials. Small spatulas have also been used to mix
small quantities of resin cements. The thin spatulas are more
flexible than the thick ones, and the choice between one over
another depends on the material to be mixed . The zinc
oxide-eugenol cement, for example, needs a more rigid spatula, while the glass ionomer cement is easily mixed with a
flexible spatula.
a
b
c
d
.Fig. 4.42 Different types of tweezers and forceps. a , b Clinical
tweezers; c Miller articulating paper forceps; d Halstead mosquito
forceps
ab cd ef g
.Fig. 4.43 Exploratory probes. a –c Straight probes; d , e curved
probes; f inactive end probe; g straight probe with bended end
ab cd
.Fig. 4.44 Different types of spatulas. a Spatula No. 22; b spatula
No. 50; c spatula No. 24; d spatula No. 36Instruments and Equipments
44.5.5 Instrument for Filling and Modeling
The plastic filling instruments are used for carrying materials into the cavities and sculpting composites or GIC, to
restore the shape of the damaged tooth structure. Various
options are available, made in many shapes and with differ -
ent materials ( . Fig. 4.45a ). The most used instrument has
two paddleshaped flat ends, in perpendicular directions,
which are very useful to shape anterior restorations
(. Fig. 4.45a ). Some instruments are also covered with a
non-sticking coating of titanium nitride of golden color
(. Fig. 14.47k ). Different combinations are available for
double-ended instruments, such as a flat nib on one side and
a plugger or a small sphere on the other side, that help to
adapt the material into cavities with difficult access ( . Fig.
14.47j ). In addition, those instruments are also used to help
the rubber dam placement and for the insertion of gingival
retraction cords.
There are also sculpting instruments with silicon nibs,
which present the advantage of being non-sticky ( . Fig. 4.45b ,
c). Other instruments that are very useful for modeling resin
composites are special brushes with tips in various shapes.
The best ones are made of natural Kolinsky fur or synthetic
materials ( . Fig. 4.45d ). The flat brushes are particularly useful to smoothen up the superficial layer of esthetic restorations (. Fig. 14.38u ).
The retraction cord packing instruments are available with
straight or round edge. Their thin edges and fine serrations
sink into the cord, preventing it from slipping off and reducing the risk of cutting the gingival attachment ( . Figs. 4.46a
and 14.44c ). Finally, another instrument that is used for applying protective materials is the calcium hydroxide liner placement instrument ( . Figs. 4.46b and 9.18g ). It presents a tiny
sphere on the nib that retains the material, which can be precisely applied in areas of difficult access. This instrument is
also commonly used for the application of GIC.
4.5.6 Condensers
The condensers or pluggers are instruments used to condense
and adapt the amalgam toward the walls of a cavity preparation (. Fig. 11.6j , k). Their nibs are flat and generally circular
in cross section, even though some models can also be rectangular- or diamond-shaped. There are basically three types
of condensers, the ones developed by Black have a cylindrical
nib, while the ones developed by Hollenback have coneshaped nibs. The pluggers created by Ward have inverted
a b
c d
.Fig. 4.45 a Many types of plastic filling instruments for sculpting
composites; b instruments with silicon tips (silicon brush – Micerium);
c silicon sculpting instruments (Esthetics Plus, TDV); d brushes with different shapes (on the left the Kolinsky fur and on the right synthetic
fur – Kota)
S. E. de Paiva Gonçalves et al.
4
cone-shaped nibs ( . Fig. 4.47a , b). The pressure of condensation is related to the force applied by the operator and to the
diameter of the nib. The small ones result in more pressure
and are ideal to condense the material in places of difficult
access, such as retention areas. The large nibs are used to condense large amounts of material on the occlusal surface.
4.5.7 Carvers
The carvers are used to shape amalgam restorations ( . Fig.
11.6y ). The blades must be kept sharp to provide effectiveness. The most used carvers are the No. 3 and No. 3S
(Hollenback carvers), the discoid (on the shape of a disc) and
the cleoid (claw-shaped), the set of instruments developed by
Frahm, and the interproximal carver (IPC) ( . Fig. 4.48). The
use of each instrument depends on the site and type of anatomy to be reproduced, besides individual preferences during
the use. More details will be provided in 7 Chap. 11.
4.5.8 Burnishers
The burnisher is an instrument that has a dull nib with many
shapes. It is used by rubbing the nib on the surface of amalgam restorations, before and after carving, to improve con-densation of the material and create a smoother surface
(. Fig. 11.6h , i, j). . Figure 4.49 shows examples of different
burnishers.
4.5.9 Intraoral Carriers
Intraoral carriers are instruments used to carry material into
the cavity preparation, similarly to a syringe. They have a
ab
.Fig. 4.46 a Retraction cord packing instruments; b calcium hydroxide liner placement instrument
ab
.Fig. 4.47 Amalgam condensers. a Ward; b Black
ab cd ef gh
.Fig. 4.48 Amalgam carvers (a IPC; b, c and d Frahm set; e discoid;
f cleoid; g Hollenback 3; h Hollenback 3S)Instruments and Equipments
4cannula with a circular cross section, where the material is
compressed, and an embolus that when pressed pushes the
material out. There are many models available in the market,
depending on the desired application. . Figure 4.50a shows
carriers for silver amalgam, while . Fig. 4.50b shows carriers
for powder materials, such as calcium hydroxide pro-analysis
(PA) and the mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA).
4.5.10 Scissors
The scissors are used in operative dentistry for many pur -
poses, such as to cut matrix strips, rubber dam, and retraction cords. The most commonly used scissors are with a fine
tip also called Iris scissors. These can reach areas of difficult
access inside the mouth, as in the moment when the septum
of rubber dam in the interproximal spaces needs to be cut, to
remove the rubber dam isolation. The Iris scissors have this
name because they were originally designed for the fine detail
work of ophthalmic surgery. There are also the so-called scissors for gold, used in the past to cut gold foil for direct restorations. Both types can present straight or curved ends,
depending on the application ( . Fig. 4.51a , b).4.5.11 Matrix Retainer
The matrix retainers are instruments designed to hold a
metallic strip, called matrix band, used to give contour to
restorations at the proximal surfaces ( . Fig. 8.2a). There
are many types available in the market, as it can be
observed in . Fig. 4.52a–c . More details are presented in
7 Chap. 8.
4.5.12 Clamps, Clamp Forceps, and Rubber
Dam Punch
The clamps are instruments designed to adapt to the cervical
area of the tooth, allowing the fixation of rubber dam in a
rubber dam isolation ( . Fig. 4.53a ). Clamps are taken to
position by clamp forceps, as it is shown in . Fig. 4.53b . The
rubber dam punch forceps is an instrument used to open
holes on the rubber dam ( . Fig. 4.53c ). More details are presented in 7 Chap. 7.
ab
1
1
2
2
3
.Fig. 4.50 a Amalgam carriers (1 10A-PF, Duflex; 2 12A-H, Duflex; 3 S.S. White model, Duflex); b powder material carriers (1, MTA carrier,
Angelus; 2, MTA M carrier, Golgran)
a
b
.Fig. 4.51 Scissors. a Iris scissors; b Scissors for gold
ab cd
.Fig. 4.49 Amalgam burnishers (a egg shape; b Bennett;
c Hollenback No. 6; d Clev-Dent burnisher)
S. E. de Paiva Gonçalves et al.
4
4.5.13 Pliers
Some pliers can have a very important role in restorative procedures, helping to adjust the clamps ( 7 Chap. 7) or to bend
the matrix strips, as it is the case of the “flat-nose” pliers
(. Fig. 4.54a ). The riveting pliers ( . Fig. 4.54b ) are used to prepare a custom-made matrix and its use is explained in
7 Chap. 12 (. Fig. 12.15a –o).
4.5.14 Dappen Dishes
Dappen dishes are very useful pots that retain relatively small
quantities of materials, such as abrasive agents, gels, solutions
and adhesives, used during the restorative treatment. Dappen
dishes can be made of glass, plastic, silicon, or even metal, in
many shapes, with or without lids ( . Fig. 4.55a–f ).
4.5.15 Carpule Syringe
The carpule syringe or dental syringe is used to inject local
anesthetics, which allows for the control of pain during treatment. It presents a system that allows adaptation of the dental
carpules, which are small cylindrical tubes containing dental
anesthetics, and needles of small diameters which are screwed
onto dental syringes ( . Fig. 4.56 – 1, 2, and 3).
4.6 Vision Magnifiers
The quality of work performed by the clinician has direct
relation with the capacity to clearly visualize the operating
field. Therefore, devices that amplify the vision are very useful in restorative procedures. Among the vision magnifiers,
there are the dental loupes, which are attached to the head of
a
b
c
.Fig. 4.52 Matrix retainers. a Tofflemire; b Ivory; c Siqveland
a
b
c
.Fig. 4.53 a Clamps; b forceps for clamps; c Ainsworth rubber dam
punch
abcd
e
f
.Fig. 4.55 Dappen dishes. a Glass; b plastic; c silicon; d plastic with
lid; e stainless steel with lid; f Teflon coated
a
b
.Fig. 4.54 a Flat-nose plier; b riveting pliersInstruments and Equipments
4the dentist or on their glasses, allowing for a magnification of
up to four times the size of the original image ( . Figs. 4.57a
and 2.17f ). Dental loupes with greater magnification capacity
are generally heavy and can restrict head movement and
impair the stability of the vision field. In the 1970s the use of
the dental operating microscope has been introduced in dentistry. Despite the name, the device does not allow for microscopic observation of objects, providing a magnification that
can range from 3 to 20 times . Similar instruments for
laboratorial use are known as stereomicroscope ( . Fig. 4.57b ).
The use of the microscope allows the dentist to work on a
more ergonomic posture. Moreover, some models transfer
the images on to a screen and are able to record the dental
procedure on a personal computer.
Tip
There are some loupe systems associated with
headlights, which facilitates visualization of the working
environment.
4.7 Airborne-Particle Abrasion
The technique of airborne-particle abrasion consists of the
use of abrasive aluminum oxide particles expelled in high speed by air blow of high pressure. The friction of the particles with great kinetic energy on the tooth surface promotes
an abrasion. In the 1940s, an electrical abrasive instrument
called Airdent, manufactured by the S.S. White company,
was launched onto the market to be used on cavity preparations. However, at the time, all the restorations needed a
defined geometrical shape, which could not be obtained with
this technology. For this reason, its use was abandoned. With
the popularization of the restorative adhesive materials in the
1980s, the device was reintroduced to the market and it was
better accepted . One advantage of this method is the
absence of vibration and noise, which is a characteristic of
the high-speed handpiece, besides allowing minimally invasive cavity preparations. Large particles (50 μm) can be used
to promote a faster grinding, while small particles (27 μm)
are recommended to promote a slower grinding.
One disadvantage of the previous devices was that they
generated a lot of dust, because of the spreading of particles
and debris in the oral environment. In the more modern
devices, the powder jet on the center of the tip is surrounded
by a water jet, which allows for less contamination of the
environment with the powder. Airborne-particle abrasion
devices are available as independent units or attached to the
compressed air outlet of the dental delivery units ( . Fig. 4.58a ,
b). Some devices can slightly heat the water to decrease the
discomfort caused by the thermal shock, in the cases where
anesthesia is not being used.
4.8 Laser
The word LASER is an acronym for light amplification by
stimulated emission of radiation. The light is electromagnetic energy which moves through space, with specific
characteristics according to the wavelength. As examples of
electromagnetic waves with different wavelengths, from the
smallest to the greatest, there are the gamma rays, the
X-rays, the ultraviolet, the visible light, the infrared, the
microwaves, and the radio waves. On the so-called visible
light, the wavelength can vary from to nm, being
ab
.Fig. 4.57 Vision magnifiers. a Dentist using dental loupes during clinical procedure; b dental operating microscope
.Fig. 4.56 Disposable needle (1), carpule syringe (2), and dental
carpules
S. E. de Paiva Gonçalves et al.
4
captured by human eyes and identified by the brain as various colors. Each color corresponds to a range of wavelength.
However, the emitted light by the laser presents peculiar
characteristics, different for example, from the solar light or
from the ones that come from a conventional bulb. The
laser light has monochromaticity, collimation, and coher -
ence . The first of them is related to the color. While in
the white light coming from a light bulb there is a mixture
of many different wavelengths, on laser there is only one
wavelength and color, being called a monochromatic light.
. Figure 4.59a shows a schematic representation of the
white light and laser passing through a prism. The white
light is separated in its different wavelengths, while the laser
does not separate. In addition, the regular light waves travel
in different directions, while in the laser all the waves travel
on the same direction, forming a collimated beam
(. Fig. 4.59b ). The third characteristic of the laser corresponds to coherence. It means that the many waves that
compose the beam are emitted in a way that its crests and
valleys coincide ( . Fig. 4.59c ).
The theory of stimulated emission of radiation was proposed by the physicist Albert Einstein in . However, it
was only converted into reality by the studies of Charles
H. Townes in , by means of amplification of the microwaves with the MASER device, and by Theodore Maiman in
, when the first laser equipment was built with the ruby
crystal . The emission of the light from laser devices
happens by a quantum process. It is known that the atoms
present a nucleus, composed of protons and neutrons, and
are surrounded by the electrosphere. On it the electrons are
disposed on energetic sublevels. The closest to the nucleus
an electron is orbiting, the less energy it has, and it is said on
the fundamental state. If this atom receives energy from an
external source, the electron goes to a more external sublevel, entering to what is called an excited state. In normal
situations, this electron will not be able to maintain this state
and will return to the fundamental state. Therefore, the
absorbed energy is eliminated as a photon, which is a packet
of energy. This process is called spontaneous emission of
radiation.
ab
.Fig. 4.58 Air abrasion device. a PrepStart H2O (Danville); b air abrasion handpiece – RONDOflex (KaVo)
a
b
cWHITE LIGHT
LASER
.Fig. 4.59 Characteristics laser light. a Monochromaticity;
b collimation; c coherenceInstruments and Equipments
4In the laser devices, the atoms that are responsible for the
light generation are named active laser medium, and they are
in an environment which can be solid (crystal), liquid, or gas.
When it receives energy from an external source, the electrons of those atoms pass to an excited state. However, before
they eventually return to the fundamental state, they receive
more energy, so it causes the electron to be forced to return to
the most internal sublevel, releasing now two exactly similar
photons by stimulated emission, with the same wavelength
and coherence. Therefore, on a process of stimulated emission, there is a type of cloning of photons, increasing the
quantity of similar photons. The active medium is built
between two mirrors in a device called optical resonator, in a
way that only the photons that travel in the same direction
are used, allowing the beam to have a collimation .
Depending on the material used as an active medium,
many wavelengths can be produced. The active medium is
mixed with the other materials that compose the environment where the light is produced. For example, in the ruby
laser developed by Maiman, the ruby is a crystal of aluminum oxide that contains a little chromium inside, and the
chromium is the active medium. On the helium and neon
gas lasers, the neon atoms are the ones that generate the
characteristic red light. Therefore, the active medium gives
the name to the laser. Each type of active medium is capable of generating a specific wavelength, and it can be part
of the visible or non-visible spectrum of light, such as the
ultraviolet or the infrared . The laser can be emitted
continuously or in a pulsing way, in an attempt to control
the heat produced. Depending on the power output, the
devices can be classified into highor low-power laser
(. ).Depending on the characteristics of the target tissue, different interactions between the laser and the substrate can
happen. The laser light can be reflected by the surface of the
material it hits, be transmitted through it, spread on its interior, or be absorbed. What determines which effect will take
place is the characteristics of the substrate. The most impor -
tant biological effects happen when the light is absorbed,
where the light energy is converted in heat, on the so-called
photothermal effect. Depending on the quantity of heat generated, the laser energy can be used to coagulate or vaporize
the tissue. For the light to be absorbed, the spectrum of the
laser emission has to coincide with the peak absorption of
the target tissue. However, even when the heating is low, biological effects called photochemicals may also occur.
. Table 4.3 shows the effect of different temperatures over
the tissues.
. Types of laser, active medium, power, wavelength, and operational mode
Type Active medium Power Wavelength (nm) Mode
Infrared CO2High 10, Continuous
Er,Cr:YSGG High Continuous/pulse
Er:YAG High Continuous/pulse
Ho:YAG High Pulse
Nd:YAG High Continuous/pulse
Diode laser (GaAlAs) Low Continuous/pulse
Visible Diode laser (GaAlAs) Low Continuous
HeNe Low Continuous
Argon High/low ; Continuous
Ultraviolet XeF High Pulse
XeCl High Pulse
KrF High Pulse
Arf High Pulse . Temperature and respective effect over the
biological tissues
TemperatureEffects
37–60 °C Heating, absence of visual change
60– °C Denaturation of the protein and coagulation,
shrinkage of the tissue, hemostasis
Above
°CVaporization, disintegration of the tissue, cut,
ablation
Above
°CCarbonization of the organic materials, melting
and crystallization of the inorganic material
S. E. de Paiva Gonçalves et al.
4
The effects of the laser depend on its power and how the
irradiated tissue interacts with this energy. Therefore, the
equipment that generates low power can promote nonthermal
effects, such as an analgesic and anti-inflammatory action,
and the stimulation of the tissue repair. On the analgesic
effect, it acts from the peripheral receptors up to the stimulus
on the central nervous system. The antiinflammatory and
antiedema effect results from the acceleration of the microcirculation, promoting changes at the capillary hydrostatic
pressure, with reabsorption of the edema and the elimination of the deposit of intermediate catabolites. In addition,
the low-power laser also increases the cell functions on the
irradiated tissues, accelerating the time for mitosis. This is
mainly observed on the scarring repair of the lesion because
of its greater vascularization and abundant formation of
granulation tissue. As examples of the low-power devices,
there are the HeNe (helium-neon) laser and the low-power
diode lasers that emit on the visible red or on the infrared
spectrum [11, 24, 30]. They are used in operative dentistry
for the treatment of the tooth hypersensitivity and on cases
of pulpal inflammation. On the other hand, the high-power
devices are used in cutting and for coagulation and vaporization of tissues in medicine and dentistry, besides other industrial applications [12, 30]. The most used highpower lasers
over the tooth structure are the erbium:yttrium aluminum
garnet (Er:YAG); erbium, chromium:yttrium, scandium, gallium garnet (Er,Cr:YSGG); and neodymium:yttrium aluminum garnet (Nd:YAG).
4.8.1 Erbium Lasers
The Er:YAG and Er,Cr:YSGG are solid-state lasers, where the
active medium is formed by erbium or erbium and chromium atoms, inside a synthetic crystalline material of the
garnet group, composed of yttrium and aluminum (YAG) or
yttrium, scandium, and gallium (YSGG). The Er lasers have
an excellent interaction with tooth tissues due to the
wavelength of 2.79 and 2.94 μm, which coincides with the
maximum absorption of water, commonly available in biological tissues. Those lasers are also absorbed by collagen and
hydroxyapatite available in the tooth structure. When
absorbed, a great quantity of energy concentrated in a very
small area of the tissue causes an immediate evaporation of
water content. This results in an abrupt expansion, leading to
a small explosion that mechanically eliminates pieces of the
tissue, called photomechanical ablation [2, 13].
The Er lasers are indicated for cavity preparations. This
device has red light guide since the erbium laser is not on
the visible spectrum ( . Fig. 4.60a , b). The standard handpiece works without contact and must be adjusted by the
operator to the correct distance ( . Fig. 4.60b ). Innumerous
researches demonstrate that the energy used must vary
according to the tissue to be irradiated and the effect that is desired. The enamel is a more mineralized tissue and
requires more energy for ablation, while the dentin requires
less energy to produce ablation [11, 30]. A significant differ -
ence in relation to the preparation with rotary instrument is
that laser does not produce smear layer, leaving a clean
surface ( . Fig. 4.61a–d ).
a
b
.Fig. 4.60 Er:YAG Laser device (Key III – KaVo); b handpiece for
cavity preparationsInstruments and Equipments
4
ab
cd
.Fig. 4.61 Tooth surface treated with Er:YAG laser. a Aspect of a laser pulse over enamel; b greater magnification of the prepared enamel
surface; c aspect of a laser pulse over dentin; d greater magnification of the prepared dentin surface
S. E. de Paiva Gonçalves et al.
4
4.8.2 Nd:YAG Laser
This laser uses as an active medium the neodymium atoms
inside a solid matrix composed of a crystal of yttrium and aluminum garnet, emitting a wavelength on the infrared region of
1. μm (. Fig. 4.62a , b). This laser is used in dentistry due to
its cutting, vaporization, and coagulation properties, mainly on
soft tissue surgeries. When applied over the tooth structure, it
promotes the melting and the recrystallization of the surface,
producing an antimicrobial effect. Therefore, it is used for sealing the grooves and the fissures and on the disinfection of root
canals. However, since there is no refrigeration, depending on
the energy used, it can cause carbonization of the tissue or even
an undesired effect on the adjacent soft tissues. The light is
applied by means of an optical fiber. Because it is not visible, it
also uses low-power red laser as a guide light ( . Fig. 4.62b ).
The application of the Nd:YAG laser before the application of adhesive systems has shown to cause negative effects
on the bond strength. It impairs the penetration of the adhesive into the tooth substrate (enamel/dentin) as laser melts
the tissue, making it more resistant to the acid etching
(. Fig. 4.63a–d ). However, favorable results were observed in
some studies, when the laser was applied after the etching
and the application of the adhesive system, prior to light cur -
ing [1, 12, 16]. Therefore, its use during adhesive procedures
is still extremely controversial and should not yet be indicated for clinical use. The application of the Nd:YAG laser
over the enamel, with simultaneous application of topical
fluoride, has shown excellent results on the reduction of the
hydroxyapatite solubility. This technique has been recommended for caries prevention .
4.8.3 Safety Procedures
Due to the fact that it is a highly concentrated light, the effects
of laser can be extremely deleterious when unintentional irradiation happens, as on the eye, for example. All the laser equipments are accompanied by specific glasses to filter the different
wavelength emitted by each light. The safety glasses of the
Nd:YAG device, for example, must not be used during the procedure with the Er:YAG or any other, because they are absolutely specific for each equipment ( . Fig. 4.64). The room
where the devices are used must have a sensor on the door,
which automatically turn off the laser, in case any person comes
in inadvertently . The devices have security keys and some
also have protected pedals, a way to guarantee that the beam is
only emitted under the total control of the operator.
a
b
.Fig. 4.62 a Nd:YAG laser device PulseMaster IQ (American
Dental Technologies); b optical fiber to apply laser over the tooth
structureInstruments and Equipments
4
ab
c d
.Fig. 4.63 Tooth surface treated with Nd:YAG laser. a Aspect of the laser pulse over enamel; b greater magnification of the prepared enamel
surface; c aspect of a laser pulse over dentin; d greater magnification of the prepared dentin surface
S. E. de Paiva Gonçalves et al.
4
Conclusion
The development of dental instruments and equipments
happened concomitantly with the development of materials
and restorative/preventive concepts, following the techno -
logical advancements in dentistry. The operatory supply
nowadays is composed of a wide range of instruments and
equipments, with very specific design and clinical applicability. Dentists should get familiarized with such existing
resources, in terms of characteristics, indication, and clinical
applicability. This will enable practitioners to select a per -
sonal armamentarium that best suits the type of treatment
offered and allow for best clinical practice.
References
1. Araujo RM, de Paula Eduardo C, Duarte Junior SLL, Araujo MAM, de
Castro Monteiro Loffredo L. Microleakage and nanoleakage: influence of laser in cavity preparation and dentin pretreatment. J Clin
Laser Med Surg. ;19: –32. https://doi.
org/10. / .
2. Bachmann L, Zezell DM. Estrutura e Composição do Esmalte e
Dentina – Tratamento Térmico e Irradiação Laser. 1st ed. Livraria da
Fisica: São Paulo; .
3. Balamuth L. Ultrasonics and dentistry. Sound Its uses Control.
;2:15–9. https://doi.org/10. /1. .
4. Baron A. L’Art Dentaire à Travers la Peinture. Paris: ACR Édition; .
5. Baum L, Phillips RW. Dentistica Operatória. Rio de Janeiro:
Guanabara Koogan; .
6. Black GV. A work on operative dentistry. Chicago: Medico-Dental
Publishing Company; .
7. Boer NC. Análise comparativa, clínica e histológica, do complexo
dentina-polpa utilizando-se ponta CVD para ultrassom e ponta dia-mantada para caneta de alta rotação em molares humanos. Vale do
Paraiba University – UniVap. São José dos Campos; .
8. Carone FM, Vieira DV. Comparação do tempo de trabalho no prep -
aro cavitário entre as pontas CVDentus em Ultra-som e as pontas
diamantadas em alta rotação. Técnicas Estéticas. ;4:42–6.
9. Corrêa AA. Dentistica Operatória. Artes Médicas: São Paulo; .
10. Diniz MB, Gianotto RM, Cordeiro RC. Remoção de tecido cariado
com pontas CVD ultrassonicas como estratégia de manejo de criança. Rev Inst Cien Saude. ;26: –6.
11. Genovese WJ. Laser de baixa intensidade. Aplicações Terapêuticas
em Odontologia. Lovise Ltda: São Paulo; .
12. Gonçalves SE, de Araujo MA, Damião AJ. Dentin bond strength:
influence of laser irradiation, acid etching, and hypermineralization.
J Clin Laser Med Surg. ;17:77–85.
13. Gutknecht N, Eduardo CP . A Odontologia e o Laser. Quintessence:
São Paulo; .
14. Lima LM, Motisuki C, dos Santos-Pinto L, dos Santos-Pinto A, Corat
EJ. Cutting characteristics of dental diamond burs made with CVD
technology. Braz Oral Res. ;20: –61. https://doi.org/10. /
S1806- .
15. Mastrantonio SS, Gondim JO, Josgrilberg EB, Cordeiro RCL. Minimizing fear during dental treatment using ultrasonic points. Rev Gauch
Odontol. ;58:online.
16. Matos AB, Oliveira DC, Navarro RS, De Paula CE, Matson E. Nd:YAG
laser influence on tensile bond strength of self-etching adhesive
systems. J Clin Laser Med Surg. ;18: –7. https://doi.
org/10. /clm. .18. .
17. Mesquita E, Kunert I. O Ultrassom na Prática Odontológica. Artmed:
Porto Alegre; .
18. Mondelli J, Ishikiriama A, Franco EB, Mondelli RL. Fundamentos de
Dentística Operatória. 1st ed. Santos: São Paulo; .
19. Mooney JB. Operatória Dental. Panamericana: Buenos Aires; .
20. Morais ER. O medo do paciente ao Tratamento Odontológico. Rev
Fac Odontol Porto Alegre. ;44:39–42.
21. Phillips RW. Skinner’s science of dental materials. 8th ed. Rio de
Janeiro: Interamericana; .
22. Ring ME. Dentistry: an illustrated history. New York: Harry N Abrams
Inc; .
23. Roberson TM, Heymann H, Swift EJ. Sturdevant’s art and science of
operative dentistry. London: Mosby/Elsevier; .
24. Shintome LK, Umetsubo LS, Nagayasu MP , Jorge AL, Gonçalves SE,
Torres CR. Avaliação clínica da laserterapia no tratamento da hiper -
sensibilidade dentinária. Cien Odontol Br. ;10:26–33.
25. Summitt JB, Robbins JW, Hilton TJ, Schwarts RS. Fundamentals of
operative dentistry: a contemporary approach. 3th ed. Chicago:
Quintessence; .
26. Torres CRG, Borges AB, Kubo CH, Gonçalves SE, Araujo RM, Celaschi
S, et al. Clareamento Dental com Fontes Híbridas LED/LASER. 2nd
ed. São Paulo: Livraria Santos Editora Ltda; .
27. Trava-Airoldi VJ, Corat E, Moro J. Studies of CVD diamond applications as ultrasound abrading devices in odontology and relates
uses. Rev Bras Aplic Vácuo. ;25:15–9.
28. Vieira D. Pontas de diamante CVD: Inicio do fim da alta-rotação?
[Brazilian Ed]. J Am Dent Assoc. ;5: –13.
29. Vlacic J, Meyers IA, Kim J, Walsh LJ. Laser-activated fluoride treat -
ment of enamel against an artificial caries challenge: comparison of
five wavelengths. Aust Dent J. ;52: –5.
30. Wigdor HA, Walsh JT, Featherstone JDB, Visuri SR, Fried D, Waldvo -
gel JL. Lasers in dentistry. Lasers Surg Med. ;16: –33. https://
doi.org/10. /lsm. .
.Fig. 4.64 Safety glasses for the use of high-power devicesInstruments and Equipments
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG
C. R. G. Torres (ed.), Modern Operative Dentistry, Textbooks in Contemporary Dentistry,
https://doi.org/10. / -3- - -0_5167 5
Nomenclature
and Classification of Cavities
and Tooth Preparations
Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres and Ana Carolina Botta
5.1 Introduction –
5.2 Nomenclature –
5.2.1 Dental Planes –
5.2.2 Basic Components of Tooth Preparations –
5.2.3 Nomenclature Rules for the Tooth Preparation Components –
5.3 Classification of Cavities and Tooth Preparations –
5.3.1 Black’s Classification –
5.3.2 Mount and Hume’s Classification –
References –
5Learning Objectives
The learning objectives of this chapter are to:
5Define the nomenclature of tooth preparation
5Identify the section and delimitation dental planes
5Identify the walls and angles of tooth preparations
5Present the nomenclature rules for the tooth preparation
components
5Describe the historical classification of lesions and tooth
preparations based on the number of surfaces involved,
anatomic location, extension, depth, and susceptibility
of caries lesions and other defects
5.1 Introduction
Pathological processes that occur in the oral cavity can
develop lesions on the tooth structure for various reasons: (1)
carious lesions due to the caries process; (2) fractures due to
traumas; (3) abfraction lesions due to occlusal overload associated with an unbalanced occlusion; (4) erosive tooth
wear lesions due to the tooth contact with acidic substances
that come from the diet or gastroesophageal reflux; and (5)
abrasion lesions caused by the constant friction with hard
substances over the teeth. These lesions may require surgical
intervention due to loss of dental structure, tooth sensitivity,
and the need of reestablishment of form, esthetics, and function. Despite the cause, before the tooth structure to be
restored and the data related to the procedures be registered
and transmitted to other dentists, the location and the components of a tooth preparation must be easily identified
through specific nomenclature. G.V . Black created a
nomenclature system that can be used for all types of tooth
preparations, allowing it to be easily identified by differ -
ent observers .
Tooth preparations can be classified in different ways .
However, the most common classifications are still the ones
created by G.V . Black and modified by Simon
and Howard . This chapter describes the
nomenclature of lesions and tooth preparations and their
historical classification based on the number of surfaces
involved, anatomic location, extension, depth, and susceptibility to caries lesions and other defects.
5.2 Nomenclature
Nomenclature is a system of names or terms used in a par -
ticular science, discipline, or art, by which the professionals
working on that area are able to understand each other. In
order to have a good communication with colleagues and the
dental team, it is very important to become familiar with the
proper terminology of tooth preparations presented in this
chapter.
In the past, most restorative treatments were performed
due to cavitated caries lesions, and the term cavity was used to describe a caries lesion that promoted a distinct discontinuity or break of the tooth surface integrity. When the
affected tooth was treated, the preparation of the remaining
tooth structure was referred to as cavity preparation .
Currently, as many indications for surgical treatment of
teeth are not related to carious lesions, the preparation of the
tooth should no longer be referred to as cavity preparation
but as tooth preparation .
The tooth preparation is the result of a group of operative
procedures that are necessary to remove carious tissue and
produce adequate and compatible shapes to the remaining
tooth structure and to receive a proper restorative material
. The objectives of tooth preparation are to (1) conserve as
much healthy tooth structure as possible; (2) remove all
defects while simultaneously providing protection of the
pulp–dentin complex; (3) create a form on the tooth preparation so that, under the masticatory forces, the tooth or the
restoration (or both) will not fracture and the restoration will
not be displaced; and (4) allow the adequate placement of a
restorative material .
Due to the shapeless aspect of the carious lesions and
other lesions on the hard tissues, the explanations about
nomenclature will be presented on tooth preparations, which
have a more defined geometry. However, whenever possible,
the same terms applied on the prepared cavities can be
applied to describe the parts of the pathological cavities.
5.2.1 Dental Planes
In order to apply names to the components of tooth preparation, as well to the analysis of the inclinations of preparation
walls, specific references called section and delimitation
planes must be used . Three section planes are used in the
study of human anatomy ( . Fig. 5.1). The anatomical plane
that divides the body into right and left portions is called sag -
ittal or median plane (longitudinal, anteroposterior), because
it is a plane parallel to the sagittal suture. The frontal plane or
coronal plane (vertical) divides the body into ventral and dor -
sal portions. The transverse or horizontal plane (lateral, horizontal) divides the body into cranial and caudal portions [4 ].
The sagittal plane is not ideal for analysis of each tooth
separately due to the curvature of the dental arch ( . Fig. 5.2).
The sagittal and frontal planes would involve different sur -
faces from the incisors to the molars . Only the horizontal
plane would not have this variation. For this reason, in addition to the horizontal plane, two special vertical or axial section planes, named axiomesiodistal and axiobuccolingual
planes , or just mesiodistal and buccolingual planes , are used.
Those dental planes are parallel to the long axis of the teeth
and extend in a mesiodistal or buccolingual direction,
respectively. They also divide the tooth into mesial and distal
halves or occlusal and cervical halves, respectively. In
. Fig. 5.3, those planes are sectioning the central position of
all tooth surfaces.
C. R. G. Torres and A. C. Botta
5
Besides the section planes, delimitation planes tangent to
the different tooth surfaces can be used for reference pur -
poses. They are the mesial, distal, buccal/labial, lingual, gingival, and occlusal planes (commonly used as a reference during tooth preparation) ( . Fig. 5.4). The delimitation occlusal
plane of a tooth is different from the occlusal plane of the
dental arch, which is an imaginary plane extending from the
incisal edge of the incisors along the cusp tips of the posterior
teeth. Although not a real plane, the occlusal plane of the
dental arch represents the mean of the occlusal surfaces cur -
vature.
In order to describe the location of a lesion and tooth
preparation and its extension, the tooth surfaces can be
divided into thirds ( . Fig. 5.5) [1, 10]. The occlusal surface,
on the mesiodistal direction, considering the buccolingual
section plane, can be divided into mesial , middle , and distal
thirds . On the buccolingual direction, considering the mesiodistal section plane, the occlusal surface can be divided into
buccal , middle , and lingual thirds . The mesial, distal, lingual,
and facial surfaces of a crown can be divided into thirds, both
longitudinally and horizontally ( . Fig. 5.5). In regard to the
horizontal division, each axial surface of a crown can be
divided into an occlusal (or incisal), middle , and cervical third .
In regard to the longitudinal division, each facial or lingual
surface may be divided into a mesial , middle , and distal third ,
while each mesial or distal axial surface may be divided into
a lingual , middle , and facial/buccal third.
.Fig. 5.1 Anatomic planes. F – frontal plane; H – horizontal plane;
S – sagittal plane
.Fig. 5.2 Difficulties of the use of the sagittal plane on the tooth
nomenclature
.Fig. 5.3 Section planes for the tooth structure
.Fig. 5.4 Delimitation planesNomenclature and Classification of Cavities and Tooth Preparations
55.2.2 Basic Components of Tooth
Preparations
Tooth preparations present two basic components: walls and
angles . The walls are the prepared (cut) surfaces of tooth
preparations and can be divided into two types: external and
internal. The external walls, also called surrounding walls,
are the prepared surfaces that extend to the external tooth surface ( . Fig. 5.6 – in yellow). The surrounding walls parallel to the long axis of the tooth are named vertical surrounding walls, while the ones perpendicular to the long axis of the
tooth are named horizontal surrounding walls. The internal
walls are the ones facing the pulpal chamber and do not
extend to the external tooth surface ( . Fig. 5.6 – in blue).
The angles are the junction of two or more walls of the
tooth preparations. Although the word angle leads the reader
to imagine a “sharp edge, ” in some preparations they can
have a round configuration to reduce stress concentration.
Despite that, those junctions are still referred as angles for
descriptive and communication purposes . They can be
of two types: line and point. A line angle results from the
junction between two walls of different orientations along a
line (. Fig. 5.7 ), while a point angle results from the junction
of three walls of different orientations ( . Fig. 5.8 ).
The line angles can be subdivided in external and inter -
nal. The internal line angles are line angles whose apex points
into the tooth. They can be divided into two sets. The first set
includes the ones created by the junction of two external
walls (. Fig. 5.7 red line – 1st S). The second set includes the
ones created by the junction of the external and internal walls
(. Fig. 5.7 – black line – 2nd S). An external line angle is a line
angle whose apex points away from the tooth such as the
ones formed by the junction between the internal walls
(. Fig. 5.7d–f – blue line – E ).
The nomenclature of the walls and angles is based on the
tooth preparation as a cubic space, or the shape of a box.
Although the tooth preparation can have an irregular shape,
its wall and its angles are named as if they have a regular
shape.
.Fig. 5.5 Division of the tooth surfaces in thirds
ab c
de fBUCCAL
BUCCAL
BUCCALBUCCAL
BUCCALPULPAL
PULPAL
PULPALMESIAL
DISTAL
DISTAL
DISTALLINGU AL
LINGU AL
AXIAL
AXIALAXIAL
AXIALAXIALAXIAL
GINGIV AL GINGIV ALGINGIV AL
GINGIV ALGINGIV ALGINGIV AL
LABIALLABIAL
LINGU AL
MESIALAXIALOCCLUSAL
DISTAL
INCISAL
.Fig. 5.6 Tooth preparation walls. The lines point to the names of the walls. a–f preparations on different teeth and tooth surfaces
C. R. G. Torres and A. C. Botta
5
ab c
de fDB (1st S)
DP (2nd S)BP (2nd S)
MP (2nd S)
LP (2nd S)
BP (2nd S)
BA (2nd S)DA (2nd S)OA (2nd S)
GA (2nd S)MA (2nd S)LA (2nd S)FA (2nd S)
GA (2nd S)
IA (2nd S)
FA (2nd S)
DA (2nd S)BP (2nd S)
BA (2nd S)
AG (2nd S)MA (2nd S)DP (2nd S)
LA (2nd S)
AG (2nd S)AG (2nd S)MB (1st S) DO (1st S)MO (1st S)
LG (1st S)FL (1st S)
FG (1st S)
ID (1st S)
IF (1st S)
FG (1st S)
DG (1st S)BG (1st S)
MG (1st S)LG (1st S)BD (1st S)
BG (1st S)MG (1st S) DG (1st S)ML (1st S)DL (1st S)
AA (E)AP (E)
AA (E)AP (E)
.Fig. 5.7 Line angles: (1st S) Internal first set – red lines; (2nd S) Internal second set – black lines; (E) External angles– blue lines. Their names
correspond to the walls associated to them. a–f preparations on different teeth and tooth surfaces
BAPab c
de fDPB
DPLMPLOADMAO
MAGGALFAL
FAG
GADMPB
BPADAG
AGAFAGFAIAIADAI
BAGBAG
LAGMPA
MAG
AGAAPALAPBPD
.Fig. 5.8 Point angles surrounded by circles. Their names correspond to the walls associated to them. a–f preparations on different teeth and
tooth surfaces Nomenclature and Classification of Cavities and Tooth Preparations
55.2.3 Nomenclature Rules for the Tooth
Preparation Components
In order to simplify the understanding of the tooth preparation components nomenclature, G.V . Black proposed general
rules [1, 3]:
51st rule – The cavity or tooth preparation receives the
name of the surface or surfaces where it is located.
Following this rule, a tooth preparation only on the occlusal
surface receives the name of occlusal or “O” preparation
(. Fig. 5.6a). Preparation involving the mesial and occlusal
surfaces is called mesio-occlusal preparation or “MO”
(. Fig. 5.6d). Preparation involving the mesial, occlusal, and
distal surfaces receives the name of mesio-occluso-distal
preparation or “MOD. ” Preparation involving the occlusal
and lingual surfaces receives the name of occluso-lingual
preparation or “OL, ” and so on.
Tip
The description of the tooth preparation can be
abbreviated by using the first capitalized letter of the
tooth surface involved.
52nd rule – It is necessary to indicate the tooth where the
cavity or the tooth preparation is located. Therefore, an
occluso-distal preparation on the mandibular right first
molar must be identified with an “OD” on tooth 46
(. Fig. 5.6d ). A mesio-occluso-distal preparation on the
mandibular right first molar must be identified as
“MOD” on tooth 46. A mesio-occluso-disto-lingual
preparation on the maxillary left first molar must be
identified as “MODL ” on tooth 26 ( . Fig. 5.6e ).
53rd rule – The external wall takes the name of the tooth
surface that the wall is facing.
5Following this thought, the wall that faces the buccal
surface is called buccal wall. The wall facing the mesial
surface is called mesial wall, and so on ( . Fig. 5.6 ).
54th rule – The internal wall next to the pulpal chamber
and parallel to the horizontal plane is called pulpal wall/
floor (. Fig. 5.6a, d, e ). When the pulpal chamber is
opened and the dental pulp removed, the wall that is
parallel to the horizontal plane and corresponds to the
floor of the pulpal chamber, receives the name of the
sub-pulpal wall ( . Fig. 5.9 ).
55th rule – The internal wall next to the pulpal chamber,
but not parallel to the horizontal plane, is called axial
wall. This type of wall occurs on the anterior teeth
preparations and posterior teeth with the involvement of
the smooth surfaces ( . Fig. 5.6b–f ).
> The axial wall is an internal wall that is oriented parallel
to the long axis of the tooth. The pulpal wall is an internal
wall that is oriented perpendicular to the long axis of the
tooth and is located occlusally to the pulp. This internal
wall may also be referred to as the pulpal floor [ 2]. 56th rule – The line and point angles receive the names of
the walls from which they are formed.
Therefore, the junction of the buccal and gingival
walls of preparation on posterior teeth with a proximal
involvement is called bucco-gingival line angle or
“BG” (. Fig. 5.7d ). In this same preparation, the
junction among the buccal, axial, and gingival walls is
called bucco-axiogingival point angle or “BAG”
(. Fig. 5.8d ). The order to mention the wall that forms
the angle is not important. The angles formed by the
junction of the facial and lingual or facial, lingual, and
axial walls, in preparations that involve the proximal
surfaces of anterior teeth, can also be called the incisal
line or incisal point angles, respectively ( . Figs. 5.7c
and 5.8c).
> The angles receive the names of the walls from which
they are formed.
The angle formed by the junction among the buccal, axial,
and gingival walls can be called BAG, GAB, ABG, and so on.
57th rule – The angle formed by the junction of the
external surface of the tooth and a prepared wall is
called cavosurface angle . The cavosurface angle may
differ with the location on the tooth, the direction of
the enamel rods on the prepared wall, or the type of
restorative material to be used [2 ]. For better identification, it is convenient to specify the wall associated with
the cavosurface angle. Therefore, the buccal, lingual,
mesial, and distal cavosurface angles can be observed
in . Fig. 5.10a , while in . Fig. 5.10b , the occlusal,
gingival, mesial, and distal cavosurface angles are indicated. The terms preparation margin or cavosurface
margin are also used to designate the junction of the
tooth surface with the restorative material after it has
been applied [5 ].
.Fig. 5.9 Sub-pulpal wall (arrow)
C. R. G. Torres and A. C. Botta
5
5.3 Classification of Cavities and Tooth
Preparations
The word “classify” means to arrange in groups or categories that
have similar characteristics. Many classifications of the cavities
produced by the caries lesion have been proposed throughout
history, according to its different aspects and treatments available. The simplest way to classify a cavity or a tooth preparation
is according to the number of surfaces that are involved [7 , 10]:
5Simple cavities or preparations involve only one tooth
surface. As an example, those placed exclusively on the
occlusal, facial, lingual, or proximal surfaces ( . Fig. 5.6a–c ).
5Compound cavities or preparations involve two tooth
surfaces. As examples, the occluso buccal,
mesio occlusal, mesiolingual preparations, etc.
(. Fig. 5.6d, f ).
5Complex cavities or preparations involve more than two
tooth surfaces ( . Fig. 5.6e ). The most common example
is the MOD tooth preparation.
Tooth preparation can also be classified according to its
extension in the following types [7, 11]:
5Intracoronal or inlay – preparation that is limited to the
interior of the tooth structure, without the covering of
any cusp. An inlay is usually “boxlike” , having internal
and external walls ( . Fig. 5.11 ).
5Partial coverage extracoronal – can be of two types
according to the number of cusps that are covered: 5Onlay – preparation that covers one or more cusps of
a tooth but not all of them ( . Fig. 5.11b–d )
5Overlay – preparation that covers all cusps of a tooth
but does not cover all smooth surfaces, with some
parts of facial and/or lingual surfaces remaining
preserved ( . Fig. 5.11e )
5Full coverage extracoronal or full crown – preparation
that involves all the cusps and completely cover all the
smooth surfaces of the teeth ( . Fig. 5.11f ).
The preparations can also be classified according to the
restorative plan in :
5Therapeutic preparations are the ones made with the aim to
restore the tooth structure that was damaged by the caries
disease, erosive tooth wear, abrasion, abfraction, or fractures.
5Prosthetic preparations are the ones that are made in intact
teeth, when it is necessary to make some indirect restoration that will support artificial teeth on an edentulous
space. However, when they are made on partially
destroyed teeth, they also have a therapeutic aim.
Another way to classify the tooth cavities and preparations is
in relation to its depth and proximity to the pulp, as presented
on . Fig. 5.12a–f . The depth of the preparation is extremely
important on the determination of the restorative technique
to be used and on the protection that will be applied to the
dentin-pulp complex. According to Mondelli , they can be
classified in the following types:
a
de fbc
.Fig. 5.10 Cavosurface angles are pointed. a–f preparations on different teeth and tooth surfaces Nomenclature and Classification of Cavities and Tooth Preparations
5
5Shallow preparation – with the internal walls at the level
before or slightly after the dentin-enamel junction (DEJ)
(. Fig. 5.12b ).
5Medium preparation – with the internal walls from 0.5 to
1 mm beyond the DEJ ( . Fig. 5.12c )
5Deep preparation – with the internal walls beyond half
the thickness of the dentin but still keeping more than
0.5 mm of remaining dentin between the wall and the
pulpal chamber ( . Fig. 5.12d ).
5Very deep preparation – the remaining tooth structure
between the internal wall and the pulpal chamber is
smaller than 0.5 mm, allowing the visualization, due
transparency, of a pink discoloration in the internal wall
because of the presence of the pulp underneath it. There
is a great probability that small pulpal exposures that
cannot be seen clinically exist ( . Fig. 5.12e ).
5Pulpal exposure – an evident communication between
the pulp and the tooth preparation ( . Fig. 5.12f ).
Other classifications of the caries lesions are presented
in other chapters of this book. The ICDAS classification is
presented in the 7 Sect. 3.9 of 7 Chap. 3, while the radiografic lesion depth on 7 Chap. 16 (. Fig. 16.9).
5.3.1 Black’s Classification
The two classifications of the cavities and tooth preparations
proposed by G.V . Black are still the most used worldwide, which are the etiologic and the artificial.
The etiologic classification grouped the cavities according to
the susceptibility to caries lesions in specific tooth areas, due
to the difficulty of good hygiene and the easy growth of bacterial biofilm. Based on this, the etiologic classification has
two categories:
5Pit and fissures – located in zones with greater susceptibility to develop caries lesions due to the accumulation
of bacterial biofilm
5Smooth surfaces – located in zones with relative
immunity to caries lesions, due to self-cleaning effect
provided by the contact with the soft tissues or the food
bolus
The artificial Black’s classification arranged the cavities into
classes based on the tooth areas affected by the diseased and
the associated type of treatment. Five classes were originally
created . Lately, Simon included a new class to the
original Black’s classification.
5Class I – cavities and tooth preparations located on
regions of pit and fissures of the posterior and anterior
teeth, without the involvement of the proximal
surfaces ( . Fig. 5.13a–g ). These include preparations on:
5Occlusal surface of premolars and molars
(. Fig. 5.13a, b, g ).
5Occlusal two-thirds of the buccal surface of the
mandibular molars ( . Fig. 5.13a, c ).
a
d e fb c
.Fig. 5.11 Classification of the tooth preparation according to their extension. a Inlay; b –d onlay; e overlay; f full crown
C. R. G. Torres and A. C. Botta
5
5Occlusal two-thirds of the lingual surfaces on
maxillary molars including the lesions on Carabelli’s
tubercle ( . Fig. 5.13d ).
5The lingual pit near to the cingulum on the lingual
surface on the anterior maxillary teeth ( . Fig. 5.13e ).
5Sockwell [ 13] included in this class the cavities
located on the incisal two-thirds of the labial surface
of the anterior teeth ( . Fig. 5.13f ). 5Class II – cavities and tooth preparations that involve the
proximal surfaces of the posterior teeth ( . Fig. 5.14a–f ).
Even if the occlusal surface or any other tooth surface is
involved simultaneously, the preparation is still named
Class II.
5Class III – cavities and tooth preparations placed on the
proximal surfaces of the anterior teeth, without the
involvement of the incisal edge ( . Fig. 5.15a–d ).
a b c
d e f
.Fig. 5.12 Classification of the tooth preparation, according to their depth. a Intact tooth; b shallow; c medium; d deep; e very deep; f pulp
exposure – arrow
ab cg
de f
.Fig. 5.13 a–f Class I caries lesion (arrows). g Occlusal erosive tooth wear lesion due to the abusive ingestion of acidic beveragesNomenclature and Classification of Cavities and Tooth Preparations
5
5Class IV – cavities and tooth preparations that involve
the proximal surfaces of the anterior teeth, with the loss
of the incisal edge ( . Fig. 5.16a–d ).
5Class V – cavities and tooth preparations located on the
gingival third of the facial and lingual surfaces of all teeth, with the exception of the lingual surfaces of the
anterior maxillary teeth, which are considered Class I
(. Fig. 5.17a–d ).
5Class VI – cavities and tooth preparations located on the
tip of the cusps and the incisal edges ( . Fig. 5.18a–d ).
ab c
de f
.Fig. 5.14 a–f Class II caries lesions and tooth preparations (arrows)
a
cdb
.Fig. 5.15 a–d Class III caries lesions and tooth preparation (arrows)
C. R. G. Torres and A. C. Botta
5
Black’s artificial classification revealed a chronological order,
following the sequence of carious lesions development in
individuals of different ages [3 ]. In young patients, the most
common carious lesions are the Class I, followed by Class II
cavities. In teenagers, Class II and Class III cavities are the
most prevalent. The Class IV cavities may be a complication
of the Class III due to trauma or progression of carious lesions.
Finally, the Class V cavities are found, more frequently, in
elderly patients [3 ]. Although being developed to describe the
caries lesions, the Black’s classification has been also used to
identify the preparations and restorations (e.g., a Class I amalgam preparation or a Class I amalgam restoration) [2 ].
5.3.2 Mount and Hume’s Classification
Graham J. Mount and W . Rory Hume proposed a new
classification for cavities and preparations. Due to the modifications on the cutting instruments’ technology for tooth
preparation, the development of adhesive restorative materials, and the current possibility of replacement of some restor -
ative procedures by preventive measures, those authors
concluded that Black’s classification failed by omitting the
lesion extension, which is related to the decision about surgical and nonsurgical approaches .This classification was based on two characteristics to
describe the lesion on the tooth structure: site and size. This
allows dentists to have a better understanding of the involvement of the tooth structure by the lesion and the selection of
the most adequate treatment for each situation. This classification also simplifies the electronic data records and subsequently the communication among clinicians.
According to the site, the lesions can be located on:
5Site 1 – It describes all the lesions on located on pits
and fissures of the occlusal surfaces of the posterior
teeth, besides other defects on smooth surfaces of a
tooth [ 9]. This includes grooves on the buccal surfaces
of the mandibular molars, lingual groove on maxillary
molars, grooves on cingulum, pits on anterior teeth and
similar defects, as well as erosive tooth wear and
abrasion lesion on the incisal edges of the anterior
teeth and the occlusal surface of the posterior teeth
(. Fig. 5.19a–f ) .
Tip
Site 1 includes all the lesions identified as Class I and VI
according to Black’s classification.
a b
cd
.Fig. 5.16 a–d Class IV caries and dental fracture lesions (arrows)Nomenclature and Classification of Cavities and Tooth Preparations
5
5Site 2 – It describes all lesions associated with the contact
areas and placed below them, on the occlusal two-thirds
of the tooth crown, both on anterior and posterior teeth
(. Figs. 5.20a–g and 5.21a–g ) .
Tip
Site 2 includes all the lesions identified as Class II, III,
and IV according to Black’s classification.
5Site 3 – it describes all the lesions originated next to the
gingival areas, on the cervical third of the crown or areas
of exposed root, both on enamel, cement, or dentin,
around the whole circumference of a tooth, including the
proximal surfaces ( . Fig. 5.22a–i ).
Tip
Site 3 includes the Class V according to Black and also
lesions in root surfaces located on the mesial or distal
surfaces, after gingival recession.According to the size, the lesions can be classified as:
5Size 0 (incipient) – It is a small and subsurface lesion,
without cavitation, that can be remineralized or that has
already remineralized, and there is only a residual stain
. No restoration is necessary for this size of lesion,
and only preventative treatments are recommended.
5Size 1 (minimum) – It is a lesion that progressed to the
point of transition, where it cannot be exclusively treated
with a preventative approach, and an operative intervention is indicated . There is a small cavitation but with
minimum involvement of dentin.
5Size 2 (moderate) – It is a large lesion, but there is still
sufficient sound tooth structure to maintain the integrity
of the remaining crown and resist to the occlusal forces,
without the need for additional changes on the tooth
preparation, other than the removal of the carious tissue
. There is a moderate involvement of the dentin.
5Size 3 (enlarged) – It is a more extended lesion. The
remaining tooth structure is weakened to the extent that
cusps or incisal edges are split or are likely to fail if left
exposed to occlusal or incisal load . The tooth
preparation needs to be modified so that the restoration
can be designed to provide support and protection to the
remaining tooth structure .
a
cdb
.Fig. 5.17 a–d Class V caries and non-carious lesions (arrows)
C. R. G. Torres and A. C. Botta
5
5Size 4 (extensive) – it is a lesion that has extensive loss of
tooth structure such as a cusp of a posterior tooth or an
incisal edge of an anterior tooth .
The application of this classification must include the use of
both characteristics (site and size), as can be observed in
. .
In . Figs. 5.19, 5.20, 5.21, and 5.22, examples of this classification are shown, applied to clinical situations. If there are
multiple lesions on the same tooth, each one of them must be
reported separately.
Example
Examples of lesions description according to the Mount and
Hume’s classification:
5“Lesion 2.4 on the distal surface of the tooth 12” indicates
that the lesion on the distal surface of the maxillary right lateral incisor progressed in such a way that the incisal
edge was lost. It suggests the need of a large esthetic
restoration on this tooth.
5“Lesion 2.1 on the mesial surface of the tooth 46” indicates
that there is a small lesion on the mesial surface of the
mandibular right first molar. It suggests the need of a
minimally invasive tooth preparation.
5“Lesion 2.2 on the OD surfaces of the tooth 36” indicates
that there is a lesion of a moderate size, involving the
occlusal and distal surfaces of the mandibular left first
molar, with enough remaining tooth structure to resist to
occlusal forces.
5“Lesion 3.1 on the buccal surface and a lesion 2.2 on the
MOD surfaces on the tooth 47” indicates that there are two
distinct lesions on the mandibular right second molar. One
small cervical lesion on the buccal surface and one moderate
lesion involving the mesial, occlusal, and distal surfaces.
a b
cd
.Fig. 5.18 a–d Class VI caries and attrition lesions (arrows)Nomenclature and Classification of Cavities and Tooth Preparations
5
a
de fbc
.Fig. 5.19 Use of the Mount and Hume’s classification at the site 1. a Size 0; b size 1; c size 2; d size 3; e , f size 4
a
ef gbc d
.Fig. 5.20 Use of the Mount and Hume’s classification at the site 2 on posterior teeth. a Size 0; b size 1; c size 2; d , e size 3; f , g size 4
C. R. G. Torres and A. C. Botta
5
a bc d
e fg
.Fig. 5.21 Use of the Mount and Hume’s classification at the site 2 on anterior teeth. a Size 0; b , c size 1; d size 2; e size 3; f , g size 4
a
ef gh ib cd
.Fig. 5.22 Use of the Mount and Hume’s classification at the site 3. a Size 0; b size 1; c –f size 2; g , h size 3; i size 4
. Possibilities of application of the Mount and Hume’s classification
Size
Site 0 1 2 3 4
Incipient Minimum Moderate Enlarged Extensive
1 – Pit/fissure 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4
2 – Contact areas 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4
3 – Cervical area 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4Nomenclature and Classification of Cavities and Tooth Preparations
5 Conclusion
This chapter has addressed the nomenclature of lesions and
tooth preparation and their classification. Dentistry has
developed terminology useful in the communication of all
aspects of tooth preparation, among dental students, professors, and clinicians. The nomenclature and classification of
tooth preparations effectively describe preparation aspects
with regard to complexity, anatomic location, threedimensional orientation, geometry, and susceptibility of car -
ies lesions and other defects. The classification of lesions is
also important in regard to the patients’ treatment plan, influencing whether a restorative or preventative approach
should be taken into consideration.
References
1. Black GV. A work on operative dentistry. London: Chicago MedicoDental Publishing Company; .
2. Boushell LW, Walter R. Fundamentals of tooth preparation. In: Ritter
AV, Boushell LW, Walter R, editors. Sturdevant’s art and science of
operative dentistry. 7th ed. St. Louis: Elsevier; . p. –35. 3. Corrêa AA. Dentística Operatória. Artes Médicas: São Paulo; .
4. Dangelo JG, Fattini CA. Basic Dental anatomy. Rio de Janeiro: Athe -
neu; .
5. Howard WW. Atlas of operative dentistry. 2nd ed. St. Louis: Mosby;
.
6. Mondelli J. Proteção do Complexo Dentinopulpar. São Paulo: Artes
Médicas; .
7. Mondelli J, Franco EB, Pereira JC, Ishikiriama A, Francischone CE,
Mondelli RF, et al. Dentística: Procedimentos Pré-Clínicos. 1st ed.
São Paulo: Santos; . p. .
8. Mount GJ, Hume WR. A new cavity classification. Aust Dent J.
;43(3): –9.
9. Mount GJ, Hume WR. A revised classification of carious lesions by
site and size. Quintessence Int. ;28(5): –3.
10. Ritacco AA. Operatória Dental: Cavidades Modernas. 2nd ed. Bue -
nos Aires: Mundi; .
11. Roberson T, Heymann H, Swift E. Sturdevant’s art and science of
operative dentistry. 5th ed. St Louis: Mosby; .
12. Simon WJ. Clinical operative dentistry. Philadelphia: Saunders;
.
13. Sockwell CL. Silicate cement and self-curing acrylic resin restorations. In: Sturdevant CM, editor. The art and science of operative
dentistry. New York: McGraw-Hill; .
C. R. G. Torres and A. C. Botta
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG
C. R. G. Torres (ed.), Modern Operative Dentistry, Textbooks in Contemporary Dentistry,
https://doi.org/10. / -3- - -0_6183 6
General Principles of Tooth
Preparation and Carious
Tissue Removal
Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres and Falk Schwendicke
6.1 Introduction –
6.2 Biological Principles –
6.3 Mechanical Principles –
6.4 Prior to Tooth Preparation –
6.5 Steps of Tooth Preparation –
6.5.1 Outline Form –
6.5.2 Resistance Form –
6.5.3 Retention Form –
6.5.4 Convenience Form –
6.5.5 Carious Tissue Removal –
6.5.6 Finishing of the Enamel Walls –
6.5.7 Cleaning of the Cavity –
References –
6Learning Objectives
The learning objectives of this chapter are related to the following topics:
5To understand the biological and mechanical principles
of the tooth preparation
5To explain the prior procedures of the tooth preparation
5To learn about the steps of tooth preparation
6.1 Introduction
The main goal of tooth preparation and carious tissue removal
was and remains the therapy of carious lesions. Traditionally,
all carious lesions were managed invasively, i.e., using cutting
or drilling action, and restoratively, i.e., with the placement of
a restoration after the preparation and carious tissue removal.
It is highly relevant to emphasize that, as discussed elsewhere
in this book, current approaches for managing carious lesions
focus on non-restorative measures and only employ invasive/
restorative means if not avoidable or due to aesthetic or functional reasons. Note that tooth preparation and carious tissue
removal are further not strictly separated from each other,
but rather interlink, and that for many modern materials, the
preparation of a specific cavity shape during tooth preparation has lost some relevance given these materials being
applied defect-oriented. Traditionally, however, and still
applying to materials like amalgam (or ceramics or indirect
metal restorations), the preparation was found to be the foundation for the superstructure, the restorative material; if the
foundation fails, the superstructure will easily succumb to the
stress that the tooth will undergo [1 ]. In a research performed
by Healey and Philips, it was observed that 56% of the failure
on the amalgam restorations that led to its replacement were
due to incorrect tooth preparations, demonstrating the
importance of this stage for the success of the restorative
treatment [ 2]. On the other hand, it must be kept in mind that
the tooth preparation is an irreversible surgical procedure,
where mistakes damage tissues in an irreversible way [3 ].
Tooth preparation is defined as the biomechanical treatment of the carious lesion and other lesions on tooth hard
tissues, in a way that the remaining tooth structure can
receive a restoration that protects it, is resistant to the occlusal stress, and prevents the disease recurrence . Note that
tooth preparation performed for reasons other than caries,
like erosive tooth wear, abrasion, abfraction, attrition or
other non-cariogenic hard tissue defects, will not include
the carious tissue removal step .The main objectives of tooth preparation are (1) providing access to and allowing removal of the carious tissue, (2)
providing clear margin (in a conservative way) where the
restoration can end, and (3), for certain materials, providing
a cavity shape so that under biting forces, the tooth and/or
the restorations do not fracture and the restoration do not
displace .
After the tooth preparation is ready, the restoration of the
lost structure is performed, recovering the shape, function,
and aesthetics of the tooth . Therefore, it is the dentist’s
responsibility to reconstruct the damaged tooth structure
and complete its anatomy, reestablishing its function, allowing the patient to clean the restored surface while preserving
the sound remaining tooth structure and pulp vitality.
Especially on the anterior teeth, the restoration must present
an adequate color match with the remaining tooth structure,
recovering the aesthetic.
It is important to remember that the restorative procedure just repairs the damage caused by the carious disease
and other problems; but this, by itself, does not eliminate the
etiological factors that initially caused the lesion. To recover
the patient’s health, an effective preventive program must be
established, leading to a situation of low risk to develop new
lesions . Wherever possible, active lesions should be converted to inactive ones, helping the processes of defense and
healing of the dentin and pulp. Before recommending an
invasive treatment, noninvasive strategies should be considered, as every restoration has statistically only a limited lifetime. The decision to restore a tooth may begin a repetitive
restorative cycle, where the restorations are changed several
times during the life of the patient, and in each replacement,
the cavity preparation gets bigger, resulting in an additional
destruction of the tooth tissue, which may eventually lead to
the extraction of the tooth. Every time that the dentist proposes the replacement of a restoration, the size of the preparation tends to increase, due to inadvertently cut of healthy
tissue around the old restorations. In addition, as restoration
fails oftentimes for different reasons (mainly secondary car -
ies and fractures), that may also affect the remaining dental
tissues .
> The restorative procedure just repairs the damage
caused by the carious disease and other problems; but
this, by itself, does not eliminate the etiological factors
that initially caused the lesion.
> Before recommending an invasive treatment,
noninvasive strategies should be considered first, as
every restoration has statistically only a limited
lifetime. The decision to restore a tooth may begin a
repetitive restorative cycle, where the restorations are
changed several times during the life of the patient,
and in each replacement, the cavity preparation gets
bigger, resulting in an additional destruction of the
tooth tissue, which may eventually lead to the
extraction of the tooth.Tooth preparation is defined as the biomechanical treat -
ment of the carious lesion and other lesions on tooth
hard tissues, in a way that the remaining tooth structure
can receive a restoration that protects it, is resistant to
the occlusal stress, and prevents the disease recurrence.
C. R. G. Torres and F. Schwendicke
6
However, when a cavitation already exists, noninvasive measures will oftentimes not be able to arrest the lesion. The cavity needs to be filled by a restorative material, which is shaped
to recover the tooth contour, allowing the control of the bacterial biofilm [7 ]. Other reasons to perform an invasive treatment are when the teeth show hypersensitivity to heat, cold,
and sweet; when the attempts to arrest the lesion had failed;
when some improvement on tooth function or aesthetics is
needed; or when a dental displacement is probable to occur
due to the loss of the interproximal or occlusal contact [7 ].
Restorations can be performed on three different ways,
and they are the direct, the semi-direct, and the indirect techniques . Using the direct technique, the restorative material is applied and shaped by the dentist directly into the
tooth preparation in the patient’s mouth, creating the final
restoration in one clinical session. Using the semi-direct
technique, the restoration is also made in one clinical session,
but the restoration is handled outside the mouth and then
cemented into the tooth. The semi-direct technique can be
intraor extraoral. The intraoral technique consists in applying the restorative material directly into the tooth preparation, and, after curing, the restoration is removed, finished,
and polished outside the mouth. After that, it is cemented
into the tooth preparation. In the extraoral technique, an
impression or scanning of the tooth preparation is per -
formed. In the first case, an impression of the preparation
with alginate is obtained, and a fast-setting material is used to
prepare a model. Generally, a special die silicone material is
used, which is applied inside the impression, creating a flexible model . The restoration is made chairside by the dentist using composite resin and then cemented into the
preparation. On the second case, the three-dimensional
information of the preparation and surrounding teeth is
transferred to a CAD/CAM system (computer-aided design
and computer-aided manufacturing) using an intraoral scanner. Then, the restoration is prepared by the machine and
cemented by the dentist. In the indirect technique, after the
tooth preparation, an impression using a silicone material or
an intraoral scanning is performed and a interim restoration
is performed. Then a plaster or digital model is obtained and
sent to a laboratory, where the laboratory technician will prepare a restoration (either using conventional techniques or
digitally using CAD-CAM). After sending back to the dentist, it is cemented on the prepared tooth. The indirect technique requires two clinical sessions.
> Dental restorations can be performed on three
different ways, which are the direct, the semi-direct,
and the indirect techniques.
An extremely important point when studying tooth preparations are the bonding properties presented by some restorative
materials. Based on the bonding to the tooth structure, we can
divide direct restorations in two types: adhesive and nonadhesive restorations. When a tooth is restored with a nonadhesive
material, such as dental amalgam, the remaining tooth structure and the restorative material behave as two independent structures, but in perfect contact. Therefore, under bite stress,
the adequate distribution of the force on the tooth-restoration
interface is fundamental for the preservation of the remaining
tooth structure and of the restoration itself. In this case, aspects
like uniform depth of the preparation, specific shapes of the
walls, and defined marginal configurations become important
. On the other side, the adhesive capacity that some restor -
ative materials have modifies this scenario, because the forces
applied over the remaining tooth structure are transmitted
through the adhesive interface to the restorations, and vice
versa, so that both behave similar to one, not two bodies,
reducing the interference of the cavity shape. Therefore, the
very precise requirements for the tooth preparation of nonadhesive restorations are reduced for adhesive ones. As described
briefly above, the most common type of adhesive restoration,
the resin composite ones, requires mainly the removal of the
carious tissue, without the need to prepare uniform and specific cavity depth, designs for the walls, or marginal shapes.
This simplification of the preparations is due to the physical
characteristics of the composite and to the bond of the tooth
structure [5 ]. Due to that, most of the adhesive restorations
increase the fracture resistance of weakened teeth, which does
not happen with conventional amalgam, for example .
The general principles of the tooth preparation can be
divided into two groups, named biological and mechanical.
Biological principles are related to the preservation and the
protection of the tooth structure and periodontal tissue,
whereas mechanical principles are related to the factors associated with stress distribution inside the remaining tooth
structure and restorative material, transmitted through the
tooth-restoration interface.
6.2 Biological Principles
The success of the clinical procedures requires a comprehension of the anatomic and biological nature of the tooth, with
its components enamel, dentin, pulp, and cement, as well as
supporting tissues. A clinical practice that violates the physical, chemical, and biological parameters of the dental tissues
can lead to premature failure of the restorations, compromising the integrity of the crown, leading to secondary caries,
discomfort to the patient, and eventually pulpal necrosis .
Enamel is composed mainly from hydroxyapatite crystals, with about 88% per volume, organized in a prismatic arrangement, creating a hard and strong structure that
protects the vitalized dental tissues, namely, the dentin and
the pulp. There are about – prisms (or rods) per
mm2 of enamel ( . Fig. 6.1a–d ) . Among the prisms, there
is a mineralized structure called interprismatic enamel (or
interrod) ( . Fig. 6.1b). Even though most of the enamel is
organized as prisms, a more external and smaller layer has
crystals organized parallel to one another and perpendicular
to the surface, called the prismless enamel ( . Fig. 6.1d ).
The prisms run from the dentin-enamel junction (DEJ)
to the external surface of the tooth ( . Fig. 6.1a), and each
General Principles of Tooth Preparation and Carious Tissue Removal
6
successive row drives through a slightly different path, following the pattern of a wave and a spiral course, producing a
different arrangement for each group or layer of prisms. They
change the direction horizontally and vertically, changing
from clockwise to anticlockwise directions and vice versa,
from the dentin to the external tooth surface [3, 11]. They
initially follow a curved track through 1/3 of the thickness of
the enamel next to the DEJ. Then, the prisms usually follow a more direct track through the last 2/3 of the enamel to the
surface. The borders of the enamel prisms form natural cleavage lines through which the longitudinal fractures can happen . On the most external layer, where they are parallel,
the enamel is more prone to fracture. This external enamel
also has bigger prisms . Groups of prisms of enamel can
intertwine with other groups, creating the gnarled enamel,
which happens next to the tip of the cusps and incisal edge.
ab
cd
.Fig. 6.1 a Photomicrography showing the longitudinal section of
the enamel prisms “E” starting on the DEJ and following parallel to
each other; b greater magnification showing the prisms core “P” and the interprismatic enamel (red arrows); c cross section of the enamel
prisms showing the prism core “P” and the interprismatic enamel (red
arrows); d prismless enamel “PL” and prismatic enamel “P”
C. R. G. Torres and F. Schwendicke
6
The gnarled enamel is not prone to fractures like regular
enamel, being as a result of functional adaptations of the
enamel rods in areas of high loads.
The enamel is as hard as steel, with a Knoop microhardness of , much higher than the dentin microhardness,
which is around 70 . A normal physiological contact
between opposite teeth wears the enamel in a rate of 29 μm a
year [ 14]. However, its effect on the vertical dimension can be
compensated by the apical cementogenesis and passive tooth
eruption . Although the tooth enamel presents high
microhardness, which gives it resistance to wear, it is also
very brittle. When it is properly supported by dentin, this
characteristic is not relevant in terms of fracture resistance.
The dentin provides flexibility, and is capable to absorb the
occlusal loads received by the enamel, preserving its integrity
. However, undermined enamel loses more than 85% of
its resistance . If a nonadhesive restorative material (such
as the amalgam) is used under the undermined enamel, the
load applied over the enamel will not be absorbed and dissipated by the material under it, and there is a great possibility
of enamel fracture ( . Fig. 6.2a , b).
> Although the tooth enamel presents high
microhardness, which gives resistance to wear, it is also
very brittle. When it is properly supported by dentin,
this characteristic is not relevant in terms of fracture
resistance. However, undermined enamel loses more
than 85% of its strengths.
There are two possibilities to solve the problem related to the
presence of undermined enamel. The first one is to remove it
completely, even though this represents an increase of the
final dimensions of the tooth preparation. The second possibility is to create artificial support to the enamel, providing
its reinforcement, by using a restorative material that bonds
to the tooth structure and simulate the mechanical behavior
of the dentin . For example, glass ionomer cements can be used as dentin replacement ( . Fig. 6.3a–c), or full composite resin restorations can be performed ( . Fig. 6.3d ).
For nonadhesive restorations, cavity margins should hence
follow, preferably, the same direction of the enamel prisms,
avoiding that undermined prism remains. Otherwise, mar -
ginal degradation can occur, leading to deposition of bacterial biofilm and caries lesion development . To reach this
goal, the direction of the prisms on all the tooth surfaces
must be known.
In order to study the direction of the enamel prisms on
the occlusal surfaces, the inner cusp inclines can be divided
into three parts ( . Fig. 6.4a). The prisms on the central third
of the occlusal surfaces always lean toward the grooves in
the direction of the center of the crown. The prism below the
occlusal grooves is parallel to the long axis of the tooth, but
the prisms in each side vary about 20° . The greater the
cusp angle, the greater the inclination of the prisms will be.
On the medium third of the cusp inclines, the prisms trend
to become perpendicular to the surface, whereas on the
external thirds, that is, next to the cusp tip and marginal
ridges, the prisms trend to lean to those tips. On the cusp
tip, the prisms are almost parallel with the long axis of the
tooth [ 15]. In the smooth surfaces, the prisms on the occlusal or incisal third lean toward the occlusal or incisal sur -
face, around 24° in relation to a line perpendicular to the
tangent plane on this region [3 , 17]. On the medium third,
they form a 90° angle with the tangent plane on this region,
whereas on the gingival third, they lean around of 2° toward
the cervical in relation to a line perpendicular to the tangents (. Fig. 6.4b ) [15, 18].
In a circumferential analysis, the prisms around the tooth
are perpendicular to the tangent plane ( . Fig. 6.4c, d) . In
order to create enamel walls with the margins following the
direction of the prisms, the whole direction of the cavity wall
(CW) can be modified or only the enamel margins. This last
procedure is called marginal trimming ( . Fig. 6.50 ).
a
b
.Fig. 6.2 a Presence of undermined enamel over an amalgam restoration (arrow); b fracture of the undermined enamel following the direction
of the prisms after receiving a load on this region
General Principles of Tooth Preparation and Carious Tissue Removal
6
As it has already been mentioned, the dentin is resilient,
and it presents a good capacity to bear compression, due to
its elasticity, and absorb the impact hitting the enamel, avoiding its fracture . This is due to the presence of a high
organic content, of about 30% by volume, mainly composed
by type I collagen fibers, associated to 45% of inorganic
material and 25% of water . The dentin has many tubules
running from the pulpal chamber to the DEJ. Encircling each
tubule is the peritubular/intratubular dentin, formed mostly
by minerals, while between them is the intertubular dentin,
where the collagen fibers are located ( . Fig. 6.5a –d).
Another very important function of the dentin is to protect the pulpal tissue. Every time a preparation with a specific
shape is prepared, as required for nonadhesive restorations,
dentin tissue may be lost. To avoid dentin loss in deep areas
of the cavity, base materials may be used. Instead of removing
the healthy tooth structure to allow a uniform depth of the
cavity, a base material can be used to level out the cavity floor
(. Fig. 6.6a –d).
The dentin can be classified in three types, namely primary, secondary, and tertiary. The primary dentin is formed
fast by the odontoblasts during the odontogenesis, until the
end of the root formation. After this point, the dentin continues to form slowly, gradually reducing the internal volume of the pulpal chamber; this one is called secondary dentin.
Contiguously throughout the person’s life, peritubular dentin
is constantly produced by the odontoblasts. As a result, the
tubule lumen gradually becomes narrower. When external
aggression occurs, it is detected by the pulp cells, and the for -
mation of new dentin inside the pulpal chamber is increased,
generating the so-called tertiary dentin. It can be classified in
reactional or reparative. When low levels of irritative stimulus occur, such as the penetration of acids from a carious
lesion through the tubules, that stimulate the odontoblasts to
react and form more dentin on the region related to the
affected tubules. Such tertiary dentin is called reactionary
dentin. However, a high level of irritative stimulus or the
pulpal exposure can destroy the odontoblastic layer. In that
case, undifferentiated mesenchymal cells in the pulp will
migrate to the area and differentiate to odontoblast-like cells,
producing a kind of tertiary dentin named reparative dentin.
In this case, the tubular organization is very different from
that of primary or secondary dentin. The formation of ter -
tiary dentin serves to protect the pulp from diffusion or penetration of bacteria and metabolic products.
There is another kind of dentin named sclerotic
(. Fig. 6.7a, b) . Actually, the sclerotic dentin is the same
primary or secondary dentin but with a greater mineralizaab
cd
.Fig. 6.3 Different ways to treat the undermined enamel. a Carious
lesion with undermined enamel; b removal of the carious tissue
preserving the undermined enamel (dotted line); c dentin “replace -ment” using glass ionomer cement, followed by an amalgam restoration; d completely adhesive restoration using composite resin
C. R. G. Torres and F. Schwendicke
6
tion. It is always associated with a carious lesion that stimulates the pulp reaction. The rate of peritubular dentin
deposition increases, obliterating the tubules. Moreover, calcium and phosphate released from dentin hydroxyapatite, by
the bacterial acids, reprecipitate deeply inside the tubules
below the lesion, filling them up [19, 20]. The preservation of
sclerotic dentin is the best way to protect the pulp. It should
never be removed, although has a darkened color, ranging
from brown to black. It is very hard on probing, as it contains
a greater amount of minerals and radiographically appears as
a radiopaque region ( . Fig. 6.7b). The sclerosis is a predictable response that protects the dentin tubules in more than
95% of the teeth with caries lesions .
Tip
The preservation of sclerotic dentin is the best way to pro -
tect the pulp. It should never be removed, although has
a darkened color, ranging from brown to black. It is very
hard on probing, as it contains a greater amount of miner -
als and radiographically appears as a radiopaque region.Another important aspect to be considered during
tooth preparation is to avoid the heating of the tooth structure. The friction of the cutting or abrasion instruments,
when they are not cooled properly, can lead to very high
temperatures. This heat is easily transmitted to the pulp,
causing injuries. Zack and Cohen reported that the continuous contact of a dental bur on a tooth for 25 s, without
cooling, can produce an increase of the pulp temperature
up to 6 °C above the normal . Another study from the
same authors showed that a temperature increasing of
5.5 °C above the normal situation can lead to irreversible
damage of the pulpal tissue in 15% of the cases. They also
showed that a temperature increasing of 11 °C will result in
pulp necrosis in 60% of the cases . The heating can not
only occur during tooth preparation but also during polishing of restorations at high speed or with excessive pressure [23– 25].
To avoid such problems, the high-speed handpieces
must only be used with a strong spray of air-water, and the
contact between instrument and tooth should not be continuous but intermittent [5 , 26]. In cavities with a box
shape, the use of high-speed handpieces with only one
a
+ 24 °
-2 °b
cd
.Fig. 6.4 Direction of the prisms. a Longitudinal section of the
crown on the buccolingual direction and the orientation and direction
of the prism on each region; b direction of the prisms observed on the
cervical third of smooth surfaces; c transverse cross section of the crown showing the direction of the prisms in relation to the external
surface; d prisms oriented on a perpendicular direction in relation to
the external surface
General Principles of Tooth Preparation and Carious Tissue Removal
6
water outlet may not allow sufficient cooling of the active
head of the rotary instrument, because the water jet will hit
the external surface of the tooth and not enter the cavity
(. Fig. 6.8a). Therefore, handpieces with several air-water
spray outlets are required, avoiding the occurrence of blind
spots (. Fig. 6.8b). Moreover, sharp burs or diamonds
should always be used, increasing their cutting or abrasion
efficiency and reducing the heating generation. In addition,
restorative material with small exothermal curing reactions and low heating lightcuring units should be
employed .Tip
Handpieces with several air-water spray outlets are
required, avoiding the occurrence of blind spots with
insufficient cooling of the active head of the bur.
It is also important to avoid excessive drying of the dentin with
air blows . As can be observed in . Fig. 6.9a–c, the dentin
has several tubules, which have direct contact with the pulp.
Due to the presence of interstitial fluid in the pulp, the tubules
ab
cd
.Fig. 6.5 Dentin tubules. a , b Cross section; c , d longitudinal section (I, intertubular dentin; P , peritubular dentin)
C. R. G. Torres and F. Schwendicke
6
are constantly filled by the so-called dentinal fluid. A pulpal
pressure of about 11 mmHg creates a flux of this fluid toward
the outer dentin surface . A very intense drying causes the
evaporation of the fluid inside the tubules, and, by capillarity, a suction force is created, which aspirate the odontoblasts killing the cells. That results in postoperative sensitivity, forcing
the pulp to promote the recovery of the odontoblastic layer by
mesenchymal stem cell differentiation ( . Fig. 6.9a –c).
ab
c d
.Fig. 6.6 Creating a flat pulpal wall through the application of a
base material. a Pulpal wall with remaining carious tissue on the
central region; b removal of the carious remaining tissue with a round bur; c prepared cavity with an irregular pulpal wall; d filling of the
irregular area with GIC (arrow)
a
b
.Fig. 6.7 Sclerotic dentin. a Clinical aspect of the darkened dentin on the pulpal wall; b radiography of the same clinical case showing the
radiopaque aspect at the floor of the cavity (arrow)
General Principles of Tooth Preparation and Carious Tissue Removal
6
Tip
The excessive drying of the dentin with air blows can
result in odontoblastic layer death and must be avoided.
Besides avoiding damage to the tooth that will be restored,
tooth preparation procedure should also not cause damage to
the adjacent tooth. Unfortunately, iatrogenic cutting of intact
adjacent surfaces is frequent. A study showed that during the
approximal box preparation, without protection of the neighboring tooth, iatrogenic damage can happen in up to % of
the adjacent surfaces, even if the procedure is performed
carefully . The slight contact of a bur or a diamond point
over those surfaces can cause an immediate damage that the
bacteria would take years to create. Therefore, those regions
should be protected with interproximal guards, either by the
use of a steel matrix band, as it will be described on the following chapters ( . Fig. 10.13r –t), or using specific guards
for this purpose, as it can be observed on . Fig. 6.10a , manu -
factured in very strong stainless steel. There is an interproximal guard that already comes with a wedge attached to it,
protecting at the same time the adjacent tooth and the gingival tissue (WedgeGuard®-Triodent) ( . Fig. 6.10b ). The metallic strip can be removed, and the wedge be then used during
the restoration step.
It is also very important to consider the thickness of the
enamel and the dentin and their relation to the volume of the
pulpal chamber in each region of the tooth. In . Figs. 6.11a –o
and 6.12a–o, there are pictures of the same teeth obtained
from the intact structure, after complete demineralization to
exhibit the dentin and after further clearing to show the
pulpal chamber. It is possible to analyze different tooth
groups in facial, mesial, and incisal/occlusal view. It can be
observed that the enamel covers the entire anatomic crown
of the teeth with various thicknesses in different areas.
Enamel is thicker on the occlusal and incisal areas and
becomes progressively thinner on the axial surfaces toward
the cementoenamel junction (CEJ), with a thickness of
0.2 mm on cervical areas. The thickness also varies from one
type of tooth to another, with an average of 2 mm on the incisal edges, ranging from 2.3 to 2.5 mm on the premolar’s cusp
tips and 2.5–3 mm on the molar’s cusp tips. Generally, on the
occlusal surface of posterior teeth, the thickness is reduced
toward the junction of the developmental lobes. On the
internal third of the occlusal cusp inclines, the thickness var -
ies from 0.2 to 0.5 mm and sometimes zero when there is a
fissure in the junction of the lobes. The lingual layers of the
enamel generally are thinner than the facial ones. With the
aging, the enamel thickness on the occlusal surfaces decreases
due to the abrasion promoted by of the food bolus or attrition
with the opposite tooth, while the mineral content increases
making it more brittle.
The dentin thickness changes throughout the life, due to
the constant deposition of secondary dentin and, in some
a
b
.Fig. 6.8 a High-speed handpiece with only one water outlet, resulting in “blind” spots without irrigation (arrow); b handpiece with several
air-water sprays in different directions, producing an adequate cooling
.Fig. 6.9 Aspiration of the odontoblastic process because of the
excessive drying of the dentin. a Cell in the normal position; b dentin
fluid being removed due to excessive drying producing the cell
aspiration; c odontoblasts completely aspirated inside the tubule
C. R. G. Torres and F. Schwendicke
6
a b
.Fig. 6.10 Interproximal guards. a InterGuard® (Ultradent); b Wedgeguard® (Triodent)
ab c
de f
gh i
.Fig. 6.11 Crowns of maxillary teeth in a facial, mesial, and occlusal/incisal view, showing the thickness of the enamel and the volume of the
pulpal chamber. a –c Central incisor; d –f lateral incisor; g –i canine. j –l premolar; m –o molar
General Principles of Tooth Preparation and Carious Tissue Removal
6
situations, also tertiary dentin, reducing the volume of the
pulpal chamber ( . Fig. 6.13a , b). It is known that the secondary dentin is deposited preferably on the pulpal horns and on
the pulpal chamber roof and floor, causing that, after many
decades, it becomes very narrow on the occlusogingival direction . Therefore, the tooth preparation on the teeth of a
young patient presents a significantly greater chance of pulpal
exposure than on those of a patient with more advance age.
> The tooth preparation on teeth of a young patient
presents a significantly greater chance of pulpal
exposure than on those of a patient with more
advance age.
It is known that the shape of the pulpal chamber follows the
morphology of the tooth cusps. Therefore, when a preparation
is performed to create a flat pulpal wall, not following the exter -
nal contour of the crown, there will be areas where pulpal tissue
is closer to the wall, resulting in a greater risk of accidental
exposure. On the mandibular first premolars, for example,
there is a very large discrepancy of the cusp volume, resulting in
a buccal pulp horn much larger than the lingual one. Therefore,
as will be presented on further chapters, the classic shape of a
cavity for silver amalgam is modified, making the pulpal wall
parallel to a plane that tangents both cusps, instead of being
perpendicular to the long axis of the tooth, in order to avoid the
accidental exposure of the pulpal tissue ( . Fig. 6.14a , b).
Another very important biological aspect is related to the
physiological principle of biologic width, which is a natural
seal that develops around the tooth and protect the internal
medium from bacterial penetration . Its preservation or recovery is paramount to the periodontal health. The biologic width is the natural distance between the bottom of the
gingival sulcus and the top of the alveolar bone crest, including the juntional epithelium and connective tissue attachments (. Fig. 6.15) . In the past, it was proposed to place
the cavity margins inside the gingival sulcus, because this
region was considered an area of relative immunity to the
caries. However, nowadays, it is known that the restoration
interface will almost never be perfect and interfacial defects
and gaps will certainly exist in some regions. Those areas are
susceptible to biofilm deposition, resulting in aggression to
the surrounding gingival tissue . The margins of the restorations placed more than 1 mm inside the sulcus, invading
the biologic width, may be related to the inflammation,
bleeding, hyperplasia, and gingival recession. Therefore, the
preparation margins should, whenever possible, be placed
above the gingival margin [3, 4]. However, when restorations
are placed in aesthetically relevant areas, such as the maxillary anterior region, the preparation margin needs sometimes to be placed a little inside the sulcus, to hide the
tooth-restoration interface, but never invading the biologic
width [3, 4]. With highly aesthetic materials (like composites
or ceramics), this is, however, usually not needed any longer.
The biologic width is the natural distance between the
bottom of the gingival sulcus and the top of the alveolar
bone crest, including the junctional epithelial and connective tissue attachments.
jk l
mn o
.Fig. 6.11 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres and F. Schwendicke
6
It is also important to avoid damage to the gingival tissue,
with cutting instruments, during the preparation procedure.
For that, wooden wedges can be inserted into the interproximal space before the preparation of the proximal boxes
(. Fig. 10.13e ). This way, any unexpected contact of the cutting instrument will happen on the wedge, and not on the
gingiva . There are also some specific instruments for displacement and protection of the gingival tissue during the
tooth preparation, as shown in . Fig. 6.16 .
6.3 Mechanical Principles
The external forces applied onto both the restoration and the
remaining tooth structure produce internal stress inside the
restorative material and tooth, being transmitted through the
interface. As it has been mentioned before, for the nonadhe-sive restorations, the restorative material and the remaining
tooth structure behave as independent structures in intimate
contact, which can result in some circumstances in fracture
of the tooth and displacement of the restoration. The
mechanical principles of the tooth preparation have the
objective to avoid that such phenomenon to happen, increasing the longevity of the restorations. Therefore, it is impor -
tant to analyze the adhesive capacity of the restorative
material, its physical properties, and the final characteristics
of the tooth preparation.
The restorations undergo a combination of forces, both in
axial, oblique, and transversal direction . An intact mandibular molar requires an axial force of about kg to fracture . However, the maximum biting force reported on
the literature was 81.6 kg . The main question is what is
the resistance of the restored tooth, weakened by the destruction of its natural structure. According to Corrêa , even
ab c
de f
gh i
.Fig. 6.12 Crowns of mandibular teeth in a facial, mesial, and occlusal/incisal view showing the thickness of the enamel and the volume of the
pulpal chamber. a –c Central incisor; d –f lateral incisor; g –i canine. j –l premolar; m –o molar
General Principles of Tooth Preparation and Carious Tissue Removal
6
though it was possible to perform precise mathematical calculation and to determine exactly the intensity of the forces
that the restorations and tooth preparations undergo under
mastication, the clinical reality does not allow such precision.
Instead of building absolute numbers, hence, knowledge
about mechanical principles of tooth preparation and restoration should be applied.
The forces necessary for mastication are produced by the
muscles and are transmitted to the teeth through the alveolar
bone and periodontal ligaments. The response of the tooth is
determined not only by the magnitude of the forces but also
by the nature and position of the contact surfaces. When cer -
tain forces hit inclined planes, such as those created by contacts among the smooth and masticatory cuspal inclines of a mandibular premolar with the masticatory cuspal inclines of
a maxillary premolar, they are decomposed, resulting in
horizontal components, producing so-called wedge effect. It
can lead to the displacement or fracture of either the remaining tooth structure or the restoration, depending on which
offers lesser resistance ( . Fig. 6.17 ) .
It is possible sometimes to see the consequences of
the wedge effect in large MOD nonadhesive metallic restorations. When they receive occlusal loads, the forces are
partially transmitted to the surrounding walls, pushing
them and producing cuspal deflection, sometimes resulting
in oblique crack propagation from the internal line angles
toward the cervical area and cusp fractures ( . Fig. 6.18a , b)
[4, 34].
ab
.Fig. 6.13 a Pulpal chamber of the tooth of a young patient (arrow – pulp horn); b pulpal chamber of the tooth of an elderly patient with a
worn occlusal surface and reduced volume of the pulpal chamber
jk l
mn o
.Fig. 6.12 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres and F. Schwendicke
6
When the teeth are prepared and the reinforcing structures such as marginal and oblique ridge are removed, the
cusp elongation phenomenon occurs , resulting in
even greater cuspal deflection. On intact teeth the cusps have
a mechanic height equal to the anatomic height, measured
from the cusp tip to the bottom of the central groove
(. Fig. 6.19a ). When a MOD preparation is created, the
mechanical height of the cusp increases, since it has now the
distance between the tip of the cusp and the gingival wall of
the preparation ( . Fig. 6.19b ) . The larger and deeper the
cavity, the larger is the mechanical height. According to
Mondelli , such elongation can lead to disastrous effects if
the restoration is not planned to compensate this mechanical effect, for example, by providing an adhesive restoration or
by covering the cusps when the nonadhesive restoration is
performed.
Strain is the response of a system to an applied stress.
When a material is loaded with a force, it produces a stress,
ab
.Fig. 6.14 Modification of the cavity shape due to the tooth
anatomy of the first mandibular premolars. a Pulp wall parallel to the
horizontal plane, with the consequent exposure of the pulp and excessive cutting of the buccal cusp (arrows); b pulpal wall parallel to
the plane that tangents the top of the cusps, avoiding pulp exposure
GINGIVAL
SULCUS
JUNCTIONAL
EPITHELIUM
CONNECTIVE
TISSUE
ATTACHMENT
.Fig. 6.15 Biologic width (junctional epithelium + connective tissue
attachment). Image kindly provided by Dr. Miguel Angel Castilho
Salgado, professor of Histology at the Institute of Science and
Technology of São José dos Campos – UNESP – Brazil
.Fig. 6.16 Protection of the gingiva during the tooth preparation
.Fig. 6.17 Wedge effect on an intact tooth
General Principles of Tooth Preparation and Carious Tissue Removal
6
which then causes a material to deform. In engineering
the strain is defined as the amount of deformation in the
direction of the applied force divided by the initial length of
the material.
The tooth structures and the restorations undergo a combination of forces, both axial (compression and tensile) and
oblique or transversal . When a material is loaded with a
force, it produces internal stress that causes a deformation on
the material. The stress is defined as the force per unit area of
a material. According to the direction of the load, the stress
can be compressive, tensile, or shearing ( . Fig. 6.20a –c). If
the force is of compression nature, as a result of the occlusal
contact with an antagonist tooth or food, compressive stress
will occur in the interior of the material, and the strain will
result in the shortening of the structure ( . Fig. 6.20a ) .
If tensile load is applied, such as when chewing sticky
food, the tensile stress will occur and result in the elongation
of the body ( . Fig. 6.20b ). A very sticky food can generate
tensile forces from 5 to 10 kg . If one end of the structure is fixed, as a cantilever beam, and it receives a lateral load on
the free end, known as shear load, one side of the beam will
show tensile and the other compressive stress ( . Fig. 6.20c ).
This type of stress happens, for example, when the cusp elongated after deep tooth preparation contact the antagonist
tooth, or when the lingual surface of maxillary incisors contacts the incisal edge of mandibular incisor [6, 39].
The deformation of the structure can be elastic, which is
reversible and will disappear when the load is removed, or
plastic, when it is permanent. Each restorative material, as
well as the enamel and dentin, has a certain capacity to
undergo elastic deformation under occlusal loads, maintaining its original shape. However, when an inadequate restor -
ative material is used, or the capacity of elastic deformation is
exceeded, a fracture of the restorative material or of the tooth
structure will occur.
Other aspect to be analyzed is that materials, subjected to
repeated loading above a certain threshold, will suffer fatigue
and microscopic cracks will occur at locations of stress conab
.Fig. 6.18 a Wedge effect on a restored tooth. The compressive load (vertical arrow) produces tensile stress (horizontal arrows) toward the
cavity walls; b oblique fracture of a cusp, starting on the sharp line angle
ab
.Fig. 6.19 Phenomenon of the elongated cusps. a The anatomic and mechanic heights of the cusps are equal on intact tooth; b the mechanic
height in a prepared tooth is higher, increasing the cuspal deflection
C. R. G. Torres and F. Schwendicke
6
centration. Those can propagate suddenly causing catastrophic failure. Fatigue can be defined as the weakening of
the materials by damage accumulation, at a specific region,
caused by repeatedly applied loads. In this situation, the material may fracture after receiving a load much smaller
than the normal nominal material strength. All occlusal contact in new restorations should be properly adjusted to reduce
the cyclic stress, increasing their longevity [ 6, 39].
Tip
The occlusal contacts in new restorations should be
properly adjusted to reduce the cyclic stress and fatigue
of the material and remaining tooth structure, increasing
their longevity.
6.4 Prior to Tooth Preparation
Before starting the tooth preparation, a series of aspects
should be considered to guarantee that the best strategies of
preparation and restoration are chosen.
The adjacent tooth’s position should be considered. If
migration of the affected tooth has occurred, or the proximal surface of the adjacent tooth has invaded the interproximal space, restoring the proximal contour without
compromising the space for the interdental gingival papilla
can be impossible ( . Fig. 6.21a , b). In this case, the recovery
of the space, through orthodontic movement, must be per -
formed before the final restoration is performed. Initially, a
temporary restoration of the cavity needs to be performed,
and then, orthodontic appliances or – much simpler – an
orthodontic elastic separator (rubber ring) is placed. That
can be repeated until a total recovery of the space is reached,
allowing an anatomically corrected final restoration to be
performed.Fatigue can be defined as the weakening of the materials by damage accumulation, at a specific region, caused
by repeatedly applied loads.
ha
b
ch
+ h
dh
.Fig. 6.20 Deformation of the materials under external the forces. a
Compression; b tensile; c shear. The red arrows show the direction of
the loads, while the green arrows show the direction of the stress. h
means the height of the bar; − h shows a negative strain; +h shows a
positive strain; d shows strain under shear forces
ab
.Fig. 6.21 a, b Mesialization of the adjacent tooth and the invasion of carious lesion cavity
General Principles of Tooth Preparation and Carious Tissue Removal
6
In relation to the occusion of the antagonist tooth, it is
important that the contacts on the maximum intercuspation
(MIC) or centric occlusion (CO) are verified. For that, a thin
sheet of articulating paper, preferably <10 μm, should be
used. It should be analyzed where the contacts occur. It is
very important that the contacts happen either over the
restorative material or over the remaining tooth structure,
but never over the tooth-restoration interface. The contact
over the interface will result in stress concentration in this
region and eventually fracture on the restoration margins
(. Fig. 6.26a , b).
In addition, when a cavity remains open for a long time,
with the loss of occlusal contact, the affected teeth or the
antagonist can undergo extrusion, invading the interior of
the lesion. In many cases, the only solution is to cut a portion
of extruded cusp, recovering the necessary space for the dental restoration. A functional analysis of the occlusion is also
important, considering both protrusive and lateral excursive
movements, as well the presence of interferences.
Another important aspect to be assessed prior to preparation is the pulpal condition. The presence of symptoms and
radiographic signs of inflammation or necrosis must be analyzed. If endodontic intervention is necessary, the restorative
treatment should be postponed. However, in some situations,
temporary restorations or provisional crowns may be necessary, to emergently recover the aesthetics or to allow moisture control during root-canal treatment.
During radiographic analysis, the lesion depth and the
proximity to the pulpal chamber, besides the shape and
dimensions of the pulpal chamber, must be verified, to decide
how likely accidental exposure of the pulp during the tooth
preparation is; and to perform the carious tissue removal
accordingly ( . Fig. 6.22a , b).
A good periodontal health is another requirement prior
to restorative treatment. Any type of restorative treatment
should only be performed after the oral health has been
established. However, restorative treatments often need to be
performed under suboptimal conditions (gingivitis, peri-odontitis), to allow proper oral hygiene and periodontal
therapy. Those restorations then may sometimes need to be
replaced in optimal conditions, after recovering of periodontal health.
Before any restorative treatment to be started, preprocedural use of antimicrobial mouth rinses can be performed,
reducing the risk of cross infection . The most commonly used antimicrobial solution is the 0.12% digluconate
chlorhexidine, because of its high antibacterial effects. Also,
anesthesia needs to be considered and planned a priori. The
use of topical anesthetic prior to block or infiltration anesthesia is recommended.
6.5 Steps of Tooth Preparation
Greene Vardiman Black, in , proposed to adopt specific
steps to perform tooth preparations . They are a sequence
of necessary procedures, through interrelated stages, addressing biological, mechanical, and aesthetic requirements [3, 4].
A division into steps helps, mainly the beginners, to comprehend and execute the preparation sequence more adequately,
reaching the desired results in a more easily way. The steps
for tooth preparation are presented next. Note, however, that
these conventional steps mainly apply to nonadhesive restoration (they were originally established for amalgams) and
that for adhesive ones, not all steps apply. Nevertheless,
understanding these steps first will allow later on to adapt the
sequence to all kind of restorative materials, which is not prescriptive in all cases.
6.5.1 Outline Form
According to the speed carious lesion progression and the
presence of fluoride on the oral cavity, the caries lesions
may already be open (cavitated), allowing the visualization
of its interior, or may be closed. In the latter case, the enamel
ab
.Fig. 6.22 Importance of the radiographic analysis on the planning
of the preparation. a Lesion of medium depth, with a good amount of
intact dentin above to the pulp chamber (arrow); b deep lesion with a great risk of pulpal exposure during the removal of the carious tissue
(arrow)
C. R. G. Torres and F. Schwendicke
6
of external tooth surface seems intact, creating what is
called hidden caries (the “true” connection between the
outer area and the lesion inside is not visible). The opening
of the cavity is the first procedure, creating or enhancing
the access to the lesion, allowing its correct visualization
(. Fig. 6.23a , b).
After that, it is necessary to define the outline of the
tooth preparation [3 ]. Black proposed the principle of
extension for prevention that claimed that the margins of
the cavities should be placed into zones of little susceptibility to the development of lesions and where, by the action of
mastication, a self-cleaning via movement of the tongue,
lips, and cheek would occur . According to this principle, all the occlusal grooves and fissures would be included
in the preparation outline, because they would certainly be
affected in the future by new lesions ( . Fig. 6.24a ). However,
it is important to consider that, when Black proposed this
principle, the etiology of the caries disease was not completely understood, effective preventive measurements were
not available, the appearance of new lesions in a patient was
oftentimes inevitable, and restorative options were limited.
With the knowledge available today, however, it is possible
to control the caries disease, avoiding that new lesions come
up and arresting existing ones. The principle of extension
for prevention hence neither is justifiable nor is it, under the
consideration of the principles of minimal invasive, adequate. Even in patients with total incapacity, patients with
debilitating chronicle disease, and very severe xerostomia
cases (patients that undergo radiotherapy, intellectual disability, or saliva deficiency) [3 , 15], extension of the cavity is
not justified, and especially pits and fissures should be
sealed instead of included into the restoration [3 ]. In
. Fig. 6.24a –c, we can observe the variations on the extension of the preparation outline from the more invasive to
the more conservative.Nowadays, the principle of the extension for prevention
has hence been largely abandoned; the contemporaneous
approach is to remove the minimum quantity of tooth tissue,
only enough to adequate the preparation to receive the
restorative material . The outline form is primarily based
on the extension and location of the carious lesion, fracture,
or other lesions . In case of a nonadhesive restoration, the
undermined enamel can be removed or artificially supported
using adhesive materials, such as glass ionomer cement .
The cut must be extended up to reach a healthy enamel but to
a limited pulpal and axial depth [3, 5]. The aim of the procedure is to shape the cavity and allow removal of the carious
tissue (see below) in an appropriate and conservative way.
> The contemporaneous approach is to remove the
minimum quantity of tooth tissue, only enough to
adequate the preparation to receive the restorative
material.
When preparing the outline form, the dentist should evaluate
the extension of the lesion and the consequent weakening of
the cusp. If a nonadhesive restoration is planned, cusp cover -
ing should be considered, i.e., covering the cusps with a
restorative material. To decide about cusp coverage, the distance between the central groove and the top of the cusp
should be evaluated ( . Fig. 6.25a ) . If the extension is less
than 2/3 of the distance, the cusp covering is not necessary.
On the other side, if the extension is greater than 2/3, it
should be considered (again, mainly if using nonadhesive
materials) ( . Fig. 6.25b ) . The cusp covering of a weakened teeth with large preparations can increase the fracture
resistance considerably . If a fracture happens, it will occur
in the restorative material, not the tooth, and the treatment
will be reparable. If an adhesive material is used, however,
this may allow increasing the fracture resistance even without cusp coverage .
ab
.Fig. 6.23 Occlusal carious lesion. a Initial aspect; b opened cavity
General Principles of Tooth Preparation and Carious Tissue Removal
6
The outline form varies according to the anatomic shape of
each tooth. As it extends over the pits and fissures on the
occlusal surface, the margins usually do not take a straight
line from one point to another, but they follow a soft line that
preserves sound tissue . An abrupt change in the outline
form may increase the risk of fracture, especially if amalgam
is used as restorative material. The angle formed by the junc-tions between the surrounding walls of a preparation (first
set of internal line angles) must also be rounded to improve
the adaptation of the restorative material and decrease the
concentration of stress. In addition, such rounding often
allows to remove undermined enamel .
Sometimes, a pit or groove is extremely deep and allows
retention of bacterial biofilm, and it is not favorable to have
a
cb
.Fig. 6.24 Variations of the outline of a Class I preparation for silver
amalgam. a Involving all the grooves (classic preparation); b involving
only the central groove; c restricted to the pits. The outline must be the most conservative possible, restricted to the cariesaffected grooves,
for the maximum preservation of intact tooth structure
ab
.Fig. 6.25 a Analysis of the lesion extension and the weakening of the cusp by evaluating the remaining tooth structure. The distance between
the central groove and the cup tip is divided in three thirds. b Restoration with cusp covering
C. R. G. Torres and F. Schwendicke
6
the interface of an amalgam restoration on this area. On the
classic technique using the extension for prevention principle, all the grooves would be included on the preparation,
resulting in cutting of healthy tooth structure. Alternative,
wearing and smoothing the enamel, thereby removing the
retentive groove, has been proposed. This procedure of minimal changing the enamel shape with rotary cutting instruments is known as enameloplasty, avoiding extending the
outline form of the preparation . However, it also involves
removal of sound tissue. In most cases, then, sealing such
areas can be a valid option. Generally, when using adhesive
materials, such considerations play a lesser role. As it has
already been mentioned, the contact with the antagonistic
tooth should not happen exactly in the region of the interface
tooth-restoration. If this happens, the outline of the preparation should be modified to include this region, reducing the
chances of marginal fractures ( . Fig. 6.26a , b) [15, 44].
Reinforcing structures, such as the oblique and marginal
ridges, should be preserved wherever possible. However,
when there is a plan to make a nonadhesive restoration, it is
important that the remaining ridge structures have at least
1 mm thickness . If it is too fragile, e.g., <0.5 mm, and in
contact with the opposing tooth, such small ridges may need
removal ( . Fig. 6.27a –d) . Again, for adhesive restorations, no additional cutting is necessary even if the ridge is
fragile, due to the fact that the restoration will reinforce the
remaining tooth structure.
6.5.2 Resistance Form
It is the preparation form that allows the tooth and the restoration to resist to masticatory loads, volumetric changes of
the restorative material, and the intradentinal stress [3, 4, 15].
Again, it is important to bring up the difference in behavior
between an adhesive and a nonadhesive restoration. When
using adhesive restorations, the restorative material and the
remaining tooth structure will (ideally) behave as one single
body, and the internal stress will be transmitted through the adhesive interface. However, in the case of nonadhesive restorations, the tooth preparation must at the same time allow
the resistance of both the restoration, considering the physical characteristics of the restorative material, and the remaining tooth structure, that must stay intact during the tooth
function. However, when necessary to choose, it is always
best to sacrifice the resistance of the restoration than the
resistance of the tooth, because this last one cannot be
replaced. To guarantee the tooth resistance, the extension of
the preparation should be as small as possible, e.g., by maintaining cusps and ridges, as discussed [ 5].
When performing nonadhesive restorations, the first point
that must be considered is to prepare flat and smooth walls.
The smooth walls allow to well adapt the restorative material
and increase the frictional retention . Smooth walls will
further reduce the risk of remaining friable enamel prisms
which may fracture, leading to marginal defects . Flat
internal walls, parallel to the horizontal plane and perpendicular to the direction of the forces, allow any loads to be
distributed throughout the cavity and to direct them onto the
tooth, hence protecting the restoration during mastication
loading ( . Fig. 6.28a ) [15, 43, 45]. Internal walls should nevertheless protect the restoration against rotational movement,
which can otherwise result in the displacement of the restoration or fracture of the surrounding walls ( . Fig. 6.28b , c)
[5, 6]. Similar principles must be applied on the gingival wall
of the proximal box in Class II preparation . For an adhesive restoration, none of these principles apply in such rigor,
while, nevertheless, adaptation and removal of friable enamel
will play a role here, too.Resistance forms are the preparation characteristics that
allow the tooth and the restoration to resist to masticatory loads, volumetric changes of the restorative mate -
rial, and the intradentinal stress.
ab
.Fig. 6.26 Modification of the cavity outline due to the location of the contacts with antagonist tooth exactly on the cavosurface angle.
a Contacts on the margin (arrows). b Changes in the outline, allowing the contact to occur over the restorative material
General Principles of Tooth Preparation and Carious Tissue Removal
6
Another area where care is needed is the cavity margin, that
is, on the region of the cavosurface (CS) angle. In . Fig. 6.29,
there is a Class I cavity on a cross section, where we can analyze
the angles on the cavity margins. The CS angle is determined
by the projection of the cavity wall (CW) on an imaginary line
and the unprepared enamel surface (ES). The restorative material (rm) angle or margin angle is the angle formed by the
restorative material in the margin of the restoration. It can be
noticed that the opposite CS’ and rm’ angles have the same
angles as the CS and rm. An easy way to analyze those angles is
by evaluating the imaginary projections using two periodontal
probes, one resting on the external surface of the tooth and
another on the external CW ( . Fig. 6.30) . For nonadhesive
restorations, like amalgam, the dentist should remove under -
mined enamel prisms, while at the same time avoiding to leave
too thin restoration margins. This can be achieved by adjusting
the directions of the CWs. To not leave undermined enamel
prisms on the cavity margins of the occlusal surface, the CS
angle should have 90° or more. When there is a CS angle of
around 90°, the restoration margin angle is also 90°.
Although amalgam, if well condensed, shows compressive strength above MPa, it is brittle and has little flexural
strength . Amalgam restorations frequently suffer the phenomenon of marginal degradation leading to ditch for -
mation on the interface tooth-restoration. That is mainly a
result of mastication loads, leading to fracture of thin amalgam areas, leaving a ditch between the restoration and the
cavity margin, which can allow biofilm deposition and recur -
rent caries ( . Fig. 6.31a –c) [45, 46]. The weaker the amalgam
and the smaller its margin angle, more probable is the ditching formation. By increasing the margin angle, then, dentists
can provide enough amalgam bulk in margin areas to prevent
such marginal degradation.
For occlusal preparations for amalgam, recommendations are ambiguous: Some authors like Gilmore and Lund
recommend parallel vertical walls, which should be per -
pendicular to the pulpal wall (this was also proposed by
Black [ 43]), while others, like Markley , Simon ,
Howard , and Hollenback , recommended the convergence of those wall to the occlusal surface, following the
direction of the enamel prisms (and hence also achieving
undercuts). There is a consensus, though, that preparations
should not be divergent toward the occlusal surface, as even
though this would serve to remove undermined enamel, it
will lead to small margin angles, increasing the risk of ditching (. Fig. 6.43c , d).
ab
c d
.Fig. 6.27 Modification of the cavity outline due to a fragility of the
remaining tooth structure. a , c small thickness of the remaining of the
transverse and oblique ridges making them susceptible to fracture
(arrow); b, d modification of the contour for inclusion of the weakened area in the outline form. This procedure is only indicated for amalgam
restorations. For composite restoration, the adhesion to the tooth
structure will reinforce the weaken areas
C. R. G. Torres and F. Schwendicke
6
The differences on the cuspal slope inclination angles
can affect the cavosurface and margin angle of teeth restorations (. Fig. 6.32a –d). The preparation of the vertical sur -
rounding walls of the occlusal box parallel to each other may
lead to an insufficient volume, on the restoration margin of an nonadhesive amalgam restoration, to resist the masticatory load, especially on those teeth with the higher cuspal
slope inclination ( . Fig. 6.32a , b) [4, 49, 51]. In a clinical
study performed by Stratis and Bryant , the preparation
of the vertical surrounding walls parallel to each other
resulted, in about half of the margins, in margin angles of
ab
c
.Fig. 6.28 a Flat pulpal wall resulting in good stress distribution
and stability to the nonadhesive restoration when receiving an
eccentric load (blue arrow); b round pulpal wall, resulting on a
tendency for restoration rotation; c fracture of the cusp. This character -istic of the pulpal wall is only relevant for amalgam restorations. For
composite ones, the adhesion to the tooth structure will prevent the
rotation, despite the wall shape
.Fig. 6.29 Measurement of the angles on the cavity margins. CW ,
cavity wall; ES, external enamel surface; CS, cavosurface angle; rm,
restorative material angle or margin angle
.Fig. 6.30 Clinical visualization of the cavosurface and restoration
margin angle using two probes
General Principles of Tooth Preparation and Carious Tissue Removal
6
less than 50°, compared to only 8% when the walls were prepared convergent. It is important to highlight that the cusp
angles do vary not only from tooth to tooth but also on different areas of a same tooth. Therefore, when the dentist
uses the same rotary instrument in the same angle on the
entire CW , different margin angles of the restorative material will be created [51, 52].
According to Symons et al. and Bryant , the premolars and the third molars have higher cusp slope inclination angles than the other posterior teeth, which can result in
a margin angle of 25–30° or less with the use of the parallel
walls. Therefore, the preparation of vertical surrounding
walls convergent toward the occlusal surface allows a greater
volume of the restoration margin. The ideal margin angle to
amalgam restorations should be 90°, to overcome the low
marginal resistance of this material [46, 48, 49, 52]. This produces the best strength for the amalgam margins and for the
tooth [ 47]. However, especially on the cases of the large cavities on the buccolingual direction, the small amount of
remaining tooth structure will not allow the preparation of
convergent vertical surrounding walls without complete
removal of the dentin and weakening of the cusps, predisposing to fracture with the clinical use [4, 45, 51].
Elderton performed a clinical study with amalgam restorations. He observed the relationship between the margin angle and material fractures, showing that a margin
angle of around 70–75° showed lowest fracture risk and that
this risk was highest at 58°. He recommended a margin angle
with at least 70° to minimize the marginal failure. Long-term
clinical trials also observed that the restorations performed
with the buccal and lingual walls parallel to each other presented a higher rate of marginal fracture than those conver -
gent to the occlusal surface [51, 56]. However, to obtain such
an angle, only via working on the walls inclination toward
the occlusal surface, can demand a great cut of the vertical
surrounding wall ( . Fig. 6.33a ). A way to obtain such restoration margins and conserve the tooth structure is to reduce
the wall inclination but adapt the occlusal contour of the restoration with a shallower carving ( . Fig. 6.33b ).
It is known that the carious lesion expands laterally when
reaching the DEJ, with its extension in dentin being then
larger than that in enamel. It was formerly recommended the
complete removal of undermined enamel. For that, the outline form would remove caries-affected and sound enamel,
until hard dentin would be identified at the DEJ. Taking in
consideration this principle, when convergent vertical walls
are prepared, a smaller occlusal opening would be performed
in relation to a preparation with vertical surrounding wall
parallel to each other, reducing the contact of the restoration
with the occlusal loads during mastication ( . Fig. 6.34 ) .
ab
c
.Fig. 6.31 a Amalgam restorations in an extracted tooth, with ditching on the margins (arrows). b Greater magnification view of the ditch;
c cross section of a ditched margin
C. R. G. Torres and F. Schwendicke
6
However, it is possible nowadays to recover the support
of the undermined enamel by means of adhesive “dentin
replacement” materials, such as the GIC or composites. This
way, the opening of the cavity to create the outline form can
be performed up to the point where intact enamel is reached,
not necessarily sound dentin, leaving undermined enamel. In . Fig. 6.35a are shown the possibilities for the cavity outline.
The first is to remove affected and sound enamel, until reaching hard dentin on the DEJ (star), while the second is to
remove only the caries-affected enamel (dot). In . Fig. 6.35b ,
c, it is possible to compare the greater opening of the cavity
when the full removal of the undermined enamel is planned.
ab
cd
.Fig. 6.32 Analysis of different cuspal slope inclination angles on the cavosurface and margin angle of teeth preparations. a , b High cusps;
c cusps with medium cusp angle; d cusps with small cusp angle
ab
.Fig. 6.33 Relation between the direction of the walls and carving
of the restoration with the margin angle. a Convergent walls toward
the occlusal surface in a way to create a margin angle of 70°; b smaller convergence associated with a shallow carving to create the same
margin angle
General Principles of Tooth Preparation and Carious Tissue Removal
6
In this case, when the vertical walls are convergent toward
the occlusal surface, more enamel will be preserved. In
. Fig. 6.35c , the opening was performed only until intact
enamel was reached, and later the carious dentin tissue
around the DEJ was removed ( . Fig. 6.35d ). As shown in
. Fig. 6.35e , the preparation of vertical walls convergent
toward the occlusal surface preserves more enamel on the
occlusal surface, while the dentin cut does not become relevant, since the undermined enamel region can be filled with
dentin replacement material ( . Fig. 6.35f ). In addition, it creates a self-retentive cavity and a greater bulk of the restorative
material on restoration margin.
In conservative preparation with moderate size, such as
on the sizes 1 and 2, according to Mount and Hume, vertical
surrounding walls convergent toward the occlusal surface are
recommended. However, when the carious lesion is treated
on a very advanced phase, the buccolingual dimensions are
bigger than the depth of the cavity, and parallel walls are recommended to avoid an even greater weakening of the
remaining tooth structure ( . Fig. 6.36a , b) .
Another place where the resistance of the restoration
margin can influence the shape of the cavity is on the proximal box of the Class II preparations for amalgam, in the
mesiodistal direction. The ideal shape for the resistance of
the restoration margin is that it forms an angle of 90° with the
external tooth surfaces, which also avoids undermined
enamel prism on the margins of the preparation. In
. Fig. 6.37, several possibilities of such configuration are displayed.
To prepare the buccal and lingual walls in a direction
convergent toward the proximal area will result in under -
mined enamel prisms ( . Fig. 6.38a ). To prepare the same
walls parallel to each other will result in undermined prisms,
mostly on the lingual wall, on teeth that have lingual surfaces
smaller than buccal surfaces ( . Fig. 6.38b ), and, sometimes,
also on the buccal wall, especially on teeth with a very convex proximal surface. A slight divergence of the buccal and lingual walls can remove undermined prisms but also can result
on the buccal wall thin margins of the restorative material,
which are predisposed to fractures ( . Fig. 6.38c , e). In order
to increase the margin angle on this area, increasing the resistance of the restoration, an additional cut of the buccal wall
can be performed, in a way that creates a 90° angle with the
external surface of the tooth. Proposed by George
M. Hollenback , this was later called the Hollenback’s
reverse curve ( . Fig. 6.38d , f). This procedure is generally not
necessary on the lingual walls of teeth but may be applicable
in various situations.
Another factor that influences the mechanical perfor -
mance of an amalgam restoration is related to the internal and
external line angles . The preparation of sharp internal
line angles results in stress concentration, predisposing to
fractures of the remaining tooth structure ( . Fig. 6.39) [5,
57]. Preferably, the angles on a box-shaped preparation should
be round. The round angles offer better stress distribution
through the tooth structure during mastication than the
sharp angles, reducing the risk of fracture, especially on large
preparation ( . Fig. 6.39) [5, 45, 59, 60]. In addition, the preparations for amalgam with round internal angles improve the
adaptation of the restorative material to the angles during the
material condensation . It is also recommended that the
external line angles should be round, avoiding the stress concentration inside the restoration, preventing its fracture. The
preparation of a sharp axiopulpal angle may predispose the
restoration to fracture in the isthmus region ( . Fig. 6.40 ) .
During the tooth preparation, it is very important to
avoid the weakening of the remaining tooth structure. When
preparing the occlusal box of a Class I cavity for amalgam, in
case of a small to medium size lesion where the remaining
tooth structure in the marginal ridge area is more than
1.5 mm thick, the best direction of the CW is convergent
toward the occlusal surface, because it allows a self-retentive
preparation and increases the thickness of the restorative
material on the margin ( . Fig. 6.41a ). However, in case of a
large carious lesion, and the removal of the entire under -
mined enamel with rotary instruments, the mesial and distal
walls must be prepared slightly divergent toward the occlusal
surface, following the shape of the carious lesion, avoiding
the weakening of the region of the marginal ridge by the
excessive removal of dentin on this region ( . Fig. 6.41b ). The
preparation of these walls perpendicular to the pulpal wall
results in a larger removal of dentin ( . Fig. 6.41c ), whereas
preparation of those walls convergent toward the occlusal
surface may result in the entire removal of dentin under the
marginal ridge ( . Fig. 6.41d ).
In a nonadhesive restoration, the depth of the cavity must
be prepared in a way to allow a minimal bulk of the restor -
ative material . For dental amalgam, the restoration must
have a minimum thickness of 1.5 mm or preferably 2 mm,
avoiding fractures due to the occlusal loads ( . Fig. 6.42) [3,
5]. Especially, the transition area between the occlusal and
proximal boxes, known as the isthmus, is prone for fracture
.Fig. 6.34 Comparison between the final dimensions of the cavities
when they are prepared with convergent or parallel vertical surrounding wall. The blue arrows indicate the tissue removed when the parallel
walls are prepared. The red arrows show the dentin tissue removed
when the convergent walls are prepared
C. R. G. Torres and F. Schwendicke
6
and must have a minimum width that allows the necessary resistance to the restoration ( . Fig. 1.5f). Very shallow
preparations on the isthmus region also lead to fracture of
the restoration . The depth is more critical than the width
to increase the resistance in this area . Isthmus fractures
occur mainly when an antagonist supporting cusp occludes
directly on it [47, 61].The last point related to increase the resistance form of a
restoration is simply using adhesive restorative materials. An
adhesive restoration increases the resistance of the remaining
tooth structure, reducing the susceptibility to fracture . The
benefits of the adhesion may allow the dentist to not remove
weaker areas of the tooth, which will be reinforced by the restoration, without fracture of the cusp during mastication [5 ].
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 6.35 a Location of the limits in relation to the definition of the
outline form: removal of affected and intact enamel and all soft dentin
on the DEJ until reaching hard dentin (green star) or removal only of
affected enamel leaving soft dentin (yellow dot); b simulations of the
final dimensions on the cavity if chosen to open it until reaching hard
dentin (star) at the DEJ, using convergent or parallel wall; c opening of the cavity up to reach the intact enamel, even leaving undermined
enamel; d removal of the carious dentin tissue with round bur; e
carious dentin tissue removed leaving undermined enamel; f filling of
the undermined enamel region with glass ionomer cement (arrows)
General Principles of Tooth Preparation and Carious Tissue Removal
6
Tip
A good way to increase the resistance form of a restoration is simply using adhesive restorative materials. An
adhesive restoration increases the resistance of the
remaining tooth structure, reducing its susceptibility to
fracture.
6.5.3 Retention Form
Retention form is the characteristics given to the preparation
so that the restoration will not displace from the cavity, by
compressive forces due to contact with the food bolus or
antagonist tooth, tensile forces by sticky food, or any excessive forces associated with parafunctional habits, such as
bruxism and teeth clenching [5, 62]. Other factor that induces
internal stress is the differences between the thermal expansion coefficients of tooth structure and restorative material . When the temperature in the oral cavity suddenly
increases or reduces, due to ingestion of substances with different temperatures, stress is generated inside the restoration
and remaining tooth structure and transmitted through the
interface. This can, with the time, lead to the displacement of
the restorations or fracture of the remaining tooth structure.
The retention form is especially important in nonadhesive
restorations, where the preparation is the only way to retain a
restorative material. For adhesive restorations, retention is
achieved by a bonding system, with the shape of the cavity
having only little importance.
Retention forms of the restorations can be classified as natural and artificial. Natural retention is created in the tooth
structure during tooth preparation, while artificial retention
refers to the use of specific artificial retention pins or posts
that are inserted in the dentin or into the root canal after endodontic treatment, retaining the restorative material inside
the preparation.
When analyzing the retention of a restoration, it is
important to consider the probable direction of its displacement when receiving of a specific load (compression or tensile). The displacement of the restoration on a posterior tooth
may occur on the occlusal or proximal direction. In relation
to the retention toward the occlusal surface, the direction of
the surrounding vertical walls is important ( . Fig. 6.43a –d).
A small conversion of only 5° is enough to lock the restoration. However, even parallel walls can retain restorations by
means of frictional retention . The amount of friction necessary to keep this restoration in position is proportional to
the relation between the depth and the width of the cavity. As Retention form is the characteristics given to the
preparation so that the restoration will not displace
from the cavity, even under external loads during the
mastication.
ab
.Fig. 6.36 Shape of the preparations for amalgam restoration. a Vertical surrounding walls convergent toward the occlusal surface in cavities
with small or medium extension; b vertical surrounding walls parallel to each other in large cavities
E2
E1
P
P
E1
E2C
CE2
E1
P
P
E1
E2C
C
.Fig. 6.37 Different shapes possibilities of the cavity walls in the
proximal box. “C” buccal and lingual walls convergent toward the
proximal surface; “P” buccal and lingual walls parallel to each other; “E1”
slightly divergent buccal and lingual walls; (E2) more divergent walls
than the E1
C. R. G. Torres and F. Schwendicke
6
a principle, every time the preparation is deeper than wider,
it will be self-retentive [4, 6]. If the vertical surrounding walls
are prepared divergent toward the occlusal surface, a complete lack of retention will occur. Such preparation is not
appropriate for direct nonadhesive restorations, but only for
indirect or semi-direct restorations.
Moreover, additional mechanical retentions, named
coves, can be prepared through a small cut on the buccal and
lingual walls, in the line angle below the cusps ( . Fig. 6.44a , b). The coves can be prepared with inverted conical trunk or
round rotary instrument. The latter results in smaller stress
concentration and a better adaptation of the restorative material on this region . When the restorative material is condensed, its penetration on this area will form a type of anchor,
retaining the restoration. Similar natural retentions may be
prepared as holes and slots, generally on the gingival walls
(. Fig. 6.45a , b). This technique is discussed in 7 Chap. 12.
To avoid the displacement of the restoration on the occlusal
a
C CP
P PP
C C
E1 E1
E2E1E1 E1
E2E1
E2 E2
E2E1E2 E2
E2E1b
cd
ef
.Fig. 6.38 Different direction possibilities of the buccal and lingual
walls on the proximal boxes. a Convergent walls toward the proximal
surface, resulting in undermined enamel (in green); b walls parallel
between themselves resulting in undermined prisms on the lingual wall; c, e divergent walls toward the proximal surface resulting in thin
margins for restoration in the buccal wall; d , f change of the contour of
the buccal wall to increase the thickness of the amalgam in the
restoration margin (reverse curve)
General Principles of Tooth Preparation and Carious Tissue Removal
6
direction, artificial retentions can also be used. They can be
of two types: the intradentinal pins and the intraradicular
post (. Fig. 6.46a , b). This topic will be discussed again in
7 Chap. 12. Generally artificial retention is not necessary
when adhesive restorations are performed.A displacement toward the proximal surface is often
prevented by the shape of the occlusal box, following the
contour of the occlusal grooves, hence providing natural
retention. Additional retention may be obtained through
the preparation of locks on the buccoaxial and linguoaxial
.Fig. 6.39 Concentration of the stress on the regions of the sharp
internal line angles of the second set (to the left) and the dissipation of
the stress with the preparation of round angle (to the right)
.Fig. 6.40 Rounding of the axiopulpal angle (three green arrows,
rounded; one blue arrow, not rounded)
ab
c d
.Fig. 6.41 Convergence of the mesial and distal walls in amalgam
preparations on the occlusal surface. a Presence of a great remaining
of marginal ridge (arrows) associated to convergent walls toward the
occlusal surface. b Large lesion associated to the preparation of the divergent walls; c large lesions associated to the preparation of parallel
walls; d large lesions associated to the preparation of the convergent
walls
C. R. G. Torres and F. Schwendicke
6
line angles ( . Fig. 6.47a ) or by dovetail locks ( . Fig. 6.47b ).
The dovetail lock on a MO or OD preparation avoids the
rotation of the restoration [4 ]. According to Crockett et al.
, the dovetail lock increases the retention fourfold,
while the locks on the buccoaxial and linguoaxial line angles
increase it by ten times, with the advantage of saving tooth
structure.6.5.4 Convenience Form
The convenience form is the removal of sound tooth tissue to
obtain a better access and visualization of the carious lesion,
allowing the cavity instrumentation, application of the matrix
and the restorative material, and finishing the margins, among
others [3 , 5, 43]. It includes adjustments on the preparations to
improve the other preparation steps . Black proposed that
the cavity preparation walls, involving the proximal surface of
posterior teeth, should be divergent toward the proximal sur -
face and the contact with the adjacent tooth removed . He
recommended a distance between the CS angle of the preparation and the proximal surfaces of the adjacent teeth of 0.8 and
1.2 mm. More recently some researchers recommended the
teeth a separation of only 0.2 mm [5 ]. Tooth separation facilitates the carving, burnishing, and finishing of the margins, the
isolation the operating field, placement of the matrix, and excess
removal ( . Fig. 6.48a ) [3, 4]. Nowadays, preservation of the
tooth structure is oftentimes prioritized over the convenience
form if possible, and the proximal contact preserved. Another
convenience form frequently performed is the preparation of
the axial wall expulsive toward the occlusal surface. That allows
visualization and the inspection of the gingival and axial walls,
to perform the correct carious tissue removal ( . Fig. 6.48b ).
.Fig. 6.42 Fracture of the restoration due to a too shallow preparation
ab
c d
.Fig. 6.43 Retention versus inclination of the vertical surrounding
walls. a Convergent walls creating a self-retentive preparation; b
parallel walls creating frictional retention; c divergent walls do not create any retention, being contraindicated for nonadhesive restorations; d displacement of the restoration due to the lack of retention
General Principles of Tooth Preparation and Carious Tissue Removal
6
ab
.Fig. 6.44 a Preparation of additional mechanical retention (coves)
in a cavity that is larger than deeper for amalgam restorations. In one
of the line angles, the retention was performed with a round bur (to
the left), while on the other with an inverted conical trunk; b behavior of the tensile force over the restoration (red arrows) and the retentive
effect resulting in the preparation shape (blue arrows). This kind of
retention is not indicated and necessary when adhesive composite
restorations are performed
ab
.Fig. 6.45 Natural retentions. a Hole for amalgapin; b 1, coves; 2, locks; 3, slot
ab
.Fig. 6.46 a Intradentinal pin; b intraradicular post
C. R. G. Torres and F. Schwendicke
6
6.5.5 Carious Tissue Removal
Caries is no longer understood as an infectious disease but
rather as an ecological imbalance within the biofilm, which is
shifted toward acidogenic and aciduric (acid producing and
tolerating) bacteria, mainly facilitated by a frequent intake of
carbohydrates. Hence, if the carbohydrates can be controlled,
so can the biofilm but also bacterially contaminated carious
lesions.
> Caries is no longer understood as an infectious disease,
but rather as an ecological imbalance within the
biofilm, which is shifted toward acidogenic and
aciduric bacteria, mainly facilitated by a frequent
intake of carbohydrates.
Consequently, the management of a carious lesion does no
longer mainly rely on removal of the “infected” diseased tissue and the placement of a restoration. Instead, restricting carbohydrate intake and controlling the presence of a biofilm
via oral hygiene are emphasized. However, removing biofilms
will no longer be possible if a carious lesion is not cleanable
with a toothbrush, i.e., the lesion is cavitated, with overhanging enamel/dentin preventing the toothbrush from accessing
it. Hence, for such cavitated lesions, carious tissue removal,
cavity preparation (as described), and restoration oftentimes
remain needed. The question now, however, is: How much
carious tissue do we need to remove after having prepared
the cavity and before placing the restoration?
> Biofilms removal is not possible in cavitated carious
lesion, and carious tissue removal (cavity preparation)
and restoration remain needed.
Previously the aims of carious tissue removal were to remove
all bacterially contaminated and demineralized tissue, without any discrimination about different qualities of carious
tissue (hardness, moisture, color). This was carried out
ab
.Fig. 6.47 Retention form of a nonadhesive amalgam restoration
toward the proximal surface. The red arrow indicated the direction of
displacement. a Retentive locks on the proximal box (blue arrows); b dovetail lock (green arrows) and penetration on the intercuspal
grooves (blue arrows)
ab
.Fig. 6.48 Convenience form. a Removal of the contact with the adjacent tooth; b axial wall expulsive toward the occlusal surface (arrow)
General Principles of Tooth Preparation and Carious Tissue Removal
6regardless of the consequences, and it was considered better
to remove it all, even at the expense of the dental pulp, with
high risks of pulp exposure, especially if performed in deeper
lesions (extending close to the pulp). Today, the main question is, instead: “How can we achieve the best longevity for
the tooth?” To answer this question, a number of guiding
principles were agreed on [64, 65]:
5Preserve non-demineralized and remineralizable tissue.
5Achieve an adequate seal by placing the peripheral
restoration onto sound dentin and/or enamel, thus
controlling the lesion and inactivating remaining
bacteria.
5Avoid discomfort/pain and dental anxiety.
5Maintain pulpal health by preserving residual dentin
(avoiding unnecessary pulpal irritation/insult) and
preventing pulp exposure.
5Maximize longevity of the restoration by removing
enough soft dentin to place a durable restoration of
sufficient bulk and resilience .
Of course, avoiding pulpal exposure is relevant mainly in
deep lesions, in teeth with vital painless pulps, as any kind of
exposure will be managed using endodontic means, which
either have a poor prognosis (like direct capping) or are
highly invasive and oftentimes shorten the lifetime prognosis
of the tooth (like root-canal treatment) .
On the other hand, leaving carious dentin beneath restorations means leaving softer, bacterially contaminated,
demineralized dentin below this restoration. The lower elastic modulus of such dentin and the reduced bond capabilities compared with sound dentin have been found, to
varying degree, to affect the stability of the restoration [69–
71]. It is likely that this is relevant when very large amounts
of carious dentin left under a restoration are left, while small
areas of soft dentin being left to not expose the pulp will have
only limited impact [72– 74]. When there is no risk of pulp
exposure, however, there is no argument against removing
carious dentin in a way which will maximize restoration longevity.
If these general principles are to be employed, dentists
need to be able to assess carious tissue removal, i.e., what was
removed, what was left, and how exactly this was done. Often,
removal strategies had been termed as “complete” or “incomplete. ” However, this was not grounded in any evidence:
Carious tissue removal strategies should not pretend to
remove specific carious tissues, giving them names like
“complete” or “incomplete” excavation, as it remains completely unclear what is completely or incompletely removed
(bacteria? soft dentin? discolored dentin? hydrolytically
degraded collagen?), but also numerous studies found all
removal strategies to be somewhat “incomplete” “complete”
(mainly as the gradual changes between different dentin
“zones” will not be assessable clinically). Instead, strategies
should be termed according to what is done, i.e., descriptively, instead of what one aims to remove or retain.Hence, the following terms have been agreed on to
describe the dentin which is left or removed :
5Soft dentin: “Soft dentin will deform when a hard
instrument is pressed onto it, and can be easily scooped
up (e.g. with a sharp hand excavator) with little force
being required. ”
5Leathery dentin: “ Although the dentin does not deform
when an instrument is pressed onto it, leathery dentin
can still be easily lifted without much force being
required. The hardness of leathery dentin is between that
of soft and firm dentin. ”
5Firm dentin : “Firm dentin is physically resistant to hand
excavation and some pressure needs to be exerted
through an instrument to lift it. ”
5Hard dentin: “ A pushing force needs to be used with a
hard instrument to engage the dentin and only a sharp
cutting edge or a bur will lift it. A scratchy sound or ‘cri
dentinaire’ can be heard when a straight probe is taken
across the dentin. ”
The hardness criterion has been validated against clinical outcomes in several studies and is assessed using
probes or via tactile feedback during excavation. There are
further criteria, like dentin color (which is highly unreliable and possibly affected by the incorporation of external
stains, i.e., from existing amalgam restorations, as shown
in . Fig. 6.49a , b), lesion activity status (active lesions
have yellowish or slightly brownish appearance, while
the inactive ones are often highly stained, as shown in
. Fig. 6.49c , d), fluorescencebased methods (which target
bacterial removal, which is not a good criterion if working close to the pulp, as remaining bacteria may be sealed,
while over-invasive removal of bacteria will lead to pulp
exposure) , or caries detector dyes (which are not at all
recommended to be used in pulpal areas of a cavity, as they
are neither reliable nor valid, increasing the risk of pulp
exposure dramatically) . In summary, using the hardness criterion will allow the dentist to, somewhat reliably,
assess carious tissue removal.
Based on the agreed principles, and understanding that
bacteria may be sealed beneath restorations, five main carious removal strategies have been defined. These are described
below .
6.5.5.1 Nonselective Removal to Hard Dentin
Nonselective removal to hard dentin (formerly also known as
“complete removal”) aims to remove soft dentin, stopping the
removal only when hard dentin (similar to healthy dentin) is
reached. This is done everywhere in the cavity: as the same
criterion (the same endpoint) of carious tissue removal is
used both peripherally and pulpally, it is termed nonselective
(compare with selective removal; see below) .
Nonselective removal to hard dentin bears significant risks
for the pulp when applied to in deep lesions [77, 78] and is
not recommended any longer .
C. R. G. Torres and F. Schwendicke
6
ab
c d
.Fig. 6.49 a Old amalgam restoration being removed; b stained dentin due to the metal corrosion; c brownish appearance of caries-affected
dentin in active lesion on the pulpal wall; d highly stained dentin in inactive lesions (arrows)
6.5.5.2 Selective Removal to Firm Dentin
In selective removal, not one but different criteria (endpoints) are used to assess carious tissue removal in the
periphery of the cavity and in proximity to the pulp. As
described above, one guiding principle is to allow the best
adhesive seal of a restoration in the periphery of the cavity.
Such aim can be achieved when “sound” enamel and hard
dentin are left in the periphery. This approach also serves
another guiding principle: maximizing restoration longevity.
In the pulpal area of a cavity, however, another criterion
(endpoint) is used, with firm dentin being left . Such firm
dentin is physically resistant to hand excavator. This approach
is recommended for shallow or moderately deep lesions, but
not deep lesions (i.e., those extending beyond the pulpal
third or quarter of the dentin radiographically).
6.5.5.3 Selective Removal to Soft Dentin
Selective removal to soft dentin is recommended for deep
carious lesions in teeth with vital painless pulps. Here, in the
pulpal area of a cavity, to avoid pulp exposure and maintain
residual dentin thickness is prioritized ( . Fig. 9.18).
Consequently, it is accepted to leave leathery or, if needed, soft
carious dentin in the pulpal aspect of the cavity, serving the guiding principle of maintaining pulp vitality. In the periphery, achieving a good seal and maximizing restoration survival
are prioritized, with peripheral enamel and dentin again being
hard at the end of the removal process. Selective removal to
soft dentin has been shown to reduce the risk of pulpal exposure compared with nonselective removal to hard or selective
removal to firm dentin. Note that this removal technique has
been previously known as partial or incomplete removal.
Stepwise Excavation
Stepwise excavation (or removal) involves “selective removal
to soft dentin” at Stage 1, followed 6–12 months later by “selective removal to firm dentin” for Stage 2 ( . Fig. 9.19). Stage 1
has the same carious tissue removal aims as “selective removal
to soft dentin” with soft dentin being left pulpally. The periphery of the cavity should be hard – with similar appearance and
tactile characteristics to sound dentin. A provisional restoration is placed with a restorative material that is considered
suitable to last for up to 12 months. The subsequent removal of
this provisional restoration should then be followed by the
“selective removal to firm dentin” pathway with placement of a
definitive restoration aiming for longevity. This technique has
previously been also known as “two-step excavation. ”
General Principles of Tooth Preparation and Carious Tissue Removal
66.5.6 Finishing of the Enamel Walls
Even though it is the hardest tissue of the human body, the
enamel is the weakest one when undermined. The prism’s
core is stronger than the interprismatic enamel. Therefore,
when pushed, it generally cracks in the interprismatic
enamel following the long axis the prisms. As it has already
been mentioned, while the undermined enamel can be preserved when performing an adhesive restoration, because it
is protected by the restorative material, for non-adhesive
restorations it is essential its removal or protection via a base
material. The purpose of the finishing of the enamel walls,
for an amalgam restoration, is to remove the irregularities
and undermined enamel prisms left by the initial prepara-tion steps, to ensure that just full-length enamel prisms
remained, creating the best marginal sealing as possible
between the restorative material and the tooth structure [4 ].
According to Black, it is the last cutting step to be performed
and can be done with the rubber dam isolation already in
position [4 , 5, 43]. The procedure for the removal of the
undermined enamel prisms is called marginal trimming. In
order to perform this step on the CS angle of the gingival
wall, in Class II preparations, the direction of the prisms has
to be followed, cutting them about 15–20° in relation to a
line perpendicular the long axis of the tooth, creating a
slightly bevel ( . Fig. 6.50). The finishing also must be per -
formed on the CS angles of the buccal and lingual walls of
proximal boxes, in Class II preparations, removing the
remaining undermined enamel that was left after the use of
rotary instrument ( . Fig. 10.15 ).
6.5.7 Cleaning of the Cavity
The cavity cleaning is performed after the isolation of the
operating field, to remove all the residues and lose debris
that deposited during the cutting procedures, before starting the restoration [5 , 15]. It is known that after the end of
tooth preparation, residues of oil from the highand lowspeed handpieces, saliva, blood, bacterial biofilm, lose
debris, and abrasive fragments from the rotary instruments, among others, remain in contact with the cavity,
besides remaining fragments of enamel and dentin [4 , 45].
All those residues forms over the CWs a smear layer of
about 1–3 μ m (. Fig. 6.51a ) as well as smear plugs
(. Fig. 6.51b ) .
ab
7 um
.Fig. 6.51 a Smear layer covering the cavity wall; b smear plug (arrow)
15 a 20°
.Fig. 6.50 Slight marginal trimming of the enamel on the region of
the cavosurface angle of the gingival wall
C. R. G. Torres and F. Schwendicke
6
ab
.Fig. 6.53 a Opening of the dentin tubules by the acidic etching on the right side of the image. The left side remained covered by the smear
layer; b Etching pattern of enamelAnionic detergents based on sodium lauryl sulfate, antimicrobial agents like 2% chlorhexidine gluconate solution or
alkaline solutions of calcium hydroxide have been used for
cavity cleaning or disinfection ( . Fig. 6.52a –e). The use of a
chlorhexidine solution presents also the advantage of being
able to deactivate the dentin matrix metalloproteinase
enzymes (MMP), which are released by the demineralization
promoted by the bacterial acids, responsible for the formation of the carious lesions. Those enzymes are responsible for
the hydrolysis of the exposed collagen, favoring the progression of the carious lesion. When chlorhexidine is applied on
the cavity for 10–15 s, it is capable to chelate the Zn2+ ions
and results in the inactivation of the metalloproteinases . One option when performing amalgam restorations is to
apply a 2% neutral sodium fluoride solution on the preparation walls. This procedure will promote the deposition of
calcium fluoride over the walls, acting as a fluoride reservoir
that will be released if there is a drop in the pH. The application of the fluoride solution reduces up to 60% of the formation of secondary caries on the amalgam restoration margins
and interface.
For adhesive restorations, the surface treatment will
depend on the bonding system used. Etch-and-rinse adhesives
require the previous etching of the preparation walls with a
32–37% phosphoric acid gel, which removes the smear layer
and open of the dentin tubules ( . Fig. 6.53a ), creating microporosities in the enamel ( . Fig. 6.53b ). The enamel etching
increases the surface area available for bonding by 10 to 20
times [3 ]. After the application and curing of an adhesive,
resin tags will be created in the enamel and allow a micromechanical retention. The dentin collagen network, exposed by
the acid etching, is impregnated by the adhesive monomers
forming the hybrid layer, hence promoting the adhesion to the
dentin. For the self-etching systems, phosphoric acid gel is not
used, and the smear layer is dissolved by the acidic resinous
monomers in its composition. Self-etch adhesives are capable
to penetrate through the smear layer and interact with the
underlying dentin, creating a hybrid layer.
Overall, however, the effects of the antimicrobial agents
can be only superficial, due to the presence of the residual
bacteria inside the dentin tubules and within the smear layer.
However, considering what was explained before, the relevance of the cavity disinfection is questioned anyway. Sealing
the cavity seems more relevance than performing such disinfection.
.Fig. 6.52 Substances for cavity cleaning. a 11.5% polyacrylic acid;
b calcium hydroxide solution; c 2% chlorhexidine digluconate; d
anionic detergent; e 37% phosphoric acid gel
General Principles of Tooth Preparation and Carious Tissue Removal
6 Conclusion
Caries is no longer understood as an infectious disease, but
rather as an ecological imbalance within the biofilm, which is
shifted toward acidogenic and aciduric bacteria, associated
with the high consumptions of fermentable carbohydrates.
Therefore, if the carbohydrates can be controlled, so can the
biofilm, recovering the ecological balance and the oral health.
However, in cavitated lesions, it is not possible to control the
biofilm by regular tooth cleaning techniques, such as brushing and flossing. In this case, the dental restorations are still
recommended, and the cavity preparation is required. The
restorations can be performed with nonadhesive or adhesive
materials. Although the use of nonadhesive restorations per -
formed with dental amalgam is reducing nowadays, it is still
used in many situations. For this material, special characteristics of the preparation are required, in order to provide a
long-lasting restoration. On the other hand, adhesive materials, such as composite resins and glass ionomer cements, are
able to bond to the remaining tooth structure, creating its
reinforcement. In this case, the actual shape of the cavity is
less important than to provide an adequate marginal sealing
for the restoration. In this chapter, the biological and mechanical principles of the toot preparation were presented, as well
as the traditional steps of tooth preparation, which can guide
the dental students to easily obtain the desired preparation
characteristics. The current principles are based on the maximum preservation of the remaining tooth structure, creating
a defect-oriented preparation.
References
1. McGehee W, True H, Inskipp E. A textbook of operative dentistry. 4th
ed. New York: McGraw Hill; .
2. Healey HJ, Phillips RW. A clinical study of amalgam failures. J Dent Res.
;28: –46. https://doi.org/10. / .
3. Schwartz RS, Summitt JB, Robbins JW. Fundamentals of operative
dentistry. A contemporary approach. Chicago: Quintessence; .
4. Mondelli J, Franco EB, Pereira JC, Ishikiriama A, Francischone CE,
Mondelli RL, et al. Dentística: Procedimentos Pré - Clínicos. São
Paulo: Santos; .
5. Roberson TM, Heymann H, Swift EJ. Sturdevant’s art and science of
operative dentistry. Orlando: Mosby/Elsevier; .
6. Corrêa A. Dentística Operatória. Artes Médicas: São Paulo; .
7. Fejerskov O, Kidd EAM. Dental caries : the disease and its clinical
management: Blackwell Munksgaard; .
8. Dietschi D, Spreafico R. Restaurações Adesivas: conceitos Atuais
Para o Tratamento Estético de Dentes Posteriores. Quintessence:
São Paulo; .
9. Torres CRG, Zanatta RF, Huhtala MFRL, Borges AB. Semidirect poste -
rior composite restorations with a flexible die technique. J Am Dent
Assoc. ; : –6. https://doi.org/10. /j.adaj. .02. .
10. Boyer DB, Roth L. Fracture resistance of teeth with bonded amalgams. Am J Dent [Internet]. [cited May 24];7:91–4.
11. Eisenmann D. Enamel structure. In: Ten Cate A, editor. Oral histol –
Dev Struct Funct. 4th ed. St. Louis: Mosby; . p. –56.
12. Skobe Z, Stern S. The pathway of enamel rods at the base of
cusps of human teeth. J Dent Res [Internet]. [cited May
24];59: –32. https://doi.org/10. / .
13. Craig R. Restorative dental materials. 8th ed. St.Louis: Mosby; . 14. Lambrechts P , Braem M, Vuylsteke-Wauters M, Vanherle
G. Quantitative in vivo wear of human enamel. J Dent Res [Internet].
[cited May 24];68: –4. https://doi.org/10. /
.
15. Marzouk M, Simonton A, Gross R. Dentística Operatória: Teoria e
Prática Moderna. 1st ed. São Paulo: Santos; .
16. Busato ALS. Dentística: Novos Princípios Restauradores. Artes Médicas: São Paulo; .
17. Fernandes C, Checitarese O. The orientation and direction of rods in
dental enamel. J Prosthet Dent. ;65: – .
18. Ramsay DJ, Ripa LW. Enamel prism orientation and enamelcementum relationship in the cervical region of premolar teeth. Br
Dent J [Internet]. [cited May 24]; : –7.
19. Pashley EL, Talman R, Horner JA, Pashley DH. Permeability of normal
versus carious dentin. Endod Dent Traumatol [Internet]. [cited
May 24];7: –11.
20. Tagami J, Hosoda H, Burrow MF, Nakajima M. Effect of aging and
caries on dentin permeability. Proc Finn Dent Soc [Internet].
[cited May 24];88(Suppl 1): –54.
21. Zach L, Cohen G. Thermogenesis in operative techniques: comparison of four methods. J Prosthet Dent [Internet]. Mosby;
[cited May 24];12: –84. https://doi.org/10. / (62) -3.
22. Zach L, Cohen G. Pulp response to externally applied heat. Oral Surg
Oral Med Oral Pathol. ;19: –30.
23. Grajower R, Kaufman E, Rajstein J. Temperature in the pulp chamber during polishing of amalgam restorations. J Dent Res [Internet].
[cited May 24];53: –95. https://doi.org/10. /
.
24. Hatton J, Holtzmann D, Ferrillo PJ, Stewart G. Effect of handpiece
pressure and speed on intrapulpal temperature rise. Am J Dent.
;7(2): –10.
25. Stewart GP , Bachman TA, Hatton JF. Temperature rise due to finishing of direct restorative materials. Am J Dent [Internet]. [cited
May 24];4:23–8.
26. Stanley HR, Swerdlow H. Reaction of the human pulp to cavity
preparation: results produced by eight different operative grinding
technics. J Am Dent Assoc. ;58:49–59.
27. Fixed prosthodontics: avoiding pulp death. Oral Health. ;85:47–9.
28. Pashley DH, Matthews WG. The effects of outward forced convec -
tive flow on inward diffusion in human dentine in vitro. Arch Oral
Biol [Internet]. [cited May 24];38: –82.
29. Lussi A, Gygax M. Iatrogenic damage to adjacent teeth during classical approximal box preparation. J Dent [Internet]. [cited May
24];26: –41.
30. Provenza D. Fundamentals of oral histology and embriology. 2nd
ed. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger; .
31. Lindhe J. Textbook of clinical periodontology and implant dentistry.
Rio de Janeiro: Guanabara Koogan; .
32. Plasmans PJ, Kusters ST, de Jonge BA, van’t Hof MA, Vrijhoef MM. In
vitro resistance of extensive amalgam restorations using various
retention methods. J Prosthet Dent. ;57:16–20. https://doi.
org/10. / - (87) -9.
33. Helkimo E, Ingervall B. Bite force and functional state of the masticatory system in young men. Swed Dent J [Internet]. [cited
May 24];2: –75.
34. Shillingburg H, Jacobi R, Brackett S. Fundamentals of tooth preparations for cast metal and porcelain restorations. Chicago: Quintessence; .
35. Hansen EK, Asmussen E, Christiansen NC. In vivo fractures of endodontically treated posterior teeth restored with amalgam. Endod
Dent Traumatol [Internet]. [cited May 24];6:49–55.
36. Mondelli RFL, Ishikiriama SK, de Oliveira Filho O, Mondelli J. Frac -
ture resistance of weakened teeth restored with condensable resin
with and without cusp coverage. J Appl Oral Sci. ;17: –5.
https://doi.org/10. /S167877572009000300006.
37. Shafiei F, Memarpour M, Doozandeh M. Three-year clinical evaluation of cuspal coverage with combined composite–amalgam in
C. R. G. Torres and F. Schwendicke
6
endodontically-treated maxillary premolars. Oper Dent. ;35:
– . https://doi.org/10. /10- -C.
38. Plasmans PJ, Kusters ST, de Jonge BA, van’t Hof MA, Vrijhoef MM. In
vitro resistance of extensive amalgam restorations using various
retention methods. J Prosthet Dent [Internet]. [cited May
24];57:16–20.
39. Anusavice KJ. Phillips science of dental materials. 11th ed. London:
Elsevier; .
40. Dawson M, Soro V, Dymock D, Price R, Griffiths H, Dudding T, et al.
Microbiological assessment of aerosol generated during debond of
fixed orthodontic appliances. Am J Orthod Dentofac Orthop [Inter -
net]. [cited May 25]; : –8. https://doi.org/10. /j.
ajodo. .04. .
41. Hovliaras CA. Preprocedural rinsing in the dental office: a consideration
for improved infection control among the dental team and patients. J
N J Dent Assoc [Internet]. [cited May 25];84:27–31.
42. Shetty SK, Sharath K, Shenoy S, Sreekumar C, Shetty RN, Biju T. Compare the efficacy of two commercially available mouthrinses in
reducing viable bacterial count in dental aerosol produced during
ultrasonic scaling when used as a preprocedural rinse. J Contemp
Dent Pract [Internet]. [cited May 25];14: –51.
43. Black GV. A work on operative dentistry. Chicago: Medico-Dental
Publishing Company; .
44. Christensen G. Alternative for class II restorations. Clin Res Assoc
Newslett. ;18:1–2,7.
45. Horsted-Bindslev P , Mjör IA. Modern concepts in operative dentistry: Wiley-Blackwell; .
46. Markley M. Restorations of silver amalgam. J Am Dent Assoc.
;43: –46.
47. Gilmore HW, Lund MR. Operative dentistry. Saint Louis: Mosby; .
48. Simon WJ. Clinical operative dentistry. Philadelphia: Saunders;
.
49. Howard WW. Atlas of operative dentistry. 2nd ed. St. Louis: Mosby;
.
50. Hollenback GM. The economic value of amalgam in operative
dentistry and the technic of its use. J Am Dent Assoc Dent Cosm
[Internet]. ;24: –26. https://doi.org/10. /jada.
archive. . .
51. Stratis S, Bryant RW. The influence of modified cavity design and
finishing techniques on the clinical performance of amalgam resto -
rations: a 2-year clinical study. J Oral Rehabil [Internet]. [cited
May 22];25: –78.
52. de Vree JH, Peters MC, Plasschaert AJ. The influence of modification
of cavity design on distribution of stresses in a restored molar. J
Dent Res [Internet]. [cited May 22];63: –20. https://
doi.org/10. / .
53. Symons AL, Wing G, Hewitt GH. Adaptation of dental amalgam to
the cavosurface margin of Class I cavity preparations. J Oral Rehabil
[Internet]. [cited May 22];14:65–76.
54. Bryant RW. The influence of modified cavity design and finishing
techniques on the margin region of amalgam restorations: a simulated clinical study. Aust Prosthodont J [Internet]. [cited
May 24];6:39–45.
55. Elderton RJ. Cavo-surface angles, amalgam margin angles and
occlusal cavity preparations. Br Dent J [Internet]. [cited
May 22]; : –24.
56. Akerboom HB, Advokaat JG, Van Amerongen WE, Borgmeijer
PJ. Long-term evaluation and rerestoration of amalgam restorations. Community Dent Oral Epidemiol [Internet]. [cited
May 22];21:45–8.
57. Mondelli J, Ishikiriama A, Galan JJ, Navarro MF. Dentística oper -
atória. São Paulo: Sarvier; .
58. Massler M, Barber TK. Action of amalgam on dentin. J Am Dent
Assoc [Internet]. Elsevier; [cited May 22];47: –22.
https://doi.org/10. /JADA.ARCHIVE. . .
59. Fichmann DM, Santos W. Restaurações à amálgama. Savier: São
Paulo; . 60. Granath LE. Photoelastic model experiments on class II cavity resto -
rations of dental amalgam. Odontol Rev. ;16:7–38.
61. Mahler DB. An analysis of stresses in a dental amalgam restoration.
J Dent Res [Internet]. SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles;
[cited May 22];37: –26. https://doi.org/10. /
.
62. Mooney B. Operatoria dental. Buenos Aires: Panamericana; .
63. Crockett WD, Shepard FE, Moon PC, Creal AF. The influence of proximal retention grooves on the retention and resistance of class II
preparations for amalgams. J Am Dent Assoc. ;91: –6.
64. Innes NP , Frencken JE, Bjorndal L, Maltz M, Manton DJ, Ricketts
D, et al. Managing carious lesions: consensus recommendations on terminology. Adv Dent Res. ;28:49–57. https://doi.
org/10. / .
65. Schwendicke F, Frencken JE, Bjorndal L, Maltz M, Manton DJ, Rick -
etts D, et al. Managing carious lesions: consensus recommendations
on carious tissue removal. Adv Dent Res. ;28:58–67. https://doi.
org/10. / .
66. Bjørndal L, Reit C, Bruun G, Markvart M, Kjaeldgaard M, Näsman P ,
et al. Treatment of deep caries lesions in adults: randomized clinical
trials comparing stepwise vs. direct complete excavation, and direct
pulp capping vs. partial pulpotomy. Eur J Oral Sci [Internet].
[cited May 22]; : –7. https://doi.org/10. /j. . . .x.
67. Schwendicke F, Stolpe M, Meyer-Lueckel H, Paris S, Dörfer CE. Costeffectiveness of oneand two-step incomplete and complete excavations. J Dent Res [Internet]. ;90: –7.
68. Whitworth JM, Myers PM, Smith J, Walls AW, McCabe JF. Endodontic complications after plastic restorations in general
practice. Int Endod J. ;38: –16. https://doi.org/10. /
j. - . . .x.
69. Hevinga MA, Opdam NJ, Frencken JE, Truin GJ, Huysmans
MC. Does incomplete caries removal reduce strength of restored
teeth? J Dent Res [Internet]. ;89: –5. https://doi.
org/10. / .
70. Schwendicke F, Kern M, Blunck U, Dorfer C, Drenck J, Paris S. Mar -
ginal integrity and secondary caries of selectively excavated
teeth in vitro. J Dent. ;42: –8. https://doi.org/10. /j.
jdent. .08. .
71. Schwendicke F, Kern M, Meyer-Lueckel H, Boels A, Doerfer CE, Paris
S. Fracture resistance and cuspal deflection of incompletely excavated teeth. J Dent. ;42: –13.
72. Bakhshandeh A, Qvist V, Ekstrand K. Sealing occlusal caries lesions in
adults referred for restorative treatment: 2–3 years of follow-up. Clin
Oral Investig [Internet]. Springer Berlin/Heidelberg; ;16: –9.
https://doi.org/10. /s00784- - -4.
73. Hesse D, Bonifacio CC, Mendes FM, Braga MM, Imparato JC, Raggio DP . Sealing versus partial caries removal in primary molars: a
randomized clinical trial. BMC Oral Health. ;14:58. https://doi.
org/10. / - -14-58.
74. Mertz-Fairhurst EJ, Curtis JW Jr, Ergle JW, Rueggeberg FA, Adair
SM. Ultraconservative and cariostatic sealed restorations: results at
year 10. J Am Dent Assoc. ; :55–66.
75. Schwendicke F, Paris S, Tu YK. Effects of using different criteria and
methods for caries removal: a systematic review and network metaanalysis. J Dent. ;43(1):1–15.
76. Innes N, Schwendicke F. In: Schwendicke F, editor. Management of
deep carious lesions: Springer; .
77. Ricketts D, Lamont T, Innes NP , Kidd E, Clarkson JE. Operative caries
management in adults and children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
;28:CD003808.
78. Schwendicke F, Dorfer CE, Paris S. Incomplete caries removal: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Dent Res. ;92: –14.
https://doi.org/10. / .
79. Zhang S, Kern M. The role of host-derived dentinal matrix metalloproteinases in reducing dentin bonding of resin adhesives. Int J
Oral Sci. ;1: –76. https://doi.org/10. /IJOS. .
General Principles of Tooth Preparation and Carious Tissue Removal
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG
C. R. G. Torres (ed.), Modern Operative Dentistry, Textbooks in Contemporary Dentistry,
https://doi.org/10. / -3- - -0_7223 7
Isolation of the Operating Field
Alessandra Bühler Borges, Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres,
Ana Raquel Benetti, and Azam Bakhshandeh
7.1 Introduction –
7.2 Isolation Using Rubber Dam –
7.2.1 Rubber Dam –
7.2.2 Rubber Dam Frame –
7.2.3 Punch –
7.2.4 Clamps –
7.2.5 Forceps –
7.2.6 Other Retainers –
7.2.7 Number of Teeth to be Isolated –
7.2.8 Technique for Isolation Using Rubber Dam –
7.2.9 Modified Techniques for Isolation in Special Clinical Situations –
7.2.10 Sealing Leakage on the Rubber Dam Isolation –
7.3 Using Cotton Rolls Combined with Suction –
7.3.1 Saliva Ejector and High-Volume Evacuators –
7.3.2 Cotton Rolls and Absorbent Pads –
7.3.3 Cheek and Tongue Retractors –
7.3.4 Light-Cured Gingival Barriers –
7.3.5 Gingival Retraction Cords –
7.3.6 Cotton Roll Isolation Technique –
References –
7Learning Objectives
The learning objectives of this chapter are related the follow -
ing topics:
5To understand the importance of isolation of the
operating field
5To become acquainted to the instruments and consumables used for that procedure
5To acquire knowledge about the techniques employed
for controlling the moisture on the operating field
7.1 Introduction
Certain dental treatment procedures require a clean and dry
working field. The isolation of the operating field aims primarily to control moisture and avoid contamination from
microorganisms or saliva during treatment. It can be obtained
in two ways: (1) by application of a rubber dam or (2) by
using saliva absorbers, such as cotton rolls, saliva ejectors,
and retraction cords.
Evidence regarding which is the best method to obtain a
clean and dry operating field is limited. A systematic review
published in found only low-quality evidence studies
suggesting that the use of rubber dam during direct restor -
ative procedures may lead to a lower failure rate of the restorations, when compared to the failure rate registered for
restorative procedures conducted under isolation with cotton rolls . Further high-quality studies investigating the
impact of the use of rubber dam during different restorative
procedures are recommended. The limited evidence is,
according to some authors, not sufficient to support changes
to current practice regarding the placement of direct restorations . Although it appears very difficult to scientifically
prove the impact of the use of rubber dam on the final outcome of restorative procedures, consensus exists towards
the need of a clean surface and moisture control when bonding to teeth – regardless of the method used to achieve this. A
meta-analysis on the clinical outcome of nonretentive and
cervically placed composite restorations, identified a significantly higher retention rate of such restorations placed using
rubber dam . As a rule of thumb, the use of rubber dam is
preferred over the use of cotton rolls combined with effective
suction to obtain a clean and dry operating field for a number
of restorative procedures, the reasons are explained in details
in the sections to come. Though it is valid to point out that
both techniques have advantages and limitations, thus an
individual assessment may be necessary to guarantee that the
best technique is employed for each clinical situation.
7.2 Isolation Using Rubber Dam
The use of a rubber dam was introduced by Sanford Christie
Barnum [5, 6] to completely eliminate fluids from the operating field. If well performed, the moisture control with its use
is simple and effective; hence it is highly recommended to
maintain the teeth dry during restorative procedures. Further important advantages are obtained when isolating the oper -
ating field by using a rubber dam: this ensures (1) retraction
and protection of the patient’s soft tissues, (2) protection of
the patient’s respiratory and digestive tracts, and (3) improvement of access to visualization of the operating field, thus
allowing the dentist to concentrate on the treatment to be
performed. In addition, it avoids interruptions of the treatment, otherwise necessary to change cotton rolls and retract
soft tissues . The use of rubber dam is also important dur -
ing excavation of deep carious tissue, as it prevents the contamination of the pulp from microorganisms present in the
oral fluids, specially in the case of an accidental pulp exposure during excavation. During the removal of amalgam restorations, the use of a rubber dam prevents the patient from
swallowing amalgam residues.
Other than allowing a clean and dry operating field, with
an adequate moisture control by exclusion of saliva, crevicular fluid, and occasional bleeding, the use a rubber dam may
aid obtaining optimal conditions for the dental materials,
whose properties may become impaired by early contact
with moisture [1 ]. Regarding protection of the patient, the
use of a rubber dam eliminates the risk of the patient swallowing or aspirating materials or instruments that are used
during the operative procedures, and reduces the risk of
accidental damage to the patient’s soft tissues. The rubber
dam also benefits the dentist and the dental team because it
reduces dispersion of oral microorganisms to the working
environment. Improved efficiency is expected when the rubber dam is in place due to simplification of the restorative
procedures, and the reduction of time spent with patient
expectoration and conversation [5 , 8].
Some dentists avoid placing the rubber dam, justifying as
main reasons the lack of supporting evidence, additional
time spent with this procedure and the unwillingness of the
patients . However, training leads to improvement of the
technique and consequently reduction of the working time.
Additionally, if the patients are well-informed about the
improved prospect of the dental work performed using the
rubber dam, they often accepts its use. There are, however,
cases shown impossible or very difficult to use a rubber dam.
Examples are teeth on initial stages of eruption, misaligned
teeth, patients with breathing problems, and lack of latex-free
rubber dam for patients with allergy to latex . In such
cases, proper moisture control of the operating field shall be
achieved using cotton rolls and effective suction.
7.2.1 Rubber Dam
The rubber dam isolates the operating field from the oral cavity. It is often fabricated with natural latex and is available in
several colors. Latex-free sheets made of silicone or nitrile
rubber are also available and are indicated for patients aller -
gic to latex. The colors that contrast with the teeth are preferred because they improve the visualization of the
preparations’ and restorations’ details. The blue color is
generally chosen: it is the complementary color to the yellow
A. B. Borges et al.
7
of the teeth, increases the perception of contrast, and is a
relaxing color to the vision .
Rubber dams are available generally as 13 cm × 13 cm
sheets with various thicknesses (thin, medium, thick, and
extra thick) ( . Fig. 7.1). Thick rubber sheets are easier to
pass through tight interproximal contacts, but they tear
more easily [3 ]. On the other hand, thicker rubber sheets
are more tear resistant and better to retract the soft tissues
. The thick rubber dam is helpful for isolating Class V
lesions associated with a cervical retainer. Medium-thick
rubber dam is most widespread and is usually preferred as
the thin one is more prone to tearing and the extra thick
one is more difficult to apply. As latex deteriorates with
time, it will tear more easily, and therefore, new rubber
sheets must be used [6 ].
7.2.2 Rubber Dam Frame
The rubber dam frame is used to keep the borders of the rubber
sheet in position. The rubber sheet must be stretched and fixed
on the lateral pins of the frame. Different frame shapes are
available. The Y oung frame has a U-shape with lateral pins used to fix the rubber sheet ( . Fig. 7.2a, b ). The Otsby frame has an
hexagonal shape, anatomically projected for better contouring
the face of the patient ( . Fig. 7.3a, b ), thus allowing some distance between the rubber dam and the patient’s nose for more
comfortable breathing . Rubber dam frames are made of
metal or plastic, the latter does not interfere on the uptake of
radiographic images during the operative procedures.
There are also frames integrated to the rubber sheet, aiming to simplify the placement of the rubber dam: these have
high flexibility and may reduce the need of clamps (ex.
Optradam Ivoclar-Vivadent) ( . Fig. 7.4a –d).
7.2.3 Punch
The punch forceps is used to perforate the rubber sheet in
the positions where the teeth to be isolated shall fit. The
Ainsworth punch is commonly used: it has a plunger with a
sharp end and a rotating disk-shape metal table with several
holes (. Fig. 7.5a). These perforating holes have different
diameters to better fit the teeth. The Ivory punch also has a
rotating metal disk with perforating holes of distinct diameters (. Fig. 7.5b). The diameter of the perforating hole
must be selected according to the cervical diameter of each
tooth, generally following the sequence presented in
. Fig. 7.6. However, variations are sometimes needed,
depending on the tooth size, the dentist choice, and rubber
sheet thickness [6 ].
In order to perforate the rubber sheet, the plunger
should be placed over the pre-marked positions and pressed
firmly. It is easier to perforate the rubber when the sheet is
under slight tension, but not attached to one of the sides of
the frame ( . Fig. 7.7a). It is important that the punch can
deliver perfect and complete perforations ( . Fig. 7.7b).
Incompletely cut perforations easily result in tear of the
rubber during manipulation or may lead to penetration of
saliva after the rubber dam is in place ( . Fig. 7.7c) . In
order to avoid these problems, the perforating table of the
punch shall always be sharp; if necessary, the punch can be
sharpened.
.Fig. 7.1 Rubber dam sheets with different colors
ab
.Fig. 7.2 Young frames. a Plastic; b metallicIsolation of the Operating Field
7
7.2.4 Clamps
Clamps are used to secure the rubber sheet in place and are
generally made of a flexible metal. The clamps should be
placed on the tooth that is more distal on the arch to the tooth
in which the treatment is to be performed, particularly when
isolating posterior teeth. The most distally placed clamp must
resist traction from the rubber towards the frame. Anywhere else in the isolated quadrant, additional clamps can be used to
retract the gingiva whenever necessary. Clamps are available
in different sizes and specifically adapt to each group of teeth.
They are composed by the bow that connects two horizontal
jaws (. Fig. 7.8). Those jaws present prongs that grip the tooth
cervically below its largest circumference, while the round
holes, are used for fitting the forceps. They also present rectangular holes, which allow placing a bold hand instrument for
ab
.Fig. 7.3 Ostby frames. a Plastic; b metallic
ab
cd
.Fig. 7.4 Frame integrated to the rubber dam (ex. OptraDam,
Ivoclar Vivadent). a Frontal view of the set showing the extension of
the sheet for lip protection; b back view of the set, showing the marking for punching; c application into the patient’s mouth; d rubber
dam isolation finished
A. B. Borges et al.
7
transposing the rubber sheet underneath the wings of the
clamp (. Fig. 7.33i ). Some clamps have wings ( . Fig. 7.9a, c )
that allow attaching the clamp in the rubber dam ( . Fig. 7.33a–
d), while others are wingless ( . Fig. 7.9b, d ). The clamps recommended for posterior teeth have one bow, while those used
in anterior teeth possess two bows ( . Fig. 7.9). The clamps are
flexible and can be opened with the aid of the forceps to trespass the largest circumference of the tooth. When in position,
the clamp is released to grip the cervical area of the tooth
(. Fig. 7.10a, b ). Winged clamps are more bulky and can
therefore interfere with the matrix, the matrix holder, or the
wedges used in the restorative procedure [5 , 10, 13].
Several models of clamps are available on the market; this
chapter shows, among a variety of clamps, the winged clamps
No. – used on molars, No. – used on premolars, and No. – used on maxillary and mandibular
incisors, respectively ( . Fig. 7.11a–c ). The chapter includes also a variety of smaller, wingless clamps and describes later
their placement techniques ( . Fig. 7.11d ).
In some situations a clamp can be modified to individually adapt to a specific case. This is achieved by heating the
jaws of the clamp until they become red hot and then immediately submerging it in water. The necessary modifications
are made on the jaws by bending them using flat pliers or,
when necessary, cutting them with mounted stones. The
clamp is tempered by heating it again on a flame, up to a
slightly lower temperature, and submerging it in oil
(. Fig. 7.12a–g ) . This could be advantageous for clamp
no. to adjust the facial jaw to a more cervical position on
the tooth crown, thus allowing retraction of gingiva and
exposure of the gingival margins of the cavity.
Gingival retraction clamps ( . Fig. 7.13a, b ) are designed to
be used in teeth that are not completely erupted and if lesions
are too close to the gingival level. In these clamps, the jaws are
ab
.Fig. 7.5 Punch forceps. a Ainsworth; b Ivory
.Fig. 7.6 Detail of the
perforating holes in the rotating
metal table on the Ainsworth
punch and their corresponding
group of teeth. The largest hole is
used to make perforations for
anchor molarsIsolation of the Operating Field
7
a
cb
.Fig. 7.7 Punching the rubber dam. a Punch in position with rubber dam under slight tension; b complete and correct perforations;
c inadequate partial perforations, which increase the risk of tearing the rubber
BOW
JAW
WING
PRONGHOLE FOR FORCEPS
REC TANGULAR HOLE .Fig. 7.8 Components of
the clamps
A. B. Borges et al.
7
a
cdb .Fig. 7.9 a Winged clamp with
one bow; b wingless clamp with
one bow; c winged clamp with
two bows; d wingless clamps
with two bows. The red arrows
indicate the wings
ab
.Fig.7.10 a Winged clamp at rest; b flexibility is shown when the clamp is opened by the forceps
0ab00 22 A
8
.Fig. 7.11 Clamps most commonly used in operative dentistry. a Winged clamps for premolars; b winged clamps for molars; c clamps for
anterior teeth; d wingless clamps for premolars (top row) and molars (bottom row)Isolation of the Operating Field
7
.Fig. 7.12 a Clamp number in its original shape; b exposure
of the clamp’s jaws to the flame; c immersion into water; d modifications on the clamp are made using two flat pliers to bend the facial
jaw apically; e the jaws are exposed again to the flame; f the clamp is then immersed in oil for tempering; g final shape of the clamp
with the facial jaw on a more apical position to retract the gingival
tissues
ab
cd .Fig. 7.11 (continued)
cd
211W2A
W8A 26 28 W5627 29
A. B. Borges et al.
7
ab
.Fig. 7.13 a Examples of gingival retractor clamps for posterior
teeth, with jaw and prongs on a more apical position (arrows);
b retractor clamps no. (upper image), 212R (lower right), and 212L (lower left). Clamps 212R and 212L allow the restorative
procedure to be made simultaneously in adjacent teeth .Fig. 7.12 (continued)
g
efIsolation of the Operating Field
7
directed gingivally to allow anchorage on a more cervical region
of the tooth. For a single cervical restoration, the regular
clamp is recommended, while for two restorations on neighboring teeth, clamps 212R and 212L are used simultaneously
(. Fig. 7.13b ). For an extra gingival retraction on anterior teeth
or premolars, the gingival retraction clamp no. can be customized as mentioned earlier ( . Fig. 7.12a–g ) or can be pur -
chased already modified by the manufacturer ( . Fig. 7.14a, b ).7.2.5 Forceps
The clamp holding forceps is used to securely position the
clamp on the tooth. The most commonly used forceps are
Palmer ( . Fig. 7.15a ), Brewer ( . Fig. 7.15b ), and Ivory
(. Fig. 7.15c ), which vary according to the angle of the
shank and the presence or not of curvature towards the
active tip. The Palmer forceps is mono-angled and can presab
.Fig. 7.14 a Retraction clamp no. with jaws at the same alignment; b clamp no. 212M modified by the manufacturer, with the facial jaw on
a more cervical position to improve gingival retraction during restoration of class V cavities
a
cb
.Fig. 7.15 Clamp forceps. a Palmer; b Brewer; c Ivory
A. B. Borges et al.
7
ent a knurled surface or notches in the active end
(. Fig. 7.16a, b ) to fit the holes on the clamps.
7.2.6 Other Retainers
Besides using clamps, the rubber dam can be retained and
stabilized using other types of retainers.7.2.6.1 Ligatures
Dental floss is used to stabilize the rubber dam and to retract
the gingiva. There is no need to make ligatures in every tooth;
this procedure is only needed where it is difficult to invert the
rubber dam or if gingival retraction is desired. A piece of
dental floss is then used to embrace the cervical area of the
tooth, and, with the aid of a bold hand instrument that pushes
the dental floss apically, the floss is directed towards the gingival crevice. After the margins of the perforation on the rubber dam are effectively inverted, the floss is tied on the facial
side with a double knot first, followed by a simple knot for
stabilization ( . Fig. 7.17a–f ) .
Tip
Ligatures with a double knot are difficult to perform
when the operator is unassisted and should preferably
be performed with help. The operator and assistant
have to ensure that the knot is in the right position,
retracting the gingiva, and not sitting loose around
the cervical areas of the tooth.
It is also possible to make ligatures with a running knot, where
a running loop is made outside the mouth and the dental floss
a
b
.Fig. 7.16 Detail of the tip of the Palmer forceps. a With slots; b with
a knurled surface
ab
cd
.Fig. 7.17 Sequence to prepare ligatures using double knots with dental floss. a Introduction of the dental floss into the crevice; b , c double
knot (surgeon knot) used to stabilize; d , e simple knot used to fix the ligature; f ligatures finishedIsolation of the Operating Field
7
is then adapted around the tooth and tied ( . Fig. 7.18a–i ).
Another simple knot is made over the first knot for fixation of
the ligature. If no additional gingiva retraction is desired, the
dental floss is then cut next to the knot.
Tip
Ligatures using a running knot are more stable and
therefore preferred. It is also possible to use this
ligature when working unassisted.
7.2.6.2 Stabilizing Cords, O-rings, and Elastic
Ligatures
Dental dam stabilizing cords are made of natural latex
(. Fig. 7.19a ) and available in various diameters. They can
sometimes substitute clamps or ligatures if the rubber dam is
placed on the anterior and premolar regions. The stabilizing
cords are used on the most distal tooth when isolating the
anterior teeth ( . Fig. 7.19b ) or on the most mesial tooth
when isolating posterior teeth ( . Fig. 7.19c ). Alternatively,
pieces of the rubber sheet can be used to stabilize the rubber
dam (. Fig. 7.20a–c ). O-ring ligatures commonly used in
orthodontics to fixate the archwire onto the brackets are also
suitable to stabilize the rubber dam in the gingival area. The
O-rings can be stretched and brought onto the teeth by using
either the forceps or two opposing pieces of dental floss
(. Fig. 7.21a–f ) . Elastic ligatures can also be used to stabilize the rubber dam. They are available in two shapes, for
anterior and posterior teeth, respectively, and can in some
situations replace the use of clamps ( . Fig. 7.22a, b ).
7.2.7 Number of Teeth to be Isolated
For some procedures in operative dentistry, it is enough to
place the rubber dam on only one tooth ( . Fig. 7.23): when
there is no involvement of the approximal region or when
there is only one tooth on the hemiarch. > The clamp may in some situations be placed directly
on the tooth which will receive treatment, such as
single restorations of class I, class V, or sealing of
occlusal pits and fissures, as well for endodontic
treatment or internal bleaching.
In cases of class II preparations, a minimum of one tooth
mesially and one distally to the tooth being treated should be
isolated. This allows anatomical visualization of the adjacent
teeth used for reference during build up of the restoration,
and allows the placement of matrices and wedges. Some
authors suggest the isolation of the entire hemiarch of the
region that will be treated, extending the procedure to the lateral incisor or canine of the contralateral hemiarch to improve
access and visualization of the operating field [6 , 8, 10, 12, 15].
However, this procedure is generally not necessary.
> The clamp shall not be placed directly on the tooth of
interest if the restorative procedure involves the
interproximal space. This will interfere with positioning
the matrice and wedges.
For restorative procedures on anterior teeth, the isolation is
preferably made from canine to canine or from premolar to
premolar ( . Fig. 7.24a, b ). In such cases, the use of clamps
can often be avoided because the rubber dam can be stabilized using other retainers ( . Figs. 7.19b , 7.20c , and 7.21f ).
Stabilizing cords, O-rings, or elastic ligatures can be tried
before deciding for the use of a clamp.
For restoration of class V cavities, no. gingival retraction clamp is used to isolate and restore one tooth at a time
(. Fig. 7.25a ). Clamps no. 212R and 212L can be used to
restore two adjacent teeth ( . Fig. 7.25b ).
7.2.8 Technique for Isolation Using Rubber
Dam
7.2.8.1 Preparation
Firstly, the need for anesthesia must be assessed. Isolation
with the rubber dam does not necessarily require anesthesia .Fig. 7.17 (continued)
ef
A. B. Borges et al.
7
of the gingival tissues, but is recommended if the gingival
retraction clamps are used and, in some cases, when the ligatures are necessary. However, if the restorative treatment
requires local anesthesia, this must be applied before placing
the rubber dam .
The next step is to test the clamp. It is necessary to choose
the one that best adapts on the anchor tooth. The choice of
clamp is simply based on the fit, which depends on the tooth
size, location on the arch, and eruption stage of the anchor
tooth. The clamp bow must be directed distally to the anchor
tooth. > For patient safety, a piece of dental floss (about 30 cm
long) must be tied on the clamp holes or bow before
inserting it into the mouth to avoid accidental
deglutition or aspiration. It can also be tied on both
circular holes of the clamp, increasing the safety in the
case it breaks on the region of the bow while inside the
mouth (. Fig. 7.26a, b).
The clamp must be opened with the forceps until it trespasses
the tooth circumference and grips the cervical region. It is
released from the forceps, and its stability on the tooth must
.Fig. 7.18 Sequence to prepare ligatures using a running knot. a –d Preparation of the running knot outside the mouth. e Placement of the
dental floss around the tooth; f tied knot; g , h additional simple knot used for fixation; i ligature finished and cut closely to the knot
ab
cd
e fIsolation of the Operating Field
7
g
ih
.Fig. 7.18 (continued)
a
cb
.Fig. 7.19 a Dental dam stabilizing cord roll used to stabilize the rubber dam (Wedjets – Coltène/Whaledent); b isolation of anterior teeth
stabilized distally with the stabilizing cords; c mesial placement of the cord to stabilize the rubber dam during isolation of posterior teeth
A. B. Borges et al.
7
a
cb
.Fig. 7.20 a A piece of rubber is cut from the edge of the dam; b the piece of rubber is placed distally to the canines when isolating anterior
teeth; c isolation finished using pieces of rubber dam for stabilization
ab
.Fig. 7.21 a Orthodontic O-ring ligatures. b the O-ring can be
placed at the tip of the Palmer forceps. c stretching of the O-ring with
the Palmer forceps. d alternatively, the O-ring can be enlaced with two opposing pieces of dental floss. e stretched O-ring using dental floss.
f dental isolation using O-ring ligatures for stabilizationbe verified, by touching the clamp slightly with the tip of the
index finger ( . Fig. 7.27a , b). If there is lack of stability, the
clamp will move, and the efficacy of the procedure will be
compromised. Care must be taken to not open the clamp
excessively: then there is a risk of the clamp not returning to
its original dimension .Before actually placing the rubber dam, the inter -
proximal contacts must be checked with dental floss
(. Fig. 7.28). Any sharp regions, such as defective restorations or approximal carious lesions, are likely to tear
the rubber sheet, and these areas should be smoothened
with the aid of abrasive strips. Smoothing sharp margins Isolation of the Operating Field
7
after removing old restorations is also recommended
before placing the rubber dam.
7.2.8.2 Preparation of the Rubber Dam
The rubber sheet must be perforated to adjust properly
around the teeth to be isolated. There are several techniques
to determine the position of the perforations in the rubber
dam, such as the use of a stamp ( . Fig. 7.29a, b ) and tem-plates (. Fig. 7.30a, b ) or by directly marking the position of
the perforations in the mouth ( . Fig. 7.31a ).
Stamps
Stamps ( . Fig. 7.29a, b ) can be used to print the position of
the teeth on the rubber dam. After wetting the stamp with
ink, it must be centralized on the rubber dam to transfer the
locations of the orifices to be made. This technique allows
ab
.Fig. 7.22 a Elastic ligatures (Angelus) for anterior (1) and posterior teeth (2); b elastic ligature placed on a molar. Such ligatures could be
useful in cases of fissure sealants or alternatively for endodontic treatments .Fig. 7.21 (continued)
cd
ef
A. B. Borges et al.
7
marking the rubber dam in advance; later only the positions
corresponding to the teeth to be isolated need to be punched.
This technique is easy, but it does not allow individualization of the positions of the teeth and may not be the best option in
cases of tooth misalignments or absence of teeth.
Templates
Templates ( . Fig. 7.30a , b) made of paper or plastic can also
be used to mark the position of the orifices on the rubber
dam. After placing the template centrally on the rubber sheet,
a marker pen is used to mark the position of the orifices. A
ballpoint pen should not be used because it does not allow
correct marking on the rubber. Similar to the use of stamps,
this technique is easy but does not account for individualization of tooth positions in the dental arch.
Marking the Perforation Positions in the Mouth
Although the use of stamps or templates is a rather easy way
for demarcating the perforations, they lack individualization
for the position of the teeth in the patient’s arch. Thus, by
marking the position of the perforations in the mouth, it is
possible to account for teeth that are misaligned or farther
apart from the neighboring teeth. According to this method,
the rubber dam must be attached to the frame and placed
centrally in the oral cavity. It is important to verify that the
.Fig. 7.23 Placing the rubber dam in only one tooth is sufficient
when there is no involvement of the approximal area; here during
application of pit and fissure sealant
ab
.Fig. 7.24 Rubber dam placed to restore anterior teeth without using clamps. a The rubber dam was stabilized using only dental floss ligatures
on the canines (arrow). b The ligatures do not hinder positioning the silicone mold used for reconstruction of the fractured teeth
ab
.Fig. 7.25 a Gingival retraction clamp number applied to isolate only one tooth; b gingival retraction clamps 212L and R used for
simultaneous isolation and exposure of the cervical margins of two adjacent teethIsolation of the Operating Field
7
position of the rubber dam in the mouth leaves the nose free
from contact with the rubber . Using the tip of the fingers, the rubber dam must be stretched towards the teeth to
be isolated, so it is possible to see the contour of the teeth under the rubber sheet. A marker pen is then used to mark
the center of the occlusal surface of posterior teeth
(. Fig. 7.31a ) and the center of the incisal edge of anterior
teeth. In the absence of teeth, the corresponding space shall
remain unmarked.
7.2.8.3 Punching the Rubber Dam
The marks on the rubber dam must now be perforated by
pressing the punch firmly. The size of the perforations must
correspond to the size of the teeth, as described previously. In
order for the punch to reach all marks, the rubber sheet must
be partially removed from the frame ( . Fig. 7.32 ).
7.2.8.4 Placing the Rubber Dam
The rubber dam can be placed in the patient’s mouth using
different techniques as described below.
Placement of the Whole Set: Clamp, Dam,
and Frame
In this technique, winged clamps must be used. The appropriate clamp is selected and tested beforehand, tied to dental
floss. The wings must be attached to the perforation correab
.Fig. 7.26 a A piece of dental floss is tied onto the clamp to increase the safety during the placement into the mouth. b dental floss tied on
both circular holes of the clamp, increasing the safety in case it breaks on the region of the bow while inside the mouth
ab
.Fig. 7.27 a Testing the clamp onto the tooth; b verification of the clamp stability with the finger
.Fig. 7.28 Verification of interproximal contacts with dental floss to
make sure it will be possible to pass the rubber between the teeth
without tearing
A. B. Borges et al.
7
sponding to the anchor tooth, the bow directed distally
(. Fig. 7.33a–d ). The perforations must be lubricated on the
side of the rubber sheet to be in contact with the teeth with a
watersoluble lubricant or the patient’s own saliva. Petroleum
jelly or oil-based products must not be used because residues on the tooth can impair bonding procedures or damage the
rubber dam. The lubrication facilitates the passage of the
rubber dam through the interproximal contacts ( . Fig. 7.33e ).
In sequence, the forceps must be engaged on the round
holes of the clamp, and the whole set containing the clamp,
the rubber dam, and the frame are placed into the mouth
.Fig. 7.31 Marking the position of the teeth directly in the mouth.
The rubber shall be stretched over the teeth and held in position, while
the center of the tooth is marked using a permanent marker
a bMaxila
Mandibula
.Fig. 7.29 a Stamp used to print the position of the teeth on the rubber dam; b marked rubber dam with the stamp
ab
.Fig. 7.30 Examples of templates used to mark the rubber dam. a Vivadent; b Ivory
.Fig. 7.32 Punching the marked positions on the rubberIsolation of the Operating Field
7of the patient ( . Fig. 7.33f–h ). The clamp must be opened
to allow adaptation onto the cervical area of the anchor
tooth. After releasing the clamp from the forceps, the
clamp stability must be tested. Thereafter, a bold instru-ment is used to release the rubber sheet from the wings:
the instrument is inserted into the rectangular holes of the
clamp, and the rubber dam is directed underneath the
clamp (. Fig. 7.33i, j ). The most anterior perforation is
.Fig. 7.33 Sequence to assemble the clamp onto the rubber
dam and subsequent placement of the whole set into the mouth.
a–c Fitting the clamp into the corresponding orifice for the anchor
tooth by placing the rubber under the wings; d view of the clamp
wings from the opposite side; e lubrication of the rubber dam on the
side to be in contact with the teeth; f fitting the forceps into the round
orifices of the clamp; g positioning the clamp on the anchor tooth
while bringing the whole set onto the mouth; h view of the clamp on
anchor tooth with the rubber above the wings; i the rubber dam is
moved underneath the clamp’s wings using a bold instrument; j view of the rubber dam with good seal around the anchor tooth; k the
rubber is then passed over the most mesial tooth included in the
perforations; l thereafter, the rubber is passed between the remaining
teeth with help of dental floss, which is at the same time used to invert
the rubber into the crevice on the approximal surfaces; m if necessary,
the dental floss can be passed again in the same interproximal space to
push the rubber through; the double strand of floss is then removed
from the facial embrasure; n the rubber dam is also inverted on the
remaining dental surfaces using a bold instrument and air stream;
o rubber dam isolation finished
ab
cd
ef
A. B. Borges et al.
7
.Fig. 7.33 (continued)
gh
ij
kl
mnIsolation of the Operating Field
7
then passed through the most anterior tooth included in
the isolated field ( . Fig. 7.33k ) and stabilized using a piece
of elastic, stabilizing cord, ligature, or alternatively a piece
of the rubber sheet. The remaining perforations on the
rubber are then passed through the remaining teeth, one
by one, with the help of fingers, dental floss, and the bold
instrument ( . Fig. 7.33l ). If the interproximal contacts are
very tight, it may be necessary to repeatedly use the dental
floss until the rubber dam is successfully passed through
the interproximal contacts. In this case, it is recommended
to work with the dental floss always from the surface of
the tooth towards the edge of the perforation on the rubber dam, instead of pushing the rubber between two per -
forations – the latter increases the risk of tearing the
rubber dam.
Tip
If the interproximal contacts are too tight and multiple
passings of the dental floss are needed, a larger piece
of floss can be used to direct the rubber dam between
the teeth. After the first half of the dental floss has
passed between the teeth, it is left in position, and the
second half is pushed through the contacts. The
double strand of dental floss is then removed towards
the facial side of the tooth (. Fig. 7.33m), thus
reducing the risk of tearing the rubber.
After the dam is in place, the edges of the perforation must be
inverted into the gingival crevice. A bold hand instrument
aided by air-blowing is used for this task ( . Fig. 7.33n ). This
step is very important to secure adequate isolation of the
operating field when using the rubber dam; otherwise leakage will occur ( . Fig. 7.33o ).Placement of the Dam and Frame Set Over a Prepositioned Clamp
This technique is used with wingless clamps, which cannot be
attached to the rubber sheet. In this case, it is essential that the
rubber sheet is not too thick and well-lubricated. The clamp
must be previously placed on the anchor tooth. Afterwards,
the lubricated rubber dam attached to the frame is taken in
the mouth, and the most distal perforation is pushed over the
clamp using the fingertips [6 ]. Then, the remaining teeth are
passed over their corresponding perforations ( . Fig. 7.34a–c ).
Placement of the Dam and Wingless Clamp
Followed by the Frame
In this technique, after choosing the correct clamp
(. Fig. 7.35a ), the bow of the wingless clamp must pass
through the most distal perforation in the rubber dam
(. Fig. 7.35b ). The open clamp with the attached rubber
sheet is placed on the anchor tooth using the forceps, usually held in the one hand ( . Fig. 7.35c ). Generally, the other
hand is used to pull the rubber dam out of the way, so the
field is visible for placement of the clamp on the tooth
(. Fig. 7.35d ). Afterwards, the frame is positioned
(. Fig. 7.35e ). The rubber perforation around the anchor
tooth is stretched and passed completely over the clamp
(. Fig. 7.35f ). In sequence, the remaining teeth are passed
over their corresponding perforations, following the same
steps previously described [6 , 8].
7.2.8.5 Placement of the Clamp over
the Rubber Dam
This technique is generally performed when the rubber dam is
used to restore class V cavities or non-carious cervical lesions
using the gingival retractor clamp no. . This clamp is wingless and large, and therefore the techniques described previously do not apply. Therefore, the dam is first attached to the
frame. The perforation on the rubber dam is pushed towards
the cervical area of the selected tooth until the preparation mar -
gins are visible ( . Fig. 7.36a ). Clamp no. , engaged in the
forceps, is brought over the rubber dam; the most apical jaw is
carefully placed to retract the gingival tissue, so the margins are
completely exposed ( . Fig. 7.36b ). In this technique, care must
be taken not to not compress the gingiva lingually while moving the clamp facially nor damage the enamel or the cement on
the cervical region. The clamp jaw must be placed about
0.5–1 mm below the gingival cavosurface angle ( . Fig. 7.36c )
. In cases of cervical lesions with large gingival extension,
clamp no. 212M should be used instead ( . Fig. 7.14b ). This
technique is more easily performed four-handed.
Placing the clamp over the rubber dam can also be used
in posterior teeth if the dentist is working with assistance. In
that case, the punched rubber dam is placed over the tooth
and held in place by the dental assistant, while the dentist
places the clamp. A disadvantage of this technique when
working in the posterior region is the reduced visibility .
o
.Fig. 7.33 (continued)
A. B. Borges et al.
7
a
cb
.Fig. 7.34 Placing the rubber dam and frame set over a prepositioned clamp. a Placing the clamp; b passing the most distal perforation over
the bow of the clamp; c the remaining perforations are passed over their corresponding teeth
ab
.Fig. 7.35 Sequence for placement the rubber dam over the clamp,
without the frame. a Testing the clamp, which is then removed;
b passing the rubber dam over the bow of the clamp outside of the mouth; c fitting the forceps into the round orifices of the clamp; d
placement of the dam and clamp on the tooth; e assembling the dam
on the frame; f passing the rubber dam completely over the clamp7.2.8.6 Inverting the Rubber Dam Edges
The perforation edges of the rubber dam must be inverted
into the gingival crevice of all isolated teeth, to obtain an
effective seal and avoid contamination with saliva, blood, or crevicular fluid ( . Fig. 7.37a , b). On the interproximal area,
the rubber dam must be inverted towards the interproximal
papilla using dental floss. After moving the floss gingivally, it
should be removed facially or lingually, not occlusally Isolation of the Operating Field
7
(. Fig. 7.33m ). On the facial and lingual surfaces, a bold
instrument must be used to direct the rubber sheet inside the
crevice simultaneously with an air stream on the tooth, which
will dry the surfaces and direct the dam into the gingival
crevice (. Fig. 7.38a, b ).
7.2.8.7 Removing the Rubber Dam
After the end of the restorative procedure, the clamp must be
carefully removed from the tooth. The rubber sheet is then
stretched, and the rubber in the interproximal area is carefully cut ( . Fig. 7.39). The underlying soft tissue must be
protected by the dentist’s fingers, and care must be taken not
to cut the lips of the patient, which sometimes are exposed on
the perforations when the rubber dam is stretched.
After the rubber dam is removed, it must be inspected to
verify if there are missing pieces of rubber. The interproximal
spaces shall also be inspected with a dental floss. The gingiva
surrounding the clamped anchor tooth should be massaged
to stimulate blood circulation on the areas of compression.
7.2.9 Modified Techniques for Isolation
in Special Clinical Situations
If placing rubber dam is needed next to abutment teeth of
a fixed prosthesis or work needs to be done on the abutment teeth, the technique is modified accordingly [6 , 10]. Other special situations include the placement of rubber
dam to include teeth with fixed orthodontic retainers or
yet drying the operating field around deep subgingival
margins or gingival retractions. In such situations, it may
not be possible to place a clamp or trespass the rubber
dam individually around the teeth nor retract the gingival
tissues. Thus, the easier and most used approach when
the use of rubber dam is desired in such clinical situations
is the use of the sleeve technique. Here, the rubber dam is
not perforated but instead cut in an arch to include several teeth. For the sleeve technique, a clamp is placed in
the most distal anchor tooth to stabilize the rubber dam,
and the rubber is folded towards the gingiva ( . Fig. 7.40).
In anterior areas, the use of clamp may be unnecessary,
but instead the rubber dam can be stabilized using elastic
ligatures.
The use of the sleeve technique is beneficial in special
situations, for example, if the rubber dam must be used in the
area of bridges or orthodontic retainers. Additionally, the
sleeve technique may be advantageous when the use of conventional rubber perforations may not result in a satisfactory
solution. . Figure 7.41 shows a veneer tooth preparation on
central incisor, in which proper positioning of the rubber
dam was not achieved with the regular technique. In this
case, the sleeve technique was applied to expose the gingival
margin of the preparation to allow the restoration with composite. The sleeve technique can be beneficial for adhesive .Fig. 7.35 (continued)
cd
ef
A. B. Borges et al.
7
ab
c
.Fig. 7.36 Sequence for placement of the clamp over the rubber dam. a Fitting the punched dam over the tooth; b fitting the clamp no. ,
retracting the gingiva on the labial surface and exposing the gingival cavosurface angle of the preparation; c isolation finished
ab .Fig. 7.37 Schematic
drawings showing the impor -
tance of inverting the rubber
dam into the crevice. a Flow of
the gingival fluid and the saliva
through the rubber dam
perforation; b by inverting the
edge of the rubber dam inside
the gingival crevice, the passage
of fluids is blocked
restorative procedures in teeth with deep subgingival
margins or located at areas of gingival retraction, particularly
if the gingiva is thin.
Although the sleeve technique offers better moisture
control of the operating field and retraction of the soft tis-sues than the use of cotton rolls combined with suction,
there is a possibility of salivary flow into the operating field.
That must nevertheless be controlled and is more problematic when working on the lower jaw due to accumulation of
saliva. . Figure 7.42 shows a clinical case of a patient with Isolation of the Operating Field
7
orthodontic retainer on the lingual surface of lower incisors, which impairs the regular application of the rubber
dam. In this case, the sleeve technique was associated with a light-cured gingival barrier, to completely seal the mar -
gins of the rubber dam.
Tip
When using the sleeve technique, applying light-cured
gingival barriers at the margins of the rubber dam can
protects the gingiva and may help to improve the seal
(. Fig. 7.42).
> Attention must be given when the clamp is placed
cervically on resin composite or ceramic crowns or
veneers, due to the possibility of edge fractures of the
material.
7.2.10 Sealing Leakage on the Rubber
Dam Isolation
Sometimes, small undesired flaws in the rubber dam isolation may compromise seal ( . Fig. 7.43). Commonly encountered flaws may result from inadequate punching of the
rubber sheet, e.g., if the distance between perforations is too
small, which adversely affect the correct protection of the
papilla and inversion of the rubber dam into the crevice
(. Fig. 7.44a–c ). Some of these flaws can be sealed with success using flexible light-cured resin-based gingival barriers,
although this is not always the case.
7.3 Using Cotton Rolls Combined
with Suction
The use of cotton rolls combined with suction aims to control the moisture of the operating field and displace the
surrounding soft tissues around the teeth, such as the lips,
cheeks, and tongue. It is difficult to reach complete moisture control during the operative procedures, and because
ab
.Fig. 7.38 Inversion of the rubber dam into the crevice using a bold instrument and air stream. a The instrument is used to push the rubber
towards the crevice while air-blowing; b rubber dam edges were inverted inside the crevice
.Fig. 7.39 Removal of the dam is easier by cutting the rubber whilst
protecting the patient’s soft tissues from the scissors
.Fig. 7.40 Example of a sleeve dam technique, where the rubber is
cut to include several teeth under the opening. The sleeve dam offers
retraction of the soft tissues and is here stabilized by placing clamps on
the most distally teeth
A. B. Borges et al.
7
this technique does not hinder the involuntary movement
of the soft tissues, it must be used with caution, during
short periods of time and preferably in fourhanded work
. In favorable cases, it can adequately substitute the need
for rubber dam isolation . Although the use of cotton
rolls can be relatively effective in controlling the moisture,
it does not reduce the risks of contaminations and accidents . The use of cotton rolls combined with suction
in operative dentistry are indicated in the following situations :
5When rubber dam isolation is impossible or impairs the
aesthetic evaluation of the operating field
5In patients with nasal obstruction or mouth breathing
5When rubber dam isolation has failed
5In teeth that are partially erupted or misaligned and
placing the clamp or other retainer is not possible
ab
.Fig. 7.41 a Conventional isolation did not allow visualization of
the preparation margins on the central incisor, and concern existed
that the use of a gingival retraction clamp could further compromise the gingival contour. b the rubber dam was removed and replaced as a
sleeve dam, where access to the whole preparation margin was
granted
ab
.Fig. 7.42 Conventional isolation of the upper arch combined with
sleeve dam isolation of the lower arch, due to the presence of an
orthodontic retainer on the lingual surface of the lower incisors. Pieces of rubber are used to stabilize the dam instead of using clamps.
a gingival barrier was applied to protect the gingiva; b the gingival
barrier is in place and a cotton roll is used on the lingual opening
.Fig. 7.43 An undesired perforation in the rubber dam compro -
mises seal and allows flow of saliva into the operatorative field (arrow)Isolation of the Operating Field
7
5In patients who are allergic to latex, if latex-free sheets
are not available
5For topical fluoride application
5In cases of temporary restorations
5For direct veneers or large restorations on anterior teeth.
Here, the use of cotton rolls and suction allows a better
overview of the operating field and improved visualization of the relationship between the teeth and the
gingival level
5For multiple cervical lesions. Here several teeth can be
restored at once, while the rubber dam limits restoring
two teeth at a time
Cotton rolls shall obstruct the exit of the salivary glands’
ducts (. Fig. 7.45a–c ) to reduce the moisture in the oral cavity. . Figure 7.46 illustrates the path of the saliva inside of the
oral cavity.
7.3.1 Saliva Ejector and High-Volume
Evacuators
Saliva ejectors are devices used to remove saliva and water
that comes from the high-speed handpiece . Saliva ejectors are usually made in soft plastic not to hurt the soft tis-sues. Disposable saliva ejectors that have a flexible metallic
rod are preferred, as they can be curved and adapted in several places of the oral cavity ( . Fig. 7.47a ). Careful placement
of the saliva ejectors is necessary to avoid suction, trauma, or
ulceration of the soft tissues on the cheeks or oral cavity floor.
Modified saliva ejectors with thin tips exist, and they can be
inserted inside the tooth preparation or be used for suction
of gels applied over the tooth surface. Some saliva ejectors are
anatomically designed to adapt to the mouth at the same
time as it retracts the tissues and provides suction. Hygoformic
saliva ejectors are curved, adjustable plastic devices which
are equipped with five small holes ( . Fig. 7.47b , left side).
They are placed in the floor of the lower jaw, can reach the
most posterior teeth, and push the tongue aside from the
working field ( . Fig. 7.48a, b ). Another very useful saliva
ejector also offers tongue retraction ( . Fig. 7.47b , right side).
It has an anatomic design that can keep the tongue away. It is
only found in one size but can fit all patients due to the good
flexibility of the plastic.
High-volume evacuators (HVE), i.e., larger diameter
plastic suction tips with beveled end, collect the water spray
as the tooth is being rinsed or prepared ( . Fig. 7.49a, b ). HVE
are capable of quickly removing higher volumes of liquids as
well as small solid residues from the operating field and are
ideal for four-handed work. HVE are very useful when
a
cb
.Fig. 7.44 Sealing flaws on the rubber dam is sometimes possible using light-cured gingival barriers. a Failure on the isolation exposing of the
gingival papilla; b application of the gingival barrier; c light-cured gingival barrier in position
A. B. Borges et al.
7
removing amalgam restorations, thus minimizing the
amount of amalgam residues to be swallowed by the patient.
Tongue and cheek retraction dam (ex. Ez-Dam dry isolation field) is another technology regarding saliva ejection: it
is equipped with high volume suction, tongue retractor,
cheek retractor, and biting block all in one device ( . Fig. 7.50a,
b). The biting block is made of silicone and is available in five
different sizes.
Tip
Hygoformic saliva ejectors shall be placed on the same
side of the jaw as you work. It can preferably be
adjusted by bending the coil so it pushes the tongue
further away from the teeth. These ejectors can be
stabilized to the lower jaw by curving it around the
chin of the patient.
7.3.2 Cotton Rolls and Absorbent Pads
The cotton rolls must be highly absorbent of saliva
(. Fig. 7.51a ). Long cotton rolls are used to isolate one hemiarch (. Fig. 7.51b ). Cotton rolls must always be used together
with the saliva ejectors and shall be carefully replaced when
they become saturated. At the end of the procedure and
a
cb
.Fig. 7.45 a Exit of parotid gland duct at the parotid papilla, which lies between the first and second upper molars. b Ducts of submandibular
and sublingual glands exit in the sublingual caruncles. c Visible saliva drops from minor salivary glands, which are scattered all over the mouth
.Fig. 7.46 Schematics of the saliva path inside the oral cavity. On
the right side, the saliva flow comes from the parotid gland, and on the
left side the flow comes from the submandibular and sublingual glandsIsolation of the Operating Field
7
ab
.Fig. 7.47 a Examples of disposable saliva ejectors for regular and
high-suction evacuation; the transparent tubes can be curved for
adaptation in the oral cavity. b Hygoformic saliva ejectors, which are more delicate to the surrounding soft tissues; the one on the right of
the image also retracts the tongue (ex. Sweflex saliva ejector)
ab
.Fig. 7.48 a Hygoformic saliva ejector in the mouth. b in combination with cotton roll to control moisture of the operating field
a b
.Fig. 7.49 a High-volume evacuator combined with hygoformic saliva ejector and cotton rolls in the mouth. b High-volume evacuator used in
combination with rubber dam
A. B. Borges et al.
7
before removing the cotton rolls, it is important to check if
they are dry. In this case, they must be moistened with water
before removal to avoid undesired damage of the mucosal
epithelium. There are also absorbent rolls made of paper and covered by a layer of nonwoven fabric (TNT), with an identical shape as the cotton rolls ( . Fig. 7.51c ). There are advantages of not sticking to the oral mucosa of the patient even
when they are dry.
ab
.Fig. 7.50 a Tongue and cheek retraction dam is connected directly to the suction unit. b Small perforations in the silicone allow suction of
saliva while simultaneously retracting the tongue and cheek
ab
c d
.Fig.7.51 a Examples of cotton rolls of different thicknesses; b long
cotton rolls with an internal metallic rod to allow curving (Roeko);
c absorbing paper rolls (ex. Septembar Group); d saliva absorbing pads to be adhered to the mucosa on the exits of the parotid glands. Some
pads have a reflexive external side (ex. NeoDrys)Isolation of the Operating Field
7
Absorbent pads adhere onto the cheeks’ mucosa, blocking
the exit of the parotid gland duct. Such absorbent pads tend to
retain more water than cotton rolls. They are made of cellulose
or filled with acrylate polymers that retain the moisture and
transform it in a gel ( . Fig. 7.51d ). The absorbent pads must
also be moistened before their removal from the oral cavity.7.3.3 Cheek and Tongue Retractors
The cheek retractor protects cheeks and lips while increasing
the visual field ( . Fig. 7.52a–c ). Before using these retractors, it
is necessary to lubricate the patient’s lips with lip balm to avoid
drying and lip fissures when the tissue is stretched. There are
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 7.52 Examples of soft tissue retractors. a Lip and cheek
retractor (ex. J. Morita); b labial retractor for procedures on anterior
teeth (ex. Indusbello); c labial retractor with protecting rubber (ex.
Optragate – Ivoclair/Vivadent); d tongue retractor (ex. Villevie); e cheek and tongue retractor (ex. Arcflex – FGM); f cheek and tongue retractor
combined with saliva ejector (ex. Nola Dry Field System – Great Lakes
Orthodontics)
A. B. Borges et al.
7
also flexible retractors made of rubber, which retract the lips
and cheeks evenly and gently ( . Fig. 7.52c ). The tongue retractor in the form of a disposable bite block restrains the tongue
and provides bilateral support ( . Fig. 7.52d ). Some cheek
retractors can be attached to a tongue retractor ( . Fig. 7.52e ).
The cheek and tongue retractor combined with saliva ejector is
shown in . Fig. 7.52f ; besides retracting the lips and cheeks, it
presents a tongue guard and tubes that aspirate saliva.
Biting blocks made of silicone can be used to keep the
mouth open in patients with difficulties or opening limitations (. Fig. 7.53a ). The biting blocks have multiple slots
along the lateral surfaces to stabilize on the occlusal sur -
faces of the teeth. The biting blocks must be inserted
between antagonist teeth on the opposite hemiarch to the
one that will receive treatment: the narrower edge facing
the more distal tooth. The more posterior the biting block is
placed, the more the mouth will open anteriorly . It is
recommended to tie a piece of dental floss on the biting
block for safety reasons ( . Fig. 7.53b ).
7.3.4 Light-Cured Gingival Barriers
The light-cured resin-based gingival barriers are flowable
resins with pigments, which are used to protect the gingival
tissues (. Fig. 7.54a, b ). Even after light-curing, these resins
still show certain flexibility, which makes their removal easy
(. Fig. 7.54c ). The light-cured gingival barriers can be useful
to protect the gingiva from in-office bleaching agents, but as
mentioned earlier, they can be also used to correct small
defects in the rubber dam or in combination with rubber
dam in modified applications ( . Fig. 7.42a, b ).
7.3.5 Gingival Retraction Cords
Flexible cords are inserted into the gingival crevice to retract
the gingiva, improve the visualization and access to gingival margins during tooth preparation and restoration, as well as
control gingival fluid or bleeding during the restorative
procedure. Twisted (cotton thread twisted around itself),
braided (where the threads are weaved), and knitted (formed
by rings as knitting stitches or chains) cords are available
(. Fig. 7.55a ), and the choice is determined by the dentist’s
preference, even though the knitted and weaved cords are
easier to use . The thicknesses of the cord to be used
depends on the depth of the gingival crevice ( . Fig. 7.55b ).
The cords must be packed into the crevice with a thin bold
instrument or using specific packing instruments
(. Fig. 7.55c ), some with fine serrations on the working edge
to avoid slipping and damaging the gingival tissue.
Retraction cords to mechanically retract the gingiva can
be impregnated with astringent or vasoconstrictors solutions, which will cause contraction of the gingival tissue,
reduce the flow of gingival fluid, and control bleeding. The
most commonly used astringent solutions are aluminum
chlorite, aluminum sulfate, zinc chlorite, or iron sulfate.
These compounds only act locally and rarely cause systemic
reactions while promoting adequate hemostasis of the gingival tissues. Epinephrine can also be used, but possible risks
are the increase of the cardiac frequency and arterial pressure
as well as allergenic potential. When applying cords impregnated with astringent, their use shall be limited to short periods of time, preferably up to 15 min . Since procedures in
operative dentistry generally take longer, mechanical retraction is preferred using non-impregnated cords.
The thickness of the retraction cord is chosen according
to the depth of the crevice and the degree of desired retraction. The cord is cut to size ( . Fig. 7.56a, b ) and carefully
packed into the crevice ( . Fig. 7.56c, d ). Care must be taken
to not create prolonged ischemia of the tissue; if this is the
case, the cord must be replaced by a thinner one. As packing
of the cord progresses, part of the cord already inserted into
the gingival crevice tends to be displaced as the instrument
moves forward. Therefore, the instrument shall return a little
and press the previous region again, repositioning the cord.
ab
.Fig. 7.53 a Biting blocks with a central orifice to tie dental floss; b biting block in the mouthIsolation of the Operating Field
7
The gingival retraction can cause discomfort to the patient
and may lead to permanent gingival retraction. To avoid
these problems, the technique must be performed correctly,
without excessive pressure during insertion of the cord in the
crevice.
> At end of the restorative procedure, the cord must be
carefully removed from inside the gingival crevice with
the aid of an exploratory probe.
7.3.6 Cotton Roll Isolation Technique
7.3.6.1 Maxillary Anterior Teeth
Two cotton rolls must be placed on the bottom of the vestibule on each side of the labial frenulum to better accommodate it and to avoid their displacement ( . Fig. 7.57a ). On
patients that have a small labial frenulum, a single long cotton roll can be used on the whole arch ( . Fig. 7.57b ).
7.3.6.2 Mandibular Anterior Teeth
Two cotton rolls must be placed on the bottom of the vestibule, one on each side of the lower lip frenulum. Two additional cotton rolls must be placed on each side of the lingual
frenulum. These block the exit of the submandibular and
sublingual glands, as well as the exits of minor salivary glands (. Fig. 7.58a ). When the labial frenulum is small, a
single long cotton roll can be placed on the vestibule region
(. Fig. 7.58b ).
7.3.6.3 Maxillary Posterior Teeth
The cotton rolls must be positioned on the bottom of the vestibule on the posterior region, blocking the exit of saliva from
the parotid gland’s duct and retracting the cheek ( . Fig. 7.59a ).
Absorbing pads can also be used; they adhere to the cheek
mucosa and absorb the saliva ( . Fig. 7.59b ). Some absorbing
pads have a reflective surface that improves light distribution
inside the oral cavity. The saliva ejector must be kept at the
floor of the mouth or at the area behind the last molar .
7.3.6.4 Mandibular Posterior Teeth
It is the region that requires most care and attention when
using cotton rolls and suction, due to the large quantity of
saliva and the movement of the tongue, lips, and cheeks. A
cotton roll must be placed over the exit of the parotid
gland’s duct in the upper vestibule. Another cotton roll
must be paced in the lower vestibule, beside the tooth to be
treated, and one or two more cotton rolls shall be placed on
the floor of the mouth, under the tongue. This ensures that
saliva is absorbed at the same time that the tongue is displaced (. Fig. 7.60a ). It is important to remember that the
saliva ejectors must be placed at all times – during the
ab
c
.Fig. 7.54 a Light-cured gingival barrier being applied; b after curing; c removal of the gingival barrier
A. B. Borges et al.
7
a b
c
.Fig. 7.55 a Examples of gingival retraction cords (1, twisted; 2, braided; and 3, knitted); b cords with varying thicknesses; c instruments used
for placement of the retraction cords into the gingival crevice
ab
.Fig. 7.56 Placement of gingival retraction cord. a Initial situation; b retraction cord cut to size and brought to the cervical region of the tooth;
c packing the cord into the crevice with a special packing instrument of round tip (ex. Millennium); d gingival retraction finishedrestorative procedure – in the oral cavity, removing the
saliva and maintaining the cotton rolls in position.
Alternatively, a long cotton roll can be placed on the upper
and lower vestibule ( . Fig. 7.60b ) or the cotton roll can be
combined with absorbing pads, always under constant suction (. Fig. 7.60c ).Tip
When you want to remove the cotton rolls or absorbant
pads, make sure that they are wet. Otherwise they
adhere to the mucosa and can wound the epithelium.Isolation of the Operating Field
7
ab
.Fig. 7.57 Cotton roll isolation of the area of maxillary anterior teeth. a Two cotton rolls placed on each side of the upper labial frenulum;
b single, long roll placed on the upper arch vestibule
cd
.Fig. 7.56 (continued)
ab
.Fig. 7.58 Cotton roll isolation of the area adjacent to the
mandibular anterior teeth. a Cotton rolls are placed beside the lower
labial frenulum. Cotton rolls placed on the lingual side are stabilized by the saliva ejector; b pre-curved, long cotton rolls placed over the lower
arch vestibule and under the tongue
A. B. Borges et al.
7
ab
.Fig. 7.59 a Cotton roll isolation of the area adjacent to the maxillary posterior teeth; b saliva-absorbing pad positioned onto the cheek
mucosa
a
cb
.Fig. 7.60 Cotton roll isolation of the area of mandibular posterior
teeth. a Cotton rolls positioned on the lower vestibule, under the
tongue and over the exit of the parotid duct; b pre-curved, long cotton roll positioned over the exit of the parotid duct and in the lower
vestibule; c cotton roll combined with absorbing pad (red arrow) and
hygoformic saliva ejector (blue arrow)Isolation of the Operating Field
7Tip
After acid etching and rinsing of the surface during an
adhesive technique, you need to change the cotton
rolls or absorbant pads in order to avoid moisture
reaching the operating field. If the cotton rolls are
contaminated with adhesive or resin-based materials,
these must be changed to avoid contact of
unpolymerized material with the patient’s soft tissues.
Conclusion
Controlling moisture and contamination in the operating
field offer the best conditions for optimal restorative work.
The use of rubber dam is preferred for effective control of
moisture and preventing contamination, both essential pre -
requisites for adhesive dentistry. If the use of rubber dam is
not possible, the next best available option is the use of cot -
ton rolls combined with suction. This chapter explains the
importance of isolation of the operating field to enhance the
quality of the restorative procedures. The necessary instruments and consumables for providing effective moisture control, either by using rubber dam or combining cotton rolls
with suction, have been revised. The techniques for obtaining
moisture control of the operating field have been thoroughly
explained.
References
1. Wang Y, Li C, Yuan H, Wong MCM, Zou J, Shi Z, Zhou X. Rubber dam
isolation for restorative treatment in dental patients. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. ;9:CD009858.
2. Keys W, Carson SJ. Rubber dam may increase the survival time of
dental restorations. Evid Based Dent. ;18(1):19–20.
3. Browet S, Gerdolle D. Precision and security in restorative dentistry:
the synergy of isolation and magnification. Int J Esthet Dent.
;12(2): –85. 4. Mahn E, Rousson V, Heintze S. Meta-analysis of the influence of
bonding parameters on the clinical outcome of tooth-colored cer -
vical restorations. J Adhes Dent. ;17(5): – .
5. Gilmore HW, Lund MR, Bales CD, Vernetti S, editors. The operating
field. Operative dentistry. 3rd ed. St. Louis: CV Mosby Company;
. p. –16.
6. Summitt JB. Field isolation. In: Summitt JB, Robbins JW, Schwarz RS,
editors. Fundamentals of operative dentistry. Illinois: Quintessence
Books; . p. –39.
7. Barrancos Mooney J, Rodríguez GA. Isolamento do campo oper -
atório. In: Barrancos Mooney J, editor. Operatória Dental. Buenos
Aires: Medica Panamericana; . p. – .
8. Wilder AD. Preliminary considerations for operative dentistry. In:
Roberson TM, Heymann HO, Swift EJ, editors. Sturdevant’s art and
science of operative dentistry. St. Louis: Mosby/Elsevier; .
p. –91.
9. Besek M. Optidam, the new dimensional rubber dam. Available
from: http://www. kerrhawe. com/products/documents/Article_
Besek_en. pdf .
10. Baum L, Phillips RW, Lund MR, editors. Isolation of the working field.
Textbook of operative dentistry. Philadelphia: WB Saunders Company; . p. – .
11. Conceição EN, Soares CG. Isolamento do campo operatório. In: Conceição EN, Colaboradores, editors. Dentística: Saúde e Estética.
Porto Alegre: Artes Médicas Sul; . p. 83–94.
12. Mondelli J. Fundamentos da Dentística Operatória. São Paulo: Santos; .
13. Luz MA. Isolamento do campo operatório. In: Garone Neto N, editor.
Introdução à Dentística Restauradora. São Paulo: Santos; .
p. 25–41.
14. Souza JB, Fernandes MI, Filho AV, Taveira WS, Rocha LI, Gonçalves
AM. Isolamento do Campo Operatório. In: Busato AG, editor. Grupo
Brasileiro dos Professores de Dentística. São Paulo: Santos; .
p. –36.
15. Marzouk MA, Simonton AL, Gross RD, editors. Controle do Campo
Operatório. Dentística Operatória: Teoria e Prática Moderna. Santos:
São Paulo; . p. 95– .
16. Iorio PA, editor. Isolamento do campo operatório. Dentística Clínica:
Adesiva e Estética. Santos: São Paulo; . p. 3–19.
17. Brunthaler A, König F, Lucas T, Sperr W, Schedle A. Longevity of
direct resin composite restorations in posterior teeth. Clin Oral
Investig. ;7:63–70.
18. Donovan TE, Chee WW. Current concepts in gingival displacement.
Dent Clin North Am. ;48(vi): –44.
19. Reiman MB. Exposure of subgingival margins by nonsurgical gingival displacement. J Prosthet Dent. ;36: –54.
A. B. Borges et al.
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG
C. R. G. Torres (ed.), Modern Operative Dentistry, Textbooks in Contemporary Dentistry,
https://doi.org/10. / -3- - -0_8261 8
Matrix and Wedge Systems
Cesar Rogério Pucci, Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres,
and Ali Ibrahim Abdalla
8.1 Introduction –
8.2 Matrix –
8.2.1 Metallic Matrix –
8.2.2 Transparent Plastic Matrix –
8.3 Matrix Retainer –
8.4 Wedges –
8.4.1 Frequent Mistakes Related to the Use of Wedges –
8.4.2 Elastic Wedges –
8.5 Challenges for the Correct Use of Matrix and Wedges –
8.6 Custom-Made Matrices –
8.6.1 Spot-Welded and Riveted Matrix –
8.6.2 Window Matrix –
8.6.3 Barton Matrix –
8.6.4 Tband Matrix –
8.6.5 S-shaped Matrix –
References –
8Learning Objectives
The learning objectives of this chapter are related to the following topics:
5To explain the definitions, characteristics, and impor -
tance of the matrix and wedge use during restorative
procedures
5To present the different kinds of metallic and plastic
matrices (circumferential and sectional)
5To explain the use of different matrix retainers in detail,
followed by its indications and techniques of use
5To present the frequent mistakes related to the use of
wedges and the solution for challenging situations
5To explain the technique to prepare custom-made
matrices, including spot-welded and riveted matrix,
window matrix, Barton’s matrix, T-band matrix, and
S-shaped matrix
8.1 Introduction
There are several reasons that can lead to the loss of tooth
structures, such as the caries disease, traumas, attrition, occlusal overload, erosive tooth wear, among others. Regardless of
the cause, the restorations of those lost structures must
recover the lost shape, function, and esthetics using an artificial restorative material. Those materials present plastic viscosity so that they can be applied into the cavity and be shaped,
before they undergo some kind of curing reaction and become
hard, maintaining the shape created and restoring the lost
tooth surfaces. In some situations, such as on the occlusal sur -
faces of the posterior teeth (Class I) or on the facial or lingual
surfaces of the posterior and anterior teeth (Class V), the
tooth preparations present surrounding walls that will hold
the restorative material in place, simplifying the procedure
(. Fig. 8.1a). However, in the cases where the lesion, and consequently the preparation, reached the interproximal surfaces,
it is impossible to guarantee the perfect restoration of the lost
surface if the material is inserted directly into the preparation, because it will flow into and invade the interproximal space
and facial and lingual embrasures. To solve this technical
problem, it is necessary something be used as a temporary
artificial holder for the restorative material until its setting,
allowing that the contour and smoothness of the proximal
surface are restored ( . Fig. 8.1b – arrow). This device, called
matrix, is basically a strip or band made of metallic or plastic
material that works as a type of a tray, inside which the restoration will be made. The use of a matrix to restore teeth was
introduced in Dentistry by Dr. Louis Jack, in . In order to
keep the matrix in position around the tooth structures dur -
ing the restorative procedure, several different types of instrument can be used, commonly called matrix retainer. When
the matrix is placed in position on the interproximal region, it
must be stabilized and better adapted to the remaining tooth
structure. To reach this goal, a small wedge with triangular
cross section is inserted into the interproximal space
(. Fig. 8.1b – asterisk). The set of the three components is
known as the matrix and wedge system, which have the following goals: [3 , 4, 6].
5To allow the application or condensation of the restor -
ative material inside the cavity
5To hold the restorative material until it passes through
the setting reaction and keep the desired shape
5To allow the anatomic and physiological reconstruction
of the teeth
5To allow the restoration of the interproximal contact
5To allow the sculpture of the restoration
5To prevent the restorative material extrusion at the cavosurface margin, resulting in excess at the margins (flash)
or overhangs in the cervical region, which would result
in the presence of and deposit of bacterial biofilm
5To help the isolation of the prepared tooth, once it will help
to keep the rubber dam in position and retract the gingiva
The matrices and wedge system can be used in cavities that
involve proximal surfaces, such as Class II, III, and IV according to Black classification, or even on the Class I compound
ab
.Fig. 8.1 Indications of a matrix system. a The preparations sur -
rounded by vertical walls are capable to hold the restorative material.
b When the proximal surface was lost, it is necessary a temporary holder during the restorative procedure (the arrow indicates
the matrix band; the wedge can be seen in the interproximal space)
C. R. Pucci et al.
8
preparation, where the matrix will aid the restoration of the
buccal groove on the mandibular molars or lingual groove on
the maxillary molars. Occasionally, the matrices can also be
used for Class V restorations.
> The correct application of a wedge can prevent the
restorative material extrusion at the cavosurface
margin, which would create overhangs in the cervical
region, promoting biofilm deposition and periodontal
inflammation.
8.2 Matrix
In order to a matrix band has an adequate performance,
some basic requirements must be present. In the first place,
they must be very thin, so they do not take too much space in
the interproximal area, but at the same time be capable to
resist the pressures applied over the restorative material, as it
occurs during the amalgam condensation. They must be flexible, to adapt on the contours of the remaining tooth structure, and smooth to create a restoration with the external
surface roughness like the remaining tooth structure. In
addition, they must be rigid enough to not suffer deformation during the use and be compatible with the restorative
material, not sticking to it .
The matrices can be classified on several manners, which
will allow to understand better its purpose. In relation to the
involvement of the dental crown, they can be classified in the
circumferential matrix, which involves the mesial, distal,
facial, and lingual surfaces simultaneously, or partial (also
called sectional), which involves only one of the proximal
surfaces ( . Fig. 8.2a , b).
In relation to the restorative material used, the matrices
can also be classified in matrices for silver amalgam and
matrices for esthetic materials, as composite resins or glass
ionomer cement. On the anterior teeth, the matrices for
esthetic materials need to be transparent to allow the passage
of the light from the light-curing unit through it. In relation
to the way of use, the matrices can be called universal, when they are ready-made and can be used in several different situations, or custom-made, when the dentist makes by hand a
specific matrix for a special clinical situation . The matrices can also be made of metal, used for posterior teeth, or
plastic that can be used for anterior and posterior teeth.
It is important to emphasize that the matrix band must
never be used more than once. When the band is used again,
there is an increase of the surface roughness and change of
the contour due to the deformation, which will significantly
jeopardize the smoothness and desired profile of the proximal surface to be restored .
8.2.1 Metallic Matrix
Several types of metallic matrices are available on the market,
and they can be circumferential or sectional. They can be
used on posterior teeth, both for amalgam and composite
restorations, once the light for the curing is applied occlusally.
8.2.1.1 Circumferential Metallic Matrix
The most commonly used metallic matrices are the straight
bands. They are flat bands available in two thicknesses,
0.03 mm (0. inch) or 0.05 mm (0. inch), and two
heights, 5 mm indicated for teeth with shorter clinical crowns
and 7 mm indicated for longer crowns ( . Fig. 8.3a). They
need to be cut on the necessary size to wrap the crown and to
be fixated onto the matrix retainer, resulting in a cylindrical
shape (. Fig. 8.3b). There are also the metallic bands with a V
or boomerang shape, known as Tofflemire matrix band. They
are 7 cm long with various widths for different crowns sizes.
Some of them present projections in the internal border that
serve to adapt onto the preparations where the gingival walls
go far down into the cervical region ( . Fig. 8.3c). The
boomerangshaped matrix must be assembled on the retainer
with the internal edge of its curvature facing the cervical
region. This will result on a funnel-shaped cone when
wrapped around a tooth, placed with its smaller diameter
facing the cervical area, contributing for a better adaptation
ab
.Fig. 8.2 Classification of the matrices, according to the surrounding of the crown. a Circumferential; b sectional
Matrix and Wedge Systems
8
of the matrix ( . Fig. 8.3d). It is also available pre-contoured
Tofflemire circumferential matrix, which follows the natural
contour of the proximal tooth surface.
Some metallic bands present an integrated retainer system that dismisses the use of a separated matrix retainer.
They can have disposable retainers integrated with the bands
or be retainerless. The applications of the retainerless cir -
cumferential matrices are particularly interesting in the cases
where the tooth, which will be restored, is also the anchor
tooth and will receive the clamp for isolation. Some examples
can be observed in . Figs. 8.4 , 8.5, and 8.6.
8.2.1.2 Sectional Metallic Matrix
The sectional matrices surround only one proximal surface
during the restoration, which present some advantages. As the
matrix band has a certain thickness that occupies a space
between the restorative material and the adjacent tooth, to get
a proper interproximal contact, the wedge must separate the
adjacent teeth with enough distance to compensate the thickness of the band. On the cases of a Class II cavity that involves
only one proximal surface, when using a circumferential
matrix, the separation produced by the wedge must compensate twice the thickness of the matrix. On the other hand,
using a sectional matrix the need of teeth separation is smaller.
The sectional matrices can be prepared cutting a piece of
the straight band with a length enough to involve the proxi-mal surface and go further in about 1/3 of the mesiodistal
dimensions of the crown, in the buccal and lingual surfaces.
The corners of the matrix that will be facing the gingiva must
be cut, avoiding that it damages the soft tissues ( . Fig. 8.7a).
Then, it is burnished over a paper mixing pad to become
curved as the proximal surface ( . Fig. 8.7b, c ). After that, it
is placed and wedged, being burnished in position to
improve the contact with the proximal surface of the adjacent tooth ( . Fig. 8.7d, e). After that, a piece of green low
fusion compound is handled as shown in . Fig. 12.16a–i and
applied on the buccal and lingual embrasures to avoid the
extrusion of the restorative material ( . Fig. 8.7f). At the
moment of compound application, the matrix must be
pressed toward the contact with the adjacent tooth with the
back of a spoon or a burnisher. This technique was proposed
by Sweeney, in , and it is a type of custom-made matrix
[5, 6, 8]. The compound can be replaced by a light-cured gingival barrier.
In , Alvin Meyer projected and produced sectional
matrices that were ready to be used, with pre-contoured
surfaces, simplifying the anatomic reconstruction of the
proximal surface. They have a different occluso-gingival
height, adapting to different crown sizes. They also present
models with extensions in the internal edge for cavities
with a large cervical extension ( . Fig. 8.8a). Analyzing it
sideways, they have a concave and a convex edge
ab
cd
.Fig. 8.3 Metallic circumferential matrix bands used with the matrix retainer. a Straight strips. b straight strip assembled on the matrix retainer.
c Tofflemire matrix. d Tofflemire matrix assembled on the retainer
C. R. Pucci et al.
8
(. Fig. 8.8a – arrow). They also have a concave side that
must face the tooth preparation and a convex side that
faces the adjacent tooth ( . Fig. 8.8b ).
First of all, the occluso-gingival height of the sectional
matrix is chosen, and it must be compatible with the depth of
the cavity. With a clinical tweezer, it is placed into the inter -
proximal region, observing that the concave side of the matrix must be in contact with the adjacent tooth ( . Fig. 8.8c).
The convex edge is placed toward the cervical area. After that,
a wedge is placed, and then, using a clamp forceps, a separation ring is placed to bring the borders of the matrix in contact with the tooth surface in the embrasure area ( . Fig. 8.8e).
This hinders what the restorative material extrudes, and it
promotes the additional dental separation, simplifying to
ab
cd
.Fig. 8.4 a Retainerless circumferential matrix bands with a built-in tensioning ring (TDV). b Matrix in position. c The pinched aluminum
built-in tensioning ring acts as a retainer for better adaption around the tooth. d Ring folded to not harm the soft tissues or the cheek
ab
.Fig. 8.5 a Retainerless circumferential matrix bands (AutoMatrix,
Dentsply), available in multiple heights and gauges for varied clinical
solutions. A device is available in the set for tightening the matrix around the tooth (Automate Tightening Device) as well as a snipper for
removal. b AutoMatrix in place
Matrix and Wedge Systems
8
ab
.Fig. 8.6 a Disposable circumferential matrix band and retainer
(Omni-Matrix, Ultradent), with different sizes identified by the color of
the conical handle. The pivoting head allows the retainer to be turned to any side, depending on the tooth to be restored. b Omni-Matrix in
position
ab
c d
.Fig. 8.7 Technique for the preparation of custom-made sectional
matrix. a Sectioning a piece of the matrix band. b Burnishing over a
paper mixing pad for contouring. c Contoured matrix. d Matrix in
position and wedge application. e Burnishing of the matrix toward the contact with the adjacent tooth. f Application of the of low fusion
compound in the embrasures to improve the adaptation and prevent
flash formation
C. R. Pucci et al.
8
ab
c d
.Fig. 8.8 a Pre-contoured sectional matrices with different
dimensions (the arrows point to the edges). b Lateral view of the
matrix showing the concave side. c Matrix taken in place by a dental
tweezer. d Different types of separation rings (1, unimatrix, TDV; 2, Palodent, Darway). e Separation rings being positioned using a clamp
forceps. The wedge was already placed (Curvy – Voco). f Set in position
ef
.Fig. 8.7 (continued)
Matrix and Wedge Systems
8obtain proper proximal contacts during composite restoration. The separation rings are based on the principle of the
McKean master separator ring, developed for more than 50
years ago. The separation rings may have different configurations. Some present tines with a round cross section, whereas
others present a flat rectangular cross section ( . Fig. 8.8d). In
some cases, the tines with a round cross section may allow a
better adaptation of the matrices in the embrasure areas, but
they cannot be used in preparation where the proximal boxes
present a large buccolingual dimension ( . Fig. 15.9g, h ).
However, the rings with a rectangular cross section can be
used in those situations. The separation rings must be placed
over the wedges, touching the proximal surface of the adjacent tooth in the embrasure areas, providing an adequate
separation and more predictable contacts on posterior composites (. Fig. 8.8f ).
There are on the market several variations, based on the
idea of the sectional matrices with the separation ring, that
present some advantages in relation to the regular systems
presented. However, the basic principles are the same. As
examples, we have the V Ring® (Triodent), Composi-Tight
3D® (Garrison), Hawe Adapt® (Kerr Hawe), etc. The TriClip® system (Triodent) presents the matrix and the ring
attached in a one set and an elastic wedge integrated, simplifying the process to use it. In . Fig. 8.9a–d , it can be
observed the Composi-Tight 3D® system, which has two
kinds of separation rings. The larger ring is for most premolars and molars, and the smaller one is for short or badly
positioned teeth. The larger ring has notches on its tines
which allows the passage of the wedge through it and also
has soft silicon faces that rest on the proximal surfaces of
the adjacent teeth in the embrasures, pressing the matrix
and better adapting to the surface, reducing the possibility
to have composite flash at this area. The presence of those
soft faces allows its adaptation even on preparation with
large proximal boxes, where a regular separation ring would
not be used, because it would penetrate the preparation
through the embrasure. The matrices in this system have a
very thin layer of a nonstick material, which hinders the
composite bond to the matrix.8.2.1.3 Metallic Cervical Matrix
They are matrices to restore the facial and lingual cervical
areas of teeth in Class V preparations using a chemical curing
material, such as conventional glass ionomer cements or selfcuring composites. They are available in several sizes, adapting on different tooth morphologies. They have a concave
and a convex side. Nowadays, its use is reduced due to the
dentist’s preference for light-curing materials on those types
of restorations ( . Fig. 8.10a, b ).
8.2.2 Transparent Plastic Matrix
The clear plastic matrices have the advantage to allow the passage of the light through them and are recommended for composite restorations, where there is the need to apply light
through the matrix. They are always used in restorations on
anterior teeth and may be optionally used on composite restorations of posterior teeth, since the light is applied from the
occlusal surface and not through the matrix. They should
never be used for amalgam restorations, since they are not
capable to resist the condensation forces. They are made of
polyester, cellulose acetate, or polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and
can be straight or pre-contoured, circumferential, or sectional.
There are also special matrices shaped as the region that will be
reconstructed, such as the entire crowns or the cervical region.
8.2.2.1 Circumferential Plastic Matrix
The most commonly used plastic matrix is the straight polyester strip or “Mylar” strip. Mylar® is generally used to
describe polyester films, although it is a trademark owned by
DuPont company. It is flat and transparent strip used on the
restoration of anterior teeth ( . Fig. 8.11). It has the inconvenience of not presenting the natural curvature of the proximal surface of the teeth. To restore the anterior teeth, this
deficiency is easily overcome by the use of the wedge and a
careful restorative technique ( . Fig. 8.11b ). However, if used
for restorations of the posterior teeth associated to a matrix
retainer, it will produce a flat proximal surface, incompatible
with the original anatomy.
ef
.Fig. 8.8 (continued)
C. R. Pucci et al.
8
To be used on posterior teeth, some manufactures created
pre-contoured polyester strips, as it can be seen in . Fig. 8.12a, b .
Some require the use of the matrix retainer, whereas others are
retainerless. The use of the transparent matrices on posterior
teeth was proposed based on the theory that composite resin
shrinks toward the light. Therefore, to improve the marginal sealing of the composite restoration in the gingival wall, it
would be necessary that the light was applied initially on this
region, passing through the matrix. Nowadays, it is known that
the composite shrinks toward the bonded cavity walls, despite
the light direction [9 ]. Therefore, the use of clear plastic matrices for the composite restoration of posterior teeth has drastiab
cd
.Fig. 8.9 Composi-Tight 3D® matrix system (Garison). a On the left a
ring with soft silicon faces to improve the adaptation of the matrix and
on the right the ring for short or badly positioned teeth. b Sectional matrices in several shapes covered with a nonstick material. c Ring in
position. d The cervical slot can be observed, which allows the passage
of the wedge
ab
.Fig. 8.10 Metallic pre-contoured cervical matrix (Hawe Neos Dental). a Different shapes. b Side view showing the concavities on one of the
sides
Matrix and Wedge Systems
8
cally been reduced, because they are thicker and more difficult
to take into position, when there is remaining of the interproximal contact, and cannot the burnished.
8.2.2.2 Special Plastic Matrices
Some plastic matrices present the shapes and sizes of the
tooth surface that will be reconstructed. As examples, there
are the cellulose acetate or PVC transparent plastic crowns
forms (or transparent strip crowns), as seen in . Fig. 8.13a, b .
They are used as a shell matrix for the restoration or teeth
reshaping, simplifying the sculpture process. The set of
crowns presents several sizes to adapt to most teeth crowns.
The most adequate is chosen, according to the mesiodistal
dimensions and the inciso-cervical height, and then fitted by
cutting the excess with scissors.
Another type of special plastic matrix is the cervical
matrix for light-curing materials ( . Fig. 8.14a, b ). They can
be used for composite resin or modified glass ionomer
cement restorations, and it is especially indicated to the last
one, due to its viscous and sticky consistency. The technique
for use of this matrix can be seen in . Fig. 14.44a–l .8.3 Matrix Retainer
They are devices intended to hold the matrix in position and
to adjust it around the tooth that will be restored, allowing a
correct contour to be obtained, hindering the extrusion of
the material into the buccal and lingual embrasures and on
the gingival margin. They can be used with metallic or plastic
strips. There are several types on the market, even though the
most popular are the Tofflemire, Ivory, and Siqveland [5, 7].
The most commonly used is the Tofflemire matrix
retainer, developed by Joseph Benjamin Franklin Tofflemire,
also called “universal” retainer. It has two different models,
depending on the angulation of the guide posts of the head,
which has guide channels where the matrix is adapted
(. Fig. 8.15) . The model with guide posts at a 90° angle
with the long axis of the instrument should be used buccally,
while the model with the guide posts contra-angled can be
used lingually when the preparation extends to the buccal
surface. This type of retainer has the advantage of being easily
separated from the band in an occlusal direction, avoiding,
for example, the fracture of the recently condensed amalgam
ab
.Fig. 8.12 Pre-contoured polyester strips for posterior teeth. a To use with matrix retainer (premolar strips – TDV); b retainerless (TDV)
a b
.Fig. 8.11 a Straight polyester strips; b clinical use
C. R. Pucci et al.
8
restoration, because this material takes longer to reach the
final crystallization and its maximum strength [5, 6].
. Figure 8.16 presents the different parts of the instrument. On one of the ends is the head of the retainer, with the
U-shaped guide posts and the guide channels, where the band must go through and then be positioned on the diagonal slot of the locking vise. On the other end are the knurled
outer and inner nuts, which tighten or loose the matrix from
the retainer and increase or decrease the band circumfer -
ence, respectively. The frame holds all the components and
guides the movement of the locking vise.
ab
.Fig. 8.13 a Polyvinyl chloride transparent strip crowns; b clinical use for reshaping of the peg-shaped lateral incisors
ab
.Fig. 8.14 Cervical matrix. a Hand instrument with clear cervical matrix attached to the tips (TDV); b cervical matrix to be attached to the tip of
the light-curing devices (TDV)
.Fig. 8.15 Tofflemire Matrix retainer types. (1) Straight. (2)
Contra-angled. The differences are indicated by the arrows
LOCKING VISE
SCRE WKNURLED INNER NUT
KNURLED OUTER NUT S
FRAM E
DIAGONAL SL OTGUIDE CHANNELS
.Fig. 8.16 Nomenclature of the parts of Tofflemire retainer
Matrix and Wedge Systems
8To assemble the matrix band on the Tofflemire retainer,
the dentist must first verify the diameter of the tooth that will
be restored. When the band is bought in rolls, it must be cut in
a way to surround the entire tooth, leaving a small portion that
will be attached to the locking vise. In general, about 7 cm of
the matrix band is enough. Some matrix bands are sold already
cut on the final dimensions, such as the Tofflemire matrix,
which facilitates the use. The retainer must be prepared to receive the band, turning the inner knurled nut (larger) counterclockwise until the locking vise is about 5 mm from the
head of the retainer. Holding the inner nut, the vise locking
screw must be unscrewed, turning the outer knurled nut
(smaller) counterclockwise until the pointed spindle is free of
the diagonal slot. The dentist folds the band end to end to form
a loop (. Fig. 8.17a ), passing through the correct guide channel (. Fig. 8.17b ), attaching the band inside the diagonal slot
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 8.17 Assembling of band on the Tofflemire matrix retainer.
a Folding the band end to end to form a loop. b passing the band
through the correct guide channel, attaching it inside the diagonal slot
of the vise. c the outer knurled nut is turned clockwise to tighten the
pointed spindle toward the band. d –f options to assemble the band into the guide channels. g the inner knurled nut is turned clockwise,
adjusting the matrix to the diameter of the crown, tightening it.
h correct positioning of the retainer with the slotted side of the head
directed gingivally. i incorrect positioning with the slotted side of the
head occlusally
C. R. Pucci et al.
8
of the vise. Then, the outer knurled nut is turned clockwise to
tighten the pointed spindle against the band ( . Fig. 8.17c ).
The choices of which guide channel will be used depend on
the tooth that will be restored. In general, the retainer is placed
buccally with its long axis parallel to the teeth arch. However,
its position (right, left, or parallel) can vary according to the
convenience of each situation ( . Fig. 8.17d–f ). The matrix
band assembled in the retainer is placed around the tooth, and
the inner knurled nut is turned clockwise, adjusting the matrix
to the diameter of the crown, tightening it ( . Fig. 8.17g ). The
matrix retainer must be positioned on the arch with the slotted
side of the head directed gingivally, to permit easy separation
of the retainer from the band occlusally ( . Fig. 8.17h ). After
finishing the restoration, the retainer removal is made turning
the outer knurled nut counterclockwise to release the band,
pulling the retainer toward the occlusal surface, with the
matrix remaining in position. If the retainer is placed upside
down, with the slotted side of the head occlusally, its removal
before the matrix band will be more difficult ( . Fig. 8.17l ).In . Fig. 8.18a, b , the Ivory No. 8 matrix retainer can be
observed. It works like Tofflemire retainer, with a difference
that there is only one guide channel. It also presents a locking
vise, a locking screw, and inner and outer knurled nuts. This
type of retainer also allows the removal of the retainer before
the matrix, by loosen the fixation outer nut.
Another type of popular matrix retainer is the Siqveland,
also known as Steele’s Siqveland retainer ( . Fig. 8.19a ). By
the fact that it does not have a fixation nut, the matrix must
be folded on a specific sequence so that it is assembled,
according to what can be observed in . Fig. 8.19a–l , and it is
necessary about 10 cm of the matrix band. It presents as
advantages the swivel locks, which can be turned from one
side or another, improving the adaptation of the matrix in the
cervical region of tapered teeth ( . Fig. 8.19b , l). As a disadvantage, there is the fact that it is not possible to separate the
matrix from the retainer before its removal from the tooth
structure, unless the band is cut, which is a difficult procedure to be made inside the mouth.
g
ih
.Fig. 8.17 (continued)
Matrix and Wedge Systems
8
a b
cd
.Fig. 8.19 a Siqveland matrix retainer from different views. b Options to adjust the swivel lock for adaptation of the band on the cervical
region. c–j steps to assemble the band. k matrix properly assembled. l cervical adjustment by the correct positioning of the swivel lock
ab
.Fig. 8.18 Ivory No. 8 matrix retainer. a View of the instrument in different angles. b Matrix retainer assembled in position
C. R. Pucci et al.
8
g h
i j
k l
e f
.Fig. 8.19 (continued)
Matrix and Wedge Systems
88.4 Wedges
The wedges are pieces of wood, plastic, or elastic material
introduced into the interproximal space, between the matrix
and the proximal surface of the adjacent tooth, over the inter -
dental gingival papilla, to guarantee the correct restoration of
the proximal surface. Among the functions of the wedges,
the following ones must be highlighted:
5Helps to stabilize the matrix band
5Aids on the restoration of the adequate contour of the
lost surface, because it approaches the matrix to the
remaining tooth structure on the cervical region of the
proximal surface
5Prevent the extrusion of the restorative material in the
gingival margin of the preparation
5Aids to retract the rubber dam and the interdental gingival papilla
5Promotes separation between the adjacent teeth to compensate the thickness of the matrix band
When made of a rigid material, it must have the exact shape
of the interproximal space as it can be observed in . Fig. 8.20a .
The interproximal space has a triangular shape, with the apex
toward the contact point and the base toward the gingival
tissue. Therefore, the wedge must also present a triangular
cross section, being named anatomic wedges ( . Fig. 8.20b ).
The wedges are inserted through the larger embrasure, once
they have a convergence toward the tip. The attempt to insert
the wedge from the smaller embrasure will hinder its complete penetration into the interproximal space. On teeth that
are properly positioned on the arches, the lingual embrasures
are generally the largest ones, with exception between the first and second maxillary molars, where the buccal embrasure is larger. However, if the tooth presents some rotation,
each case in particular must be evaluated, analyzing the
embrasures by looking at them from the occlusal point of
view, checking which one is the largest. The wedges must be
taken into position with a forceps that can produce a firm
grasp, such as the mosquito forceps, preferable with a curved
end to ease the access. The dental tweezer does not allow the
necessary grasp to firmly insert the wedge into its position.
Preferably, the wedges must be used associated with the rubber dam isolation of the operating field. Otherwise, it can fall
into the oral cavity and be aspirate or swallowed.
> The interproximal space has a triangular shape, with
the apex toward the contact point and the base toward
the gingival tissue. Therefore, the wedge should also
present a triangular cross section, being named
anatomic wedges.
Tip
The wedges are inserted through the larger embrasure, once they have a convergence toward the tip. The
attempt to insert the wedge from the smaller embrasure
will hinder its complete penetration into the interproximal space.
To restore a proximal surface of a tooth, a matrix band is
placed between the teeth, and then the restorative material is
applied. As the matrix occupies some space due to its thickness, in case no wedge is used, when the matrix is removed
the space occupied by it will remain opened, resulting on
food impaction ( . Fig. 8.21a–c ).
When a wedge is placed between the matrix and the adjacent tooth, before the application of the restorative material,
besides preventing the extrusion of the material into the cervical region, it promotes the tooth separation to compensate for
the thickness of the matrix band ( . Fig. 8.22a, b – arrows). The
wedges must be positioned in such way that it is held on the
tooth surface below the cavosurface gingival angle, effectively Wedges are pieces of wood, plastic, or elastic material
introduced into the interproximal space, between the
matrix and the proximal surface of the adjacent tooth, to
guarantee the correct restoration of the proximal surface.
ab
.Fig. 8.20 Correct shape of the anatomic wooden wedge. a Shape of the interproximal space – asterisk; b shape of the anatomic wedge
C. R. Pucci et al.
8
pressing the adjacent tooth without deforming the matrix.
When the matrix and the wedge are removed, the teeth come
back to the normal position, and the contact is recovered.
The regular wedges can be made of wood or plastic material. The wooden wedges present the advantage that when
they become wet, absorb a little water and expand, adapting
firmly into the interproximal space. Some manufacturer
offers on the market roughly finished anatomic wooden wedges in a set like a “comb. ” They need to be removed and
finished with an abrasive disc before used, adjusting its size
to the space between the teeth ( . Fig. 8.23a, b ). When finishing the wedges, it is important that after the procedure, it
presents a gradual convergence toward the end, ensuring that
all interproximal space will be filled. The wedge must be
inserted under pressure between the teeth. Therefore, it
should not be so thin that it would not be able to separate the
a
cb
.Fig. 8.21 Importance of the space occupied by the matrix on the
restoration of the proximal contact. a Preparation done removing the
contact with the adjacent tooth. b placement of the matrix without wedge. c restoration performed failing to recreate the interproximal
contact due to the space occupied by the matrix
ab
.Fig. 8.22 Use of the anatomic wedge. a Dental separation to compensate the thickness of the matrix; b proximal contact reestablished
Matrix and Wedge Systems
8
teeth and may fracture. In addition, and it should not have
just a very short convergent tip, as a spear, which would not
be capable to penetrate the space between the teeth. Other
manufacturers produce finished individual wedges, identified by colors according to its several sizes ( . Fig. 8.24a ).
The plastic wedge is made in opaque or transparent material (. Fig. 8.24b ). The clear wedges, also named reflective
wedges, were developed to be used in association with clear
matrix bands, to conduct light to the cervical region of the
proximal surface, on the attempt to direct the polymerization shrinkage vectors toward this region. However, several studies have proved that this does not occur, making this technique each time less used.
The plastic wedges are generally straight and anatomically shaped, similar to the wooden wedges, with a triangular
cross section. However, some manufacturers offer curved
wedges that also follow the contour of the bone crest and the
proximal surface of the teeth, improving the adaptation of
the matrix onto the tooth ( . Fig. 8.24c ). The colors indicate if
they are recommended to restore the mesial or distal sur -
a
cb
.Fig. 8.24 Types of wedges. a Finished wooden wedges. b transparent and opaque plastic wedges. c curved wedges (Curvy – Voco)
ab
.Fig. 8.23 a Roughly finished anatomic wooden wedges supplied as a “comb”; b finishing of the wedge with an abrasive disc
C. R. Pucci et al.
8
faces, and they can be thinner or thicker, depending on the
size of the interproximal space.
> The wedge must separate the adjacent teeth enough
to compensate the thickness of the matrix band. It has
to be inserted under pressure into the interproximal
space. Therefore, it should not be so thin that it would
not be able to separate the teeth and may fracture. In
addition, it should not have just a very short
convergent tip, as a spear, which would not be capable
to penetrate between the teeth.8.4.1 Frequent Mistakes Related to the Use
of Wedges
When using a rigid anatomic wedge, several mistakes can be
done that will seriously compromise the proximal contour of
the restoration, and consequently the health of the periodontal tissue. The most common mistake is to insert the wedge
upside down into the interproximal space ( . Fig. 8.25a ). On
this position, the wedge will deform the matrix, resulting in a
concave proximal contour instead of a convex one, besides
not being able to seal correctly the gingival margin, allowing
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 8.25 Mistakes during the application of wedges. a Inverted
wedge. b wedge above the gingival margin. c wedge with a very
large upper edge. d very high wedge. e very small and loose wedge. f rubber dam penetration inside the preparation. The arrows indicate
the extrusion of the restorative material or defects of the restoration
contour
Matrix and Wedge Systems
8 the extrusion of the material producing overhangs. That will
result in bacterial biofilm growing, gingival inflammation,
and secondary caries lesions. Another very common mistake
is to place the wedge above the cavosurface gingival angle
(. Fig. 8.25b ). Besides hindering the separating effect of the
wedge, it will deform the matrix and the proximal contour of
the restoration, other than allowing the extrusion of the
material and formation of overhangs. The wedges with the
upper edge too large will also result on the concave proximal
contour of the restoration ( . Fig. 8.25c ). If a wedge, besides
having a very large edge, is also very high in occluso-gingival
direction, the matrix will remain far from the proximal sur -
face of the adjacent tooth, and an open contact may also
occur (. Fig. 8.25d ).
The wedges must be inserted into the interproximal space
in such way that they enter under pressure and remain tight
in position. If the wedge is smaller than the necessary,
remaining loose between the teeth, it will not produce the
necessary teeth separation, which allow the extrusion of
restorative material into the gingival sulcus and occurence of
overhangs ( . Fig. 8.25e ). Another mistake that may happen
is the remaining of rubber dam or gingival tissue inside the
gingival wall of the preparation, after the placement of the
matrix and the wedge. On those cases, after the application of
the restorative material and isolation removal, the space
occupied by the dam or gingiva will remain empty, allowing
the growing of bacterial biofilm, postoperative tooth sensitivity, and secondary carious lesions ( . Fig. 8.25f ).
On the other hand, the use of very small wedges in
occluso-gingival dimensions, even though they are tight
between the teeth, may result in the formation of a very large
contact area on the occluso-gingival direction, when the
material is applied, specially in the case of the amalgam, that
is condensed under pressure, reducing the spaces for the gingival papilla and the col ( . Fig. 8.26a, b ). Another very serious mistake occurs when the matrix is not taken beyond the
gingival cavosurface angle over the proximal tooth surface,
and the wedge is applied, pressing the matrix inside the preparation. This will result, besides an inadequate proximal con-tour, in the presence of part of the gingival wall exposed to
the oral cavity, causing postoperative sensitivity and resulting
in bacterial biofilm growing, gingival inflammation, and
carious lesion ( . Fig. 8.27 ).
In . Fig. 8.28a–d , there are radiographic images of the
restorations performed without the correct placement of the
wedges, resulting in overhangs and inadequate proximal
contours.
8.4.2 Elastic Wedges
The elastic wedges were developed to adapt to the proximal
surfaces, promoting a correct positioning of the matrix and
the tooth separation ( . Fig. 8.29a–c ). To be positioned, after
matrix placement, it must be stretched with a clamp forceps
and taken in place ( . Fig. 8.29b, c ). They present different
thicknesses, indicated by colors, depending on the size of the
interproximal space ( . Fig. 8.29a ). It has advantages to easily
adapt to the different anatomic contours of the proximal sur -
face. They present small holes on the central region that
allow, when stretched, to become thin enough to be posiab
.Fig. 8.26 The use of a very short wedge. a Results on a wrong proximal contour b
.Fig. 8.27 Matrix and wedge positioned inside the preparation
C. R. Pucci et al.
8
tioned on the cervical region. They act simultaneously on the
buccal and lingual surfaces, by the presence of the rubber
handles. To remove them, one end must be pulled with for -
ceps to cut the wedge on the central part.
8.5 Challenges for the Correct Use of Matrix
and Wedges
One of the challenging situations to the correct adaptation
of the matrix on the region of the gingival wall happens in
some MOD preparations, where one of the gingival walls is
located more cervically than the others. Taking into account
that the band must touch the proximal tooth surface, beyond
the cavosurface gingival angle of the preparation, what happens is that when the matrix is applied, it will firstly touch
the gingival tissue and sometimes the bone crest on the side
where the cavity is shallower, hindering the matrix to go fur -
ther cervically on the side where the cavity is deeper, leaving
a gap between the matrix and the cavosurface angle
(. Fig. 8.30a ). This happens because the more the carious
lesion or the restoration goes further cervically, the greater
can be the bone resorption on this area, resulting in a bone
unevenness, i.e., the bone crest is higher on the side where the cavity is shallower and lower on the side where the cavity
is deeper. To solve this problem, the matrix band must be
assembled on the matrix retainer and taken in position. The
exact position of the deepest box must be observed and the
matrix removed from the tooth. All the cervical contour of
the matrix, except the area that corresponds to the deepest
box, is cut with scissors, and the matrix is replaced
(. Fig. 8.30b–d ). Then, the wedges are applied and the restoration can be properly made [6 ].
Tip
In case of MOD preparations with too different depth
and uneven bone crests, the band can be cut on the side
of the shallower preparation, allowing a deeper matrix
penetration on the opposite side, corresponding to the
deepest cavity.
Other challenging situations occur on the mesial surface of
the first maxillary premolar. At this place, there is an anatomical peculiarity, where the root bifurcation produces a
fluted (concave) area on the proximal surface. Different cross
ab
cd
.Fig. 8.28 a–d Restorative material overhang on the cervical region and the inadequate proximal contours (arrows)
Matrix and Wedge Systems
8
sections of this kind of tooth is presented in . Fig. 8.31a, b ,
allowing to better visualize this concavity, showing that it
increases cervically.
The more cervically located is the gingival wall of the
preparation, the more the existing concavity hinders the
adequate adaptation of the matrix and wedge on the cavosur -
face margin. That creates a gap between the matrix and the
proximal tooth surface, allowing the extrusion of the restor -
ative material and overhangs ( . Fig. 8.32a ). To solve this
problem, two options are presented. The first is to use a small
cotton ball between the anatomical wedge and the matrix
band, which would press the band toward the external tooth
surface, closing the gingival margin ( . Fig. 8.32b–e ) . For
that, the wedge is placed on the entrance of embrasure, but
before inserting it completely into the interproximal space,
the small cotton ball is positioned between it and the proximal surface of the tooth. When the wedge is completely
inserted, the cotton is forced toward the concave area, pushing the matrix and sealing the cervical region ( . Fig. 8.32e ).
Other technique, known as wedge wedging, consist in using
an oblique wedge on the lingual side, preferably a toothpick
with round cross section or even a small anatomic wedge,
which is inserted between the matrix band and the wedge
already placed. The oblique wedge will press the matrix band
toward the tooth, closing the gap ( . Fig. 8.32f ) [2, 6].Tip
On the mesial surface of first upper premolar, an anatomical concavity can hinder the proper adaptation of
the matrix to the cavosurface angle. In order to improve
the band contact with the margin, a small cotton ball or
an oblique toothpick can be placed between the wedge
and the matrix.
When the space between the adjacent teeth is too wide and
a single wedge is not enough to fill the area, or when the
proximal box is wide in the buccolingual dimensions, the
double wedging technique can be applied. On this technique, one wedge is inserted from buccal embrasures and
another from the lingual, side by side. A melted compound or lightcured gingival barrier can be applied to stabilize the wedges.
In the case of shallow proximal box associated with gingival recession, the wedge will remain significantly apical to the
gingival margin, not properly sealing the matrix. In this
case, the piggyback wedging technique can be used. For that,
one larger wedge is inserted as normally used, while another
smaller wedge (piggyback) is applied above the first one, providing a good adaptation and contour for the matrix.
a b
c
.Fig. 8.29 a Elastic wedges (Elastic wedge – Danville). b Use of the forceps to stretch the wedge. c Elastic wedge in position associated to a
sectional matrix and separation ring
C. R. Pucci et al.
8
8.6 Custom-Made Matrices
In some specific situations, the uses of universal or regular matrices supplied by the manufacturers do not allow
the correct reconstruction of the lost tooth structure.
Therefore, the dentist needs to prepare the special hand-made matrices, which are named individual, anatomic,
or custom-made. One kind of custom-made matrix is the
sectional Sweeney matrix for Class II restorations,
which was already presented in . Fig. 8.7a–f . Other types
will be described next, with their indications and specifications.
a b
cd
.Fig. 8.30 Proximal boxes with different depths in MOD preparations. a The applied matrix is not capable to reach the gingival margin
on the deepest box, due to touching gingival tissue on the shallower side. b cutting of the band preserving the area corresponding to the
deepest box. c matrix ready to use. d matrix properly positioned
a b
.Fig. 8.31 a Concavity on the mesial surface of the maxillary first premolar. b Cross sections of the crown showing the concavity on the mesial
surface which becomes deeper gingivally
Matrix and Wedge Systems
8
8.6.1 Spot-Welded and Riveted Matrix
When restoring the proximal surfaces of posterior teeth, the
straight matrix band attached to the matrix retainer solves
most of the cases. However, in some situations, such as on
cases where the tooth to be restored is also the anchor tooth
with the clamp, or when the clamp in the neighbor tooth touch the matrix retainer/band set, hindering its correct cer -
vical adaptation, the use of the universal matrix is contraindicated. In addition, on the cases of large preparation,
involving one or more lost cusps, the tensile on the band
created by the matrix retainer makes the matrix penetrate
the preparation, hindering the correct anatomic shape restoration. On those cases, the custom-made retainerless spotab
cd
ef
.Fig. 8.32 Techniques to allow a correct adaptation of the matrix to
the mesial surface of the maxillary first premolars. a Use of a wedge
with a conventional shape resulting on a lack of adaptation of the
gingival cavosurface angle. b insertion of a small cotton “ball” with the wedge. c cotton ball being inserted. d , e cotton in position allowing
the correct adaptation of the matrix. f Technique of the oblique wedge
inserted lingually
C. R. Pucci et al.
8
welded or riveted matrices can be used. To make it, a piece of
the straight band is cut and then positioned around the
tooth, drawn taut with flat-nosed pliers or mosquito forceps,
after which the band is removed. The demarcated matrix cir -
cumference can be fastened with a spot-welding device, generally used for the building up orthodontic bands, which
create a welded joint ( . Fig. 8.33). Another option to fasten
the matrix is to use a No. riveting plier as presented in
. Fig. 12.15 .
8.6.2 Window Matrix
On large Class V preparations for amalgam, the direct application of the restorative material is very hard, because when
it is condensed in one side of the preparation, it escapes on
the other, due to the fact that the cavity is large and the axial
wall is convex. To solve this problem, it was proposed the use
of a window matrix. It is prepared applying the universal
matrix around the tooth, using a matrix retainer on the
opposite surface to the one with the preparation, opening a
window on the region that corresponds to the preparation,
but with smaller dimensions. The material is then applied
through the window, allowing to obtain the desired shape of
the restoration. Details about this matrix can be found in
. Fig. 11.15a–o .
8.6.3 Barton Matrix
On compound Class I preparation, the application of amalgam on the lingual or buccal boxes is very difficult. That is
related to the fact that a universal matrix placed around the
tooth is not capable to correctly adapt onto those smooth surfaces, due to its inclination toward the occlusal surface.
Therefore, a small piece of the matrix is placed on the exact
region of the buccal or lingual box, which will be pressed
toward the tooth surface using a wooden wedge. Details
about the preparation of this matrix can be found in
. Fig. 11.14a–u .
8.6.4 Tband Matrix
The T-band matrix can be obtained already shaped from the
manufactures or be prepared by the dentist. The prefabricated band is made of brass or stainless steel and can be
straight or curved. It has two flanges on one tip, which gives
its T-shape ( . Fig. 8.34). The flanges are folded forming a
U-shaped path. The free end of the band is slipped through
the U formation. The flanges are closed, and the free end is
bent or curled to produce a circle and surround the tooth
circumferentially.
The T-band matrix can also be hand made by the dentist,
using a straight band, as can be observed in . Fig. 8.35a–i .
For that, about 6 cm of the matrix strip is used. In one of its
ends, the corners are cut creating a spear-shaped
(. Fig. 8.35a ). Then, a smaller piece of band is cut, with about
1.3 cm, and placed on the flat end of the already cut band,
creating a T-shape ( . Fig. 8.35b ). The ends of the smaller
band are folded, to adapt to the longer strip ( . Fig. 8.35c ).
The flat end of the longer strip is folded with the aid of a
tweezer ( . Fig. 8.35d ) and the smaller strip slide under it
(. Fig. 8.35e ). Then, the matrix is turned upside down
(. Fig. 8.35f ), and the spear-shaped end is pulled and passes
between the smaller and the larger bands, on the opposite
side of the folds ( . Fig. 8.35f , g). The matrix is placed around
the tooth, and the spear end is pulled, adapting to the tooth
contour. Then, it is folded fastening the final position
(. Fig. 8.35h , i). This type of retainerless matrix presents
similar indications to the spot-welded and riveted matrix,
with the advantage that it can be prepared in advance, without the patient on the chair.
8.6.5 S-shaped Matrix
The S-shaped matrix is indicated for restoration of horizontal
slot Class II preparations. In this case, the restorative material
must be applied through the buccal or lingual cavity access,
contraindicating the use of a matrix retainer. A straight
matrix band is shaped like an “S” and applied between the
teeth. A wedge with the heated compound is applied on the
opposite side of the cavity access. More details about this
technique can be seen in . Fig. 11.16 .
.Fig. 8.33 Welding the matrix
Matrix and Wedge Systems
8
ab
cd
e
.Fig. 8.34 a Prefabricated straight T band made of stainless steel or
brass (in the middle). b flanges folded forming a U-shaped path. c the
free end of the band is slipped through the U formation to produce a circle. d the flanges are closed. e the matrix is adjusted around the
tooth and the free end is bent to lock the matrix
C. R. Pucci et al.
8
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 8.35 a–i Technique for preparation of a custom-made T-band matrixMatrix and Wedge Systems
8
Conclusion
This chapter described the definitions, characteristics, and
importance of the matrix and wedge use during restorative
procedures. The different kinds of metallic and plastic matrices (circumferential and sectional) and the matrix retainers
were explained in detail, followed by its indications and techniques of use. The frequent mistakes related to the use of
wedges and the solution for challenging situations were pre -
sented. The various techniques to prepare custom-made
matrices were described. The clinician must know all options
available and its different indications and advantages, being
able to apply the best technique for each clinical situation.
References
1. Anauate Netto C, Fichman DM, Youssef MN. Estudo in vitro da rugosidade superficial e do perfil proximal de amálgamas condensados contra matrizes de aço inoxidável. Rev Odontol da Univ São Paulo [Internet].
;11: –80. https://doi.org/10. /S010306631997000300005. 2. Baratieri LN, Monteiro Junior S, Andrada MA, Ritter AV. Odontologia
Restauradora: Fundamentos e Possibilidades. Santos: São Paulo;
.
3. Gilmore HW, Lund MR. Operative dentistry. Saint Louis: Mosby; .
4. Horsted-Bindslev P , Mjör IA. Modern concepts in operative dentistry.
Copenhaguen: Munksgaard, .
5. Mondelli J, Ishikiriama A, Galan JJ, Navarro MF. Dentística Oper -
atória. Sarvier: São Paulo; .
6. Roberson TM, Heymann H, Swift EJ. Sturdevant’s art and science of
operative dentistry. 5th ed. St. Louis: Mosby; .
7. Summitt JB, Robbins JW. Amalgam restoration. In: Schwartz RS,
Summitt JB, Robbins JW, editors. Fundam oper dent a contemp
approach. Illlinois: Quintessence Publishing; .
8. Sweeney JT. The class V amalgam restoration. J Am Dent Assoc.
;29: –4. https://doi.org/10. /jada.archive. . .
9. Versluis A, Tantbirojn D, Douglas WH. Do dental composites always
shrink toward the light? J Dent Res. ; https://doi.org/10. /0
.
g
ih
.Fig. 8.35 (continued)
C. R. Pucci et al.
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG
C. R. G. Torres (ed.), Modern Operative Dentistry, Textbooks in Contemporary Dentistry,
https://doi.org/10. / -3- - -0_9289 9
Protection of the Dentin-Pulp
Complex
Adriana Cristina de Mello Torres, Ana Paula Martins Gomes,
Claudio Hideki Kubo, and Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres
9.1 Introduction –
9.2 Understanding the Dentin-Pulp Complex –
9.2.1 Dentin –
9.2.2 Pulp –
9.3 Defense Mechanisms of the Dentin-Pulp Complex –
9.4 Assessment of Pulp Condition –
9.4.1 Anamnesis –
9.4.2 Extraoral Clinical Exam –
9.4.3 Intraoral Clinical Exam –
9.4.4 Radiographic Examination –
9.5 Diagnostic Hypothesis –
9.6 Origins of Pulpal Alterations –
9.6.1 Carious Lesion –
9.6.2 Tooth Preparation –
9.6.3 Occlusal Trauma –
9.6.4 Restorative Procedure –
9.7 Factors Affecting the Dentin-Pulp Complex Protection –
9.8 Cleaning of the Tooth Preparations –
9.8.1 Demineralizing Cleaning Agents –
9.8.2 Non-demineralizing Cleaning Agents –
9.9 Protective Materials –
9.9.1 Cavity Varnish –
9.9.2 Desensitizing Agents –
9.9.3 Adhesive Systems –
9.9.4 Zinc Oxide-Eugenol Cement –
9.9.5 Glass Ionomer Cement –
9.9.6 Calcium Hydroxide –
9.9.7 Mineral Trioxide Aggregate (MTA) –
9.9.8 Materials Containing Bioactive Molecules –
9.10 Techniques for Protection of the Dentin-Pulp Complex –
9.10.1 Indirect Pulp Protection –
9.10.2 Direct Pulp Protection –
References –
9
Learning Objectives
The learning objectives of this chapter are related the follow -
ing topics:
5The histology and physiology of the dentin-pulp
complex
5Defense mechanisms of the dentin-pulp complex
5How to perform the assessment of pulp condition and
create the diagnostic hypothesis
5What are the origins of pulpal alterations
5Factors affecting the dentin-pulp complex protection
5How to perform the cleaning of the tooth preparations
5To understand the characteristics of all protective
materials
5To perform different techniques for protection of the
dentinpulp complex
9.1 Introduction
Several factors can produce aggressions to the teeth, such as
the carious lesions, trauma, non-carious lesions of erosive
tooth wear, abrasions, abfraction, etc. Regardless of the cause,
the restoration must recreate the shape, function, and esthetic
of the tooth structure, avoiding producing alterations to the
biological equilibrium on the pulp tissue. Therefore, the procedures of the tooth preparation must be carefully performed,
avoiding overheating or exposure of the pulpal tissue. The
restorative material applied must not be an irritation source
to the pulp, but it must protect it from the external aggression. This way, the knowledge about the dentin-pulp complex
physiology, as well of the materials and restorative techniques, are essential to perform a minimally invasive dentistry, with minimum intervention and a maximal
preservation of the tooth structure.
9.2 Understanding the Dentin-Pulp
Complex
The structural components of the dentin-pulp complex
are the dentin, composed by the mineralized dentin
and the non-mineralized predentin, and the pulp, which is
a type of loose connective tissue. The dentin and the pulp
have the same embryonic origin, working as a single functional unit . Even though there are differences of
structure and composition between the dentin and pulp,
those tissues are closely connected, in a way that physiopathological responses in one tissue will also affect the
other [26, ]. The close relation between the dentin and
the pulp can be observed since the developing of the dental organ, when the odontoblastic cells from the pulp are
responsible for the formation, organization, and maturation of the collagen fiber and proteoglycans for the dentin
formation. On the other hand, the beginning of the dentinogenesis determines the differentiation of the dental
papilla into pulp . > Dentin and pulp are closely connected, in a way that
physiopathological responses in one tissue will also
affect the other. Therefore, they form an integrated
system that is called the dentin-pulp complex.
The great interrelation between the pulpal tissue, represented
by the odontoblasts, and the dentin, complicates the separation of the physiopathological phenomena that occurs in one
or other tissue. Therefore, the pulp and the dentin form an
integrated system that is generally named dentinpulp complex. The cut of the dentin tissue actually means the cut of a
living tissue, formed by mineralized and cellular parts, represented by the odontoblast process inside the dentin tubules.
A minimal intervention on the most external part of the dentin is immediately noticed by the pulpal tissue, and a corresponding response, of local or general magnitude, starts to
develop .
9.2.1 Dentin
The dentin is an avascular mineralized connective tissue. It
is composed of approximately 45% of inorganic material
(hydroxyapatite and other ions), 30% of organic material
(collagen, lipids, glycosaminoglycan, and other substances
in smaller quantities), and 25% of water by volume. Its composition varies with the age due to the constant formation
of new mineralized tissue, even after the complete tooth
formation [ ].
The basic structural components of the dentin are the
following: The odontoblast with the odontoblast process, the
dentin tubule, the periodontoblastic space, the intratubular
dentin matrix (peritubular), and the intertubular dentin.
The odontoblasts are peripheral cells which are responsible
for the formation of the dentin tissue and for the transmission of several stimuli to the pulpal tissue, because they are
in direct contact with the pulp. The dentin tubules hold the
odontoblast processes and are formed during the dentinogenesis ( . Fig. 9.1). The diameter and the volume of the
tubule’s lumen vary according to the age of the tooth and the
location inside the dentin. The closer the dentin is to the
pulp, the greater is the amount and diameter of the dentin
tubules ( . Fig. 9.2a, b).
The periodontoblastic space is located between the tubule
wall and the odontoblast process. This space has tissular fluid
and some organic components, such as thin collagen fibers.
The intratubular dentin is deposited on the tubule walls, and
it is characterized by its high mineral content and the lack of
the organic components. The intertubular dentin is located
between the dentin tubules, around the intratubular dentin
. Despite its high degree of mineralization, it is rich in
organic matrix composed of collagen fibers surrounded by
amorphous substances ( . Fig. 6.5) .
The tissular fluid present in the pulp is under pressure due to the blood circulation, and it tends to overflow
through the dentin tubules if they are cut, being called dentinal fluid. The intrapulpal pressure, in normal conditions, is Protection of the Dentin-Pulp Complex
9estimated to be 25–30 mmHg, transferring part of this force
to the dentinal fluid . Therefore, the dentin has a certain
permeability that varies according to some factors, such as
the proximity to the pulp, age, and the degree of dentin mineralization [ , ]. The dentin permeability is propor -
tional to the number and the diameter of the tubules;
consequently the deeper the cavity is, the greater it will be
. In . Fig. 9.3, there is an extracted tooth in which
occlusal surface was ground flat until the dentin is exposed.
After that, it was acid etched to open the tubules. As the
pulpal chamber follows the external anatomy of the tooth,
on the region corresponding to the cusp tips, the pulpal
horns are closer to the surface, and the dentin is deeper
. The tooth was connected to a device to create a simulated pulpal pressure. After some time, on the areas close to
the pulpal horns, it was observed a greater overflow of liquid, showing the higher permeability at this region. The movement of the dentinal fluid inside the tubules due to the
exposure of the dentin by the operative procedures, traumas,
caries, and others is called transdentinal permeability or
simply dentin permeability [72, ].
> The dentin close to the pulpal tissue has tubules with
larger diameter, in higher amount, resulting in
increased dentin permeability.
Between the mineralized dentin and the odontoblast layer,
there is the predentin, a layer of non-mineralized matrix with
about 10–20 μm thickness. It is formed by the odontoblasts
and consists mostly of collagen fibers and proteoglycan. The
predentin exists not only during the dentinogenesis, but also
it is found covering the circumpulpar dentin of the teeth with
complete rhizogenesis and in function, once there is a continuous and slow deposition of dentin during the entire life of
the tooth .
The dentin can be classified into three basic types: primary, secondary, and tertiary . The primary dentin is
.Fig. 9.1 Microphotography of the dentin-pulp complex showing the
odontoblasts (black arrow) and the odontoblast process inside the
dentin tubules (red arrow). Mallory’s trichrome stain, × magnification. (Photography kindly supplied by Prof. Dr. Miguel Angel Castillo
Salgado, Professor of Histology, ICT, São José dos Campos – UNESP)
ab
.Fig. 9.2 Relation between the diameter and the number of tubules and the proximity of the pulpal chamber. a Superficial dentin with less
tubules; b deep dentin with more tubules
.Fig. 9.3 Regions of higher dentin permeability on the deeper areas
close to the pulpal horns
A. C. de Mello Torres et al.
9
formed mostly before the tooth eruption and presents a regular tubule disposition. The secondary dentin is formed due to
the low intensity stimuli, resulting from the normal biological function, during the clinical use of the tooth after its eruption. It presents narrower and slightly sinuous tubules. It is
deposited all over the pulpal surface and especially on the
roof and on the floor of the pulpal chamber . As a result of
the continuous deposition of secondary dentin, the volume
of the pulpal chamber is each time smaller with the passing
of the years ( . Fig. 6.13a , b).
> As a result of the continuous deposition of secondary
dentin, the volume of the pulpal chamber is reduced
with the aging.
The tertiary dentin is formed when there are pulp irritations,
such as caries, tooth preparations, erosion, abrasion, and
thermal, mechanical, chemical, or electrical stimulus, among
others. It is located on underlying irritation zones and presents scarce, tortuous, or absent dentin tubules [48, 85, ,
]. In relation to this point, it is important to make distinctions between the tertiary dentin formed by the primary
odontoblasts, and the ones formed by cells differentiated in odontoblasts, after the death of the original odontoblastic
layers due to aggressions suffered by the tooth. The tertiary
dentin formed by the pre-existing primary odontoblasts that
survives the moderate irritation is called reactionary dentin,
while the dentin formed by newly differentiated odontoblastlike cells formed due to the death of the original odontoblasts,
from a pulpal progenitor cell, is called reparative dentin
. The formation of the tertiary dentin, reactional or
reparative, represents a defense mechanism that is important
for the dentin-pulp complex ( . Fig. 9.4a–c ). The interface
between the tertiary reparative dentin and the dentin formed
by primary odontoblasts is important, once the tubules
between both types of dentin do not communicate directly,
forming a barrier against the entrance of some aggressive
agents in direction to the pulp ( . Fig. 9.4c ).
Inside the dentin tubules, it can be observed the presence
of the odontoblastic process responsible for the formation of
the dentin matrix, besides the dentinal fluid and, occasionally, amielinic free nerve ending . Every stimulus, no
matter if it is mechanical, physical, chemical, or biological,
applied on the external surface of the tubule, causes the
movement of the dentinal fluid that reflects on the free nerve
ending that occasionally penetrates slightly on the dentin
a
cb
.Fig. 9.4 a Presence of tertiary dentin on the region of the pulp
chamber roof on tooth with attrition (arrows); b tooth where the
defective restoration was removed, showing the presence of the
tertiary dentin on the region of the mesiobuccal pulp horn (arrow)
exposed during the preparation; c microphotography showing the difference between the secondary dentin (SD) with regular tubules and
the tertiary dentin (TD) with irregular deposition of the matrix and
tubules. Mallory’s trichrome stain, × magnification. (Microphotography kindly supplied by Prof. Dr. Miguel Angel Castillo Salgado, Professor of Histology, ICT, São José dos Campos – UNESP)Protection of the Dentin-Pulp Complex
9tubules or on the ones located on the peripheral region of the
pulp. This explanation, named hydrodynamic theory, was
stated by Brännstrom and is the most accepted one to explain
the dentin sensitivity .
9.2.2 Pulp
The dental pulp can be defined as a highly specialized loose
connective tissue, with an ectomesenchymal origin, sur -
rounded by the dentin wall, occupying the pulpal chamber
and the root canal. It is directly connected to the circulatory
and nervous system through the neurovascular bundle that
enters through the apical foramen . The specialization of
the pulpal connective tissue is mainly due to cells that are
disposed on its periphery, the odontoblasts, which are
responsible for the formation of the dentin matrix . The
pulp is composed of 25% of organic material and 75% of
water. It is basically formed by the following structural elements: progenitor cells (odontoblasts, fibroblasts, and undifferentiated mesenchymal cells or stem cells), defense cells
(lymphocytes and macrophages), amorphous interstitial
substances (proteoglycans and glycoproteins), and interstitial fibrous substance (collagen fibers) . On the study of
the pulp structure, the dental pulp can be divided into two
zones: peripheral, composed of the odontoblastic and
subodontoblastic layers, and central core, composed mostly
by vessels and nerves ( . Fig. 9.5). The most external layer of
the pulp, called odontoblastic, is formed by the cell bodies of
the odontoblasts, located underlying the predentin. The
main function of the odontoblasts is the production of dentin . Below the odontoblastic layer, there is the cell-free
zone of Weil, rich in blood capillaries, amielinic nerve fiber
network (Raschkow plexus), and the cytoplasmic process of
the fibroblasts.Below the cell-free zone, there is a cell-rich zone, composed of fibroblasts, mesenchymal undifferentiated cells
(pre-odontoblasts), macrophages, and lymphocytes. When
there is the death of the odontoblasts, there is an increase of
the mitosis on the cellular zones and the migration of those
cells toward the odontoblastic layer, and this is the beginning
of the odontoblastic layer recovery process after pulpal damage [ ]. This process is possible due to the capacity of the
mesenchymal cells to differentiate into odontoblast-like cells
and, consequently, to reactivate the reparative capacity of
pulp on the injured region . The central core of the pulp
has thicker blood vessels and nerves surrounded by connective tissue rich in fibroblasts, as well mesenchymal undiffer -
entiated cells.
The arterioles and venules that enter and exit the pulpal
cavity through the foramens and the apical ramifications
create the rich vascular supply of the dental pulp. Following
the track of the blood vessels, there is an abundant nerve
supply, originating from the trigeminal nerve. The nervous
fibers that enter the pulp are mielinic and mediate the pain
sensations caused by the external agents, while the amielinic
fibers are associated with the blood vessels, having, among
other functions, the vasomotor control. Those fibers are
basically classified into two types, according to the location,
function, diameter, and speed of nervous impulse conduction: A delta and C fibers. On the peripheral zone, there are
the A delta fibers, which are mielinic and thermoreceptors
for cold, with high-speed conduction of the nervous impulse
and not related to the tissue damage. On the central zone,
next to the blood vessels are the C fibers, amielinic, thermoreceptors for heat, with low speed of nervous impulse conduction and related to the tissue damage (inflammatory
process).
The dental pulp has four basic functions: formative,
nutritive, sensory, and defense . The formative function is related to the formation of the dentin during the
entire life of the tooth, being the most important one. The
nutritive function is related to its rich vascularization, by
the entrance of the nutrients and oxygen through the vessels and exit of the tissue metabolic waste. The sensory
function is characterized by the capacity of the pulp to
respond with pain to different aggressive agents, by means
of the mielinic and amielinic nervous fibers. The defense
function may be observed when the pulp defends itself
from the aggressive stimuli with the formation of sclerotic
or tertiary dentin .
The dental pulp changes with the time due to the aging
physiological process. Those changes include the modification of a young tissue (rich in cells and poor in fibers) to an
old tissue (poor in cells and rich in fibers), that is, changes
from the loose connective tissue to dense connective tissue.
Those changes are important from the clinical point of view,
because the defense capability of an old pulp is smaller than
the one of a young pulp and the prognostic for keeping
of the pulp vitality after the direct protection of the dentinpulp complex may be reduced. Y oung patients that submitted
their teeth to several “aggressive” stimuli (caries, trauma,
.Fig. 9.5 Microphotography of the dentin-pulp complex showing
the odontoblastic layer (OL), acellular zone of Weil (AZ), cell-rich zone
(CZ), and pulp central region (CR). Mallory’s trichrome stain, ×
magnification. (Microphotography kindly supplied by Prof. Dr. Miguel
Angel Castillo Salgado, Professor of Histology, ICT, São José dos
Campos – UNESP)
A. C. de Mello Torres et al.
9
smoking, among others) throughout their lives may lead to
the reduction of the of pulp tissue defense capability by the
aging of the connective tissue.
> The dental pulp changes with the time due to the
aging physiological process. Those changes are
important from the clinical point of view, because the
defense capability of an old pulp is smaller than the
one of a young pulp, and the prognostic for keeping of
the pulp vitality after some dental treatments may be
reduced.
9.3 Defense Mechanisms of the Dentin-Pulp
Complex
The dentin-pulp complex can suffer changes when
exposed to different types of external aggressors, such as
the dental caries, traumas with or without tooth fracture,
tooth preparations, attrition, abrasion, erosive tooth wear,
restorative materials, orthodontic movement, and acid
etching. The dental pulp tries to block those aggressors by
means of three defense mechanisms: dentin sclerosis,
deposition of tertiary reactionary and/or reparative dentin, and pulpal inflammation. The response of the dentinpulp complex to the aggressors depends basically on the
pulpal condition and the maintenance of the pulp vitality.
The maintenance of the dentin-pulp complex vitality is
essential, because it is responsible for the response to the
external stimuli.
> The dental pulp tries to block the aggressors by means
of dentin sclerosis, deposition of tertiary dentin, and
pulpal inflammation.
Under external aggressions, first, the tissue responds with
local tubular sclerosis by deposition of intratubular dentin on
the underlying region to the carious lesions, which reduces
the diameter of the dentin tubules [16, 47, , ]. Clinically, the tubular sclerosis results in the darkening of dentin
color (. Fig. 9.16a , b). The tubular sclerosis is produced by
light to moderate irritating agents, such as slow progression
carious lesions, moderate trauma after tooth preparation,
abrasion, erosion, attrition, and aging. The tubular sclerosis
will not happen if the odontoblasts have previously been
destroyed. When the aggression is too intense, the odontoblasts die and the corresponding tubules are referred as dead
tracts.
The second line of defense of the dentin-pulp complex
is a deposition of tertiary reactional dentin, with the intention to increase the distance between the aggressor agent
and the pulpal tissue . The structure of the deposited
dentin matrix depends on the activity of the carious lesion.
The more active the lesion is, the more irregular the formed
tertiary dentin will be . This tertiary dentin generally
presents more sinuous and less numerous tubules than the
primary dentin, and sometimes they are completely absent (. Fig. 9.4c). It is characterized by being more mineralized
and less sensitive than the primary dentin due to the lack
of continuity of the tubules. If the odontoblasts are
destroyed due to external aggressors, they are replaced by
the mesenchymal undifferentiated cells that differentiate
themselves in odontoblastlike cells and secrete dentin
matrix. They may not take the column-like and polygonal
shape of the odontoblasts but a cubic or flat appearance.
The resulting dentin has an interrupted continuity of the
dentin tubules, acting as barrier against the penetration of
external irritants .
The pulp inflammation must be understood as a defensive response that has by objective to limit the aggressive
agent. The inflammation leads to vascular alterations, as the
vascular dilatation and the increase of vascular permeability. The anatomic location of the pulp, among hard and nonelastic walls, associated to the lack of the collateral
circulation is a factor that makes the pulp expansion difficult, which is observed after the increase of the blood flow
(vascular dilatation) and vascular permeability, resulting in
the increase of the pulpal pressure. On the vascular congestion, part of the interstitial liquid is pushed outward with
the intention to accommodate the increase of blood flow. At
the first moment, there is an increase of the arterial flow
(arterial or active hyperemia), and at the next stage, there is
a reduction of the venous flow (venous or passive hyper -
emia), producing the plasma exudation and the cell migration, characterizing the acute inflammation. However, the
inflammation is a more complex phenomenon, controlled
by the presence of chemical mediators that act on the
defined stages and with specific functions. The pain is a consequence of the pressure increasing on the tissue due to the
hyperemia, the edema, and the release of the inflammatory
mediators (pain mediators).
> The pulp initially responds to the different stimuli with
the dentin formation. If the intensity and the
frequency of the stimuli are below the defense
capacity of the pulp, there will be an inflammation
with different intensities but with a reversibility
potential of the inflammatory process. If the intensity
and the frequency of the aggression are above the
defense capacity of the pulp, there will be an
irreversible inflammation. This irreversible
inflammation can lead to the pulp necrosis.
The defense mechanisms of the dentin-pulp complex, even
when they are effective on the maintenance of the pulp vitality, will have as a natural consequence the pulp aging process
. At this case, there is a reduction of cellularity and on the
number of the vessels and nerves on the pulpal tissue. Consequently, there will be a reduction of the reparative capacity
after the conservative treatments, such as the pulp capping
and pulpotomy, which will be described later. On those situations, the treatment planning includes a thorough evaluation of the pulp condition, which will determine the clinical
treatment to be performed.Protection of the Dentin-Pulp Complex
99.4 Assessment of Pulp Condition
The diagnosis of the pulp condition represents the base for
proposing the treatment, especially when the patient’s chief
complaint is related to pain. The pain is the most frequent
reason patients seek dental treatment. It is an important reference for the dentist to reach a diagnosis, since there is no
clear relation between the clinical symptoms and the histopathological findings. Therefore, the histopathological results
cannot be extrapolated to the clinical conditions of treatment. For this reason, nowadays, the diagnosis is defined by
the clinical conditions (pain) of the pathological pulp situation [36, 94, 97].
The challenge is to recognize the etiological factor responsible for the pain on the oral structures, which is fundamental for diagnosis and the success of the dental treatment .
For the diagnosis of the pulpal condition, it is not only necessary to understand the biological responses of the pulp, but
also the interpretation of those responses. The diagnosis of
the pulp condition can be divided in phases: anamnesis,
intraand extraoral clinical exam, pulp testings, complementary testings, and radiographic examination.
9.4.1 Anamnesis
The anamnesis represents the subjective examination per -
formed through an interview to interrogate the patient,
which directs the investigation in relation to the signals and
symptoms associated with the pathological process. The
clinical history must be collected and registered in an organized manner, using objective and defined questions. The
anamnesis involves the analysis of the data obtained separately and interpreted in an associated manner to integrate
the diagnosis process . The anamneses are composed of
the chief complaint, history of the current and previous disease, and the medical history of the patient. In some cases,
the interaction with the doctor may be necessary to deter -
mine the general state and the medications used by the
patient, assuring adequate planning and treatment. It is
essential to ask the patient where and when the pain happens and if it is continuous, throbbing, spontaneous, or
provoked.
9.4.2 Extraoral Clinical Exam
As a basic protocol for an extraoral exam, the dentist must
observes the patient since when entering into the office.
Signals of physical limitations, as well signals of facial asymmetry, may be present. A visual exam must be performed to
determine if there is edema, extraoral fistulas, lacerations,
excoriations, scarring, bruising, etc. The palpation of the face
and the neck allows the dentist to determine if really there is
an edema and if it is localized or diffused, firm, or fluctuating
(. Fig. 9.6 ) .9.4.3 Intraoral Clinical Exam
The intraoral clinical exam represents the objective exam
of the signals that identify one specific disease . The
visual observation of the soft and hard tissues, associated
with the physical inspection (by means of the clinical mir -
ror, exploratory and periodontal probes), allows the identification of the carious lesions, crown and/or root fractures,
presence of fistulas, restoration fractures, periodontal
pockets, and pulp exposure. The intraoral clinical exam is
not conclusive to reach a diagnosis about the pulp condition, and it must be associated with other clinical testings
(. Fig. 9.7a–d ).
9.4.3.1 Palpation
The palpation allows determining, using the tactile perception, the consistence and texture of the soft tissues, adher -
ence, mobility, and smoothness, besides the presence of the
painful areas. On the periapical abscess without fistula, the
palpation allows verifying its stage of evolution (initial, in
evolution, acute) and if it presents a fluctuation sign
(. Fig. 9.8) . When it is pressed, the region corresponding to the lesion produces a painful sensation.
9.4.3.2 Percussion
The percussion consists of a method in which the dentist
applies soft tapping on the tooth crown with the aid of the
handle of a clinical mirror, on the vertical and horizontal
directions ( . Fig. 9.9a, b) . Even though it is a simple
testing, the percussion is important to find the tooth
responsible for a pain of endodontic origin, or due to a premature occlusal contact. The positive response to the vertical percussion (the presence of pain sensation) may be
associated with periapical alterations while to horizontal
percussion can be associated with periodontal alterations
. One positive response to the percussion testing must
always be confirmed by pulp sensitivity testing and radiographic exams.
.Fig. 9.6 Extraoral clinical exam showing a chronic draining fistula
A. C. de Mello Torres et al.
9
9.4.3.3 Periodontal Probing and Mobility
Testing
The periodontal probing allows to evaluate the presence or
not of the periodontal pockets, gingival exudation, or even
drainage via the gingival sulcus. The dentist must perform,
whenever necessary, the indicated periodontal treatment for
each clinical situation ( . Fig. 9.10a ). The tooth mobility test-ing must also be performed during the intraoral exam of the
patient. It can be performed by the digital palpation or with
the aid of dental instruments ( . Fig. 9.10b ).
9.4.3.4 Transillumination
It consists in the application of an intense light on the lingual
surface of a tooth. In the case of dental trauma, the transillumination is important on the diagnosis of fractures or
cracks (. Fig. 9.11). On the tooth with necrotic pulp, gener -
ally the shadow of the pulpal chamber appears to be darker in
relation to the rest of the crown, due to the decomposition of
the pulpal tissue. On the teeth with vital pulp, this difference
is not too evident.
9.4.3.5 Pulp Sensitivity Testing
The pulp sensitivity can be evaluated using thermal (cold
and heat) and/or electric testing. The pulp sensitivity testing aids on the differentiation of the teeth with normal
pulps to the ones with pathologically altered pulps, especially on the cases of pulp necrosis, when the other teeth
are used as control. Clinical studies were done to evaluate
the performance of thermal and electrical testing on the
determination of the pulp vitality . It was observed
that 97% of the teeth which responded positively to the
ab
cd
.Fig. 9.7 Intraoral clinical exam visually analyzing the soft and hard tissues. a Fistula (arrow); b darkened teeth associated with the pulp necrosis; c
carious lesions; d fractured teeth showing a pink discoloration of the dentin due to the thin layer of remaining dentin over the pulp
.Fig. 9.8 Palpation of the periapical regionProtection of the Dentin-Pulp Complex
9
testing presented pulp vitality, verified through the direct
visual inspection of the pulp chamber. However, the results
of the thermal testing must be interpreted with caution,
because even though they are noninvasive, objective, with a low cost, and reproducible, those testings indirectly
monitor the pulp vitality through the evaluation of the
pulp nervous response, and not of the pulpal blood flow
. The thermal testing has a limited value to the diagnosis of the pulpal condition on the tooth with incomplete
root formation and large apical foramen. On those cases,
for the correct diagnosis, it must be considered the presence of irreversible pulpitis symptoms or periapical periodontitis; clinical signals of periapical infection (edema,
sensitivity to percussion, mobility, and fistula); bone loss
detected radiographically; progressive root resorption; and
delay on the root development when compared with the
adjacent teeth .
Tip
Almost all teeth which responded positively to the pulp
sensitivity testing presented pulp vitality. However, the
thermal testing has a limited value on the tooth with
incomplete root formation and large apical foramen, and
other analyses are required.
ab
.Fig. 9.9 a Vertical percussion with the handle of a mirror; b horizontal percussion
ab
.Fig. 9.10 a Periodontal probing; b tooth mobility testing
.Fig. 9.11 Transillumination showing the cracks on the tooth
crown
A. C. de Mello Torres et al.
9
Understanding that the inflammatory pulp alterations are
related to vascular changes, agents that cause modification
on the blood flow (vasoconstriction or vasodilation) are
capable to produce stimulation on the nervous termination, characterizing the possible clinical situation of the
tissue (normal or inflamed, but still vital). However, several agents are capable to stimulate the sensitivity on the
nervous termination, which will not necessarily certify
that the tooth is vital. The nervous fibers are the last ones
to suffer degeneration and, on the teeth with pulpal necrosis, can sometimes still respond with sensitivity when
stimulated [ 53].
> The nervous fibers are the last ones to suffer
degeneration and, even on the teeth with pulpal
necrosis, can sometimes still respond with sensitivity
when stimulated.
Cold Test
The thermal stimulations of the pulp with cold can be per -
formed with an ice stick or cotton pellet soaked in a volatile
refrigerant, such as ethyl chloride, tetrafluoroethane (Endo
Ice®, Hygenic), dichlorodifluoromethane (DDM), carbon
dioxide (dry ice or carbon dioxide snow), or a propane/
butane/isobutane gas mixture (Endo Frost, Roeko)
(. Fig. 9.12a , b). Those agents promote a decrease of the
intrapulpal temperature, stimulating pulp nervous terminations due to vascular changes (vasoconstriction), causing
pain. The greater the temperature reduction, the greater the
stimulus .
During the application of the cold test, cotton roll isolation must be used. The test must be initiated on the adjacent teeth or even on the analog tooth of that under
suspicion of alteration, from posterior to anterior teeth, on
the facial surface, and, finally, on the suspected tooth. The
time of application of the cold test may vary from 1 to 4 s
[53, 94]. The absence of painful response after the application of the thermal stimulus may indicate that the pulp is
necrotic.Heat Test
On the thermal testing performed with heat, a heated guttapercha stick is applied over the labial surface of the anterior
teeth or the occlusal surface of the posterior ones . On
this test, it is difficult to precisely control the temperature
during the application. It is important that before the application, the tooth is lubricated with saliva or petroleum jelly, so
that the gutta-percha does not stick to the surface. In the case
of a positive response, the heat must be immediately removed.
The excessive and prolonged heat must be avoided, which
may cause irreversible pulp alterations ( . Fig. 9.13a , b) .
The testing of the pulp sensitivity to with cold does not
aggravate the situation of a normal or inflamed pulp.
However, the opposite may be observed with the heat test,
which should not be applied as a routine on pulps with nor -
mal characteristics . The heat test is used in situations
where it is required to establish a differential diagnosis, when
the tooth with the symptoms is not easily identified. Due to
the fact that heating can promote vasodilation, on the teeth
with symptomatic pulp inflammation, depending on the
extension of the process, the painful response to the heat can
become intense and immediate.
> The testing of the pulp sensitivity with cold does not
aggravate the situation of a normal or inflamed pulp.
However, the opposite may be observed with the heat
test, which should not be applied as a routine on pulps
with normal characteristics.
Electric Pulp Test
The electric test allows the evaluation of the pulp response to
electrical stimulation over the nervous fibers on the pulp. The
objective of this test is to stimulate the pulp sensitivity, but as
the thermal tests, it does not give information over the blood
supply, a determinant factor for the vitality .
The electric devices used for pulp sensitivity testing use
different types of electrical current, and the high frequency is
the most adequate, in which graduations may be regulated on
a continuous mode. The positive response to the electrical
ab
.Fig. 9.12 Cold test. a Application of the Endo-Frost volatile refrigerant spray (Roeko) with a little cotton pellet; b touching of the small frozen
pellet on the tooth to be evaluatedProtection of the Dentin-Pulp Complex
9
test is noticed by the patients as a heating or tingling sensation, that disappears after the removal of the electrode
(. Fig. 9.14) . The absence of response to the electrical
test on the cases of vital pulp may indicate a false-negative
response, such as on the cases of traumas, calcifications on
the root canal, incomplete root formation, patients that used
analgesics or tranquilizers, or even defects on the device [33,
, ].
Test Cavity Preparation
The objective of this test is to evaluate the presence of painful
response during the cutting of the dentin. It should be used
if there is still doubt or inconclusive results about the pulp
condition, after the use of the sensitivity testing to cold. On
this testing, the dentin exposed by a caries lesion is removed
with excavators or large diameter burs, without the use of
anesthesia. The lack of painful response may indicate pulpal
necrosis .
Local Anesthetic Test
Sometimes, the symptoms are poorly referred or localized,
and the patient has a difficulty to describe whether the pain originated in the upper or lower arch. In addition, during the
clinical examination, there is not a clear indication of the
tooth with pulpal problem, and the results of thermal tests
are not clear. On those cases, the area of the most suspected
tooth can receive anesthesia, to evaluate if the painful sensation disappears. In case of a negative response, the next suspicion tooth or area also receives anesthesia, until the affected
tooth is determined.
9.4.4 Radiographic Examination
The radiographic examination is a complementary resource
used for the diagnosis of the pulpal condition, which allows
the evaluation of the tooth mineralized structure and the apical and periapical regions. However, in some situations, the
radiographic appearance of a pathological process may be
very subjective. Therefore, the radiographic image is an
important method but only complementary to the diagnosis.
When not associated with anamnesis, clinical examination,
and pulp sensitivity testing, the radiographic examination
alone may lead to a wrong interpretation about normality or
disease.
> When not associated with anamnesis, clinical
examination, and pulp sensitivity testing, the
radiographic examination alone may lead to a wrong
interpretation about normality or disease.
Several factors may influence the quality of the radiographic
interpretation, including the dentist’s ability when taking
the radiography, quality of the film, X-ray radiation source,
film processing, and the way that the radiography is visualized. Controlling all those variables may be a hard challenge,
but it is essential to obtain a reasonable radiographic inter -
pretation .
Besides the conventional radiography, direct digital
images can be obtained with intraoral sensors. The digital
radiography does not use films and does not need a chemical
ab
.Fig. 9.13 Heat test. a Heating of the gutta-percha stick over the flame; b touching the stick on the tooth to be evaluated
.Fig. 9.14 Device for electric pulp test. (Digitest Pulp Tester, Parkell
Inc.)
A. C. de Mello Torres et al.
9
processing. A sensor is used to capture the image created
through a radiation source. This sensor is attached directly or
indirectly to a computer that interprets the signal and converts it into a digital image using specific software, allowing
its exhibition and improvement. The image is stored and may
be revised whenever necessary. The quality of diagnosis using
digital radiography is comparable, but not superior to the
conventional radiographic film, when properly exposed and
processed [52, 87].
However, the exact pulp condition cannot be obtained
by radiographic examination alone. On cases of reversible
and irreversible pulpal alteration, the radiographic examination may show the presence of carious lesion or defective
restorations, but the apical periodontal ligament may be
within normal limits or only slightly thickened, with an
intact lamina dura . However, when the pulp is necrotic,
the examination may show the breaking of the lamina dura
and the presence of the periapical lesions.
9.5 Diagnostic Hypothesis
The diagnosis must be understood as a dynamic process, per -
formed with integrated stages (subjective and objective
exams, clinical testing, and radiographic examination).
Finishing the initial evaluation phase, the dentist must establish the diagnostic hypothesis, interpreting the collected data
to plan and execute the treatment. The treatment to be per -
formed (conservative or radical) will be based on the diagnosis of the pulpal condition, i.e., evaluating whether the pulp is
vital or not.
The odontogenic pain may basically have three origins:
exposed dentin, pulpal inflammation, and periapical inflammation. Some clinical characteristics of pain collaborate dur -
ing the establishments of the diagnostic hypothesis. Among
them, it can be pointed the location of the pain, when it
appears, its duration, frequency, and intensity. The dentin
pain is generally acute and easily localized, provoked by specific stimulus, such as mechanic (touch), physical (cold or
heat), chemical (acids), osmotic (sugar), and dehydration
. The pain occurs due to the movement of liquid inside
the tubules, creating shear forces that stimulate the free nerve
terminations, disappearing as soon as the causing agent is
removed. The mechanoreceptors detect those movements
leading to the generation of an action potential and consequentially the perception to the pain .
> The odontogenic pain has basically three origins:
exposed dentin, pulpal inflammation, and periapical
inflammation.
Diagnosis to the pain of pulpal origin generally is more
complex. The pain may be diffuse (referred or reflex), spontaneous, and throbbing, complicating the exact localization
of the compromised tooth. The report of spontaneous pain
discards almost always the possibility of the pulp to present characteristics of reversible pathological alterations. In this
case, the pathological acute pulpal alterations can be classified, only with the objective of clinical treatment indication, in acute reversible pulpitis (conservative treatment
indicate) and acute irreversible pulpitis (radical treatment
indicated) .
The protection of the dentin-pulp complex, defined as a
conservative treatment, will only be indicated on the cases
where the pulp presents characteristics of reversible pathological alterations. On those cases, the pain is acute and provoked, generally localized, with the duration of no longer
than 1 minute, stopping after the removal of the stimulus.
The indicated treatment is conservative, such as indirect or
direct pulp capping, according to what will be explained later
on .
In the cases of acute irreversible pulpits, the pain is sharp,
spontaneous, and generally intense and throbbing, of long
duration and sometimes diffuse and/or reflex. The indicated
treatment is radical, through the biopulpectomy. On the
teeth with incomplete root formation, even when the pulp
has characteristic of irreversible alteration, the pulpotomy
will be indicated, which is the removal of the pulpal tissue
only on the crown area, allowing the finishing of root formation . The acute irreversible pulpitis may develop slowly
to a chronic pulpitis. That pulp alteration is generally
observed on young patients, resulting from a low-level and
long-term irritation, over a pulp with great resistance.
Clinically, two types of chronicle pulpitis can be observed:
ulcerative and hyperplastic chronicle pulpitis. The ulcerative
chronic pulpitis is characterized by presenting an ulcer on
the exposed surface of the pulp, isolating the remaining pulp
tissue by means of a barrier of an ulcerated tissue and defense
cells. Generally, the pain is provoked, localized, and produced by the compression of food in the carious cavity. The
regular indicated treatment is biopulpectomy. On the teeth
with incomplete root formation, the pulpotomy will be indicated [ 94]. The hyperplastic chronic pulpitis is characterized
by the proliferation of a granulomatous tissue on the level of
pulp exposure, named pulp polyp. The pain is generally provoked, localized, and produced by the compression of food
during mastication. The indicated treatment is the biopulpectomy. On the teeth with incomplete root formation the
pulpotomy is indicated .
The acute and chronicle pulpitis, depending on the pulp
condition and on the intensity of the aggressor agent, may
develop slowly or fast to the death of the pulp. The pulp
necrosis is generally asymptomatic and can produce a color
change of the tooth crown. Generally, there are no response
to the pulp sensitivity testing, but on doubtful cases, the cavity preparation test must be performed. The indicated treatment is the necropulpectomy.
> The protection of the dentin-pulp complex, defined as
a conservative treatment, will only be indicated on the
cases where the pulp presents characteristics of
reversible pathological alterations.Protection of the Dentin-Pulp Complex
9
9.6 Origins of Pulpal Alterations
In the past, it was believed that the main causes of pulpal
inflammation were the toxic effects of the restorative material. However, from the half of the 1970s decade, several
researches have shown that the pulp can tolerate a variety of
restorative materials if bacteria are absent, depending obviously on the type of material and whether it is or it is not in
direct contact with the pulpal tissue . Therefore, the main
cause of the pulp alterations is the bacterial invasion and
their toxins on the pulpal tissues, especially by the lack of
sealing on the margins and of the dentin tubules that were
cut during the preparation . However, the direct contact
of the materials with cytotoxicity and immunosuppressive
effect with the pulpal tissue contributed for the persistence of
tissue inflammation . Cytotoxic materials may destroy
specific pulpal cell, reducing its capability to respond to a
future bacterial invasion .
> The main cause of the pulp alterations is the bacterial
invasion and their toxins on the pulpal tissues,
especially by the lack of sealing on the margins and of
the dentin tubules that were cut during the
preparation. However, the direct contact of some
materials with the pulpal tissue may contribute to the
persistence of tissue inflammation.Several factors such as caries, tooth preparation, occlusal
trauma, operative procedures, and marginal microleakage,
besides resinous components that may reach the pulp, have
the capability to promote pulpal alteration and will be discussed later . The correct diagnosis of the pulpal
condition and the knowledge about the factors that may promote pulpal alterations, separately or in association, are
essential to allow the dentist performing dental procedures
maintaining the vitality of the pulpal tissue, reducing the
damage, and promoting the rehabilitation.
9.6.1 Carious Lesion
The caries disease promotes alterations on the pulp through
the diffusion of bacteria and its by-products through the dentin tubules. The degrees of pulpal lesion are determined by
the characteristics of the patient (age, caries risk, and potential of tissue response) and by the characteristics of the lesion
(cavity depth, size of the lesion, and mineralization degree of
the dentin) . Therefore, the maximum preservation of
remaining dentin separating the pulpal tissue of the cavity
floor is very important. On asymptomatic and well-sealed
teeth, the maintenance of the pulp vitality after tooth preparation on dentin without pulp exposure is excellent, even
when some residual carious dentin tissue remains .
9.6.2 Tooth Preparation
In order to perform the tooth preparation, a rotating cutting
instrument assembled on highor low-speed handpiece, a
high-power laser, or an air abrasion device can be used .
Those instruments are capable to generate heat in a larger or
smaller degree, and it may cause alterations on the pulpal tissue due to the temperature rise, producing postoperative
sensitivity or even necrosis . According to Zach and
Cohen, the temperature rise of the pulpal tissue must not be
superior to 5.5 °C above the body temperature, due to higher
risk of irreversible tissue alterations and pulpal necrosis
. Studies verified that the action of the rotary cutting
instruments produces movement of dentinal fluid, toward
the pulpal tissue and toward the tooth surface, due to the
heating generated by the use of a non-correctly refrigerated
instrument. This movement is also observed when the preparation is excessively dried with air stream [21, ].
The excessive force applied by the dentist over the handpiece during the tooth preparation can also cause more heat
. The increase of the force applied may be the result of a
small hand sensitivity, stress, and wrong dentist’s technique
or reduced cutting effectiveness of the rotary instruments
. In order to minimize the trauma, new rotary cutting
instruments with high cutting effectiveness must be used,
associated with the abundant refrigeration and application of
small and intermittent cutting force. In addition, excessive
drying of the preparation with a strong air stream must be
avoided, being preferably performed with small cotton pel-Tip
The diagnosis of pulp condition can be summarized as
shown below:
5 Reversible pathological alterations: The pain is acute
and provoked, generally localized, with the duration
no longer than 1 minute, stopping after the removal
of the stimulus.
5 Acute irreversible pulpits: The pain is sharp,
spontaneous, and generally intense and throbbing,
of long duration and sometimes diffuse and/or
reflex.
5 Ulcerative chronicle pulpitis: Characterized by
presenting an ulcer on the exposed surface of
the pulp; the pain is provoked, localized, and
produced by the compression of food in the
carious cavity.
5 Hyperplastic chronic pulpitis: Characterized by the
proliferation of a granulomatous tissue on the level
of pulp exposure. The pain is generally provoked,
localized, and produced by the compression of food
during mastication.
5 Pulp necrosis: Generally asymptomatic, it can pro -
duce a color change of the tooth crown. Generally,
there are no response to the pulp sensitivity testing,
but on doubtful cases, the cavity preparation test
must be performed.
A. C. de Mello Torres et al.
9
lets, absorbent papers, or small indirect and intermittent air
stream [ ]. The use of unbalanced and eccentric cutting
instruments or handpieces causes a greater frictional heat by
the vibration and must be replaced or repaired [66, ].
9.6.3 Occlusal Trauma
Restoration with excessive occlusal contact transfers the
chewing load to the tooth, pressing the periodontal ligament
on an abnormal manner, causing a periapical inflammation
and pain . The pain is localized and throbbing. The
patient describes pain when the teeth are in contact, which is
related to a very slight dental extrusion, making the patient
avoid teeth contact . In order to prevent or solve this
problem, the dentist must always adjust the interarch contact
after finishing the restorations, evaluating it on centric occlusion and during the protrusive and lateral excursive movements.
9.6.4 Restorative Procedure
The marginal microleakage is the passage of ions, fluids, and
bacteria through the tooth-restoration interface due to the
lack of sealing or a noneffective contact between the restor -
ative material and the tooth preparation. The microleakage is
associated with the bacterial infection of the dentin and secondary caries, favoring the infection and necrosis of the
pulpal tissue, and failure of the restorative material, with the
total or partial displacement of the restoration [66, ].
The correct use of the adhesive systems allows an adequate
bonding of the restorative material to the tooth structure,
reducing the microleakage and extending the longevity of the
restorations . However, in order to perform the adhe-sive technique, operative procedures such as the acid etching,
hybridization, and light-curing of the restorative material,
besides the restorative material by itself, can cause pulp alter -
ations .
9.6.4.1 Acid Etching
The acid etching of dental enamel increases the surface
roughness and energy, by selective dissolution of the hydroxyapatite crystals, which is penetrated by the adhesive monomers, creating resinous microtags and micromechanical
bonding. On the dentin, due to its composition and characteristics, the etching tends to cause a movement of the
dentinal fluid, due to its hypertonic action . It promotes
a thorough cleaning of the surface, removing the smear layer
and the smear plugs, demineralizing the peritubular and
intertubular dentin and exposing the collagen fiber network,
increasing the dentin permeability due to the opening of the
tubules, and creating a direct path to the pulpal tissue. If the
dentin is not properly sealed by means of the adhesive system
application, the tubules will remain open, allowing bacteria
and their irritating by-products, as well as irritant components of restorative materials, reach the pulp . When the
self-etching adhesive systems are used, the demineralization
and the penetration of the adhesive monomers occur simultaneously. Therefore, instead of the tubules being opened and
then sealed later, as on total-etch materials, they remain
closed, reducing the chances of pulpal contamination.
9.6.4.2 Dentin Hybridization
The hybridization of the dentin consists in the impregnation
of the collagen fiber network exposed by the acid etching
with the resinous monomers of the adhesive system. This
procedure may produce an adequate sealing of the toothrestoration interface, but not in a permanent way . The
degradation of the interface allows pulp irritation due to
marginal microleakage into interfacial gaps and/or the
nanoleakage on the base of the hybrid layer, on interfibrillar
spaces not properly infiltrated by the adhesive [49, 86]. In
case of a heterogeneous impregnation of the hybrid layer, the
dentin tubules may remain open, allowing the movement of
the dentinal fluid, activating the pulp nociceptors, and resulting in a postoperative sensitivity [38, ].
Besides the failures that may occur on the of hybridization process, some components of the adhesive systems have
cytotoxic and immunosuppressive effects and can diffuse
through the tubules and reach the pulpal tissue, especially
on the very deep cavities, with less than 0.5 mm of dentin
remaining [38, ]. A study evaluated the effect of acid
etching and application of an adhesive system on very deep
cavities, without the pulpal protection . The authors
verified a persistent inflammatory response on the pulp
when the globules of the resinous materials reached the pulp
through the tubules, starting a foreign body inflammatory
pulpal response, characterized by the presence of the macrophages and giant cells with multiple nuclei. Another study
evaluated the response of the dentin-pulp complex on very
deep Class V cavities restored with total-etch adhesive sys-The marginal microleakage is the passage of ions, fluids,
and bacteria through the tooth-restoration interface due
to the lack of sealing or a noneffective contact between
the restorative material and the tooth preparation.Tip
In order to reduce aggression during the tooth
preparation, the dentist needs to:
5Reduce and apply intermittent force over the handpiece
5Use new rotary cutting instruments and copious
refrigeration
5Avoid excessive drying of the preparation
5Not use unbalanced and eccentric cutting instruments or handpiecesProtection of the Dentin-Pulp Complex
9tem and composite resin . The authors verified the
occurrence of hyaline changes of the cellular matrix, related
to the local edema and the overflow of the blood plasma
from the capillaries, which were dilated and congested on
the coronary pulp. The displacement of odontoblasts was
observed when the thickness of the dentin remaining,
between the pulp tissue and the pulpal wall, was smaller
than 0.3 mm.
The knowledge about the characteristics of the tooth substrate may minimize the adhesion failures, and reduce the
diffusion of the adhesive system components to the pulpal
tissue, through the dentin tubules. Therefore, in deep and
very deep cavities, it is necessary to use a protective material
before the acid etching and hybridization, avoiding that the
adhesive system becomes a source of irritation of the pulpal
tissue.
> In deep and very deep cavities, it is necessary to use a
protective material before the acid etching and
hybridization, avoiding that adhesive system becomes
a source of irritation of the pulpal tissue.
9.7 Factors Affecting the Dentin-Pulp
Complex Protection
To protect the dentin-pulp complex means to protect the
dentin and the pulp against the action of external aggressive
agents, aiming to preserve its vitality. In order to do so,
besides the correct diagnosis of the pulpal condition, some
other factors must be considered, such as the depth of the
preparation, the age of the patient, the presence of sclerotic
dentin, the material used for the protection, and the type of
restorative material.
The depth of the preparation is determined by the
thickness of the dentin remaining between the cavity floor
and the roof of the pulpal chamber . The clinical deter -
mination of the cavity depth is a difficult procedure, and it
must be assisted by the radiographic examination of the
tooth structures. The thicker is the dentin remaining
between the cavity floor and the roof of the pulpal chamber, the better the prognostic for the pulp will be, because
the thickness of the remaining is the most important factor
to protect the pulp from external aggressions. As it has
already been stated in Chap. 5, the preparation can be classified, accordingly to their depth, in shallow, medium,
deep, and very deep. However, it is very difficult to clinically determine the depth of the cavity, because it is not
only related to how many millimeters of depth the cavity
has, since the volume of the pulpal chamber decreases with
aging. Therefore, a cavity of only 2 mm deep on a first per -
manent molar of an 8-year-old child may be considered
very deep, but it may be considered shallow on this same
tooth when the patient reaches 40 years old. The teeth of
younger patients, with some exceptions, present a large
pulpal chamber and dentin tubules, which will favor the
penetration of toxic or irritating agents. The only clinical aspect that can give to the dentist an absolute information
about the cavity depth is when a pink discoloration is
observed on the pulpal wall, indicating that probably less
than 0.5 mm of dentin remaining is covering the pulp. In
this case, some small pulpal exposures can be present, not
visible to naked eyes, and the cavity is named very deep, as
it is observed in . Fig. 9.7d .
> The depth of the preparation is determined by the
thickness of the dentin remaining between the cavity
floor and the roof of the pulpal chamber. The thicker is
the remaining, the better the prognostic for the
treatment. The conservation of the dentin remaining is
more important for the health of the pulpal tissue than
the application of a protective artificial material. When
a pink discoloration is observed on the dentin, that
indicates that less than 0.5 mm of dentin remaining is
covering the pulp and some small pulpal exposures
can be present, not visible to the naked eyes.
During the tooth preparation, the dentist must preserve the
largest amount possible of dentin, since the remaining dentin
will protect the pulpal tissue, acting as a thermal isolation
and physical and chemical barrier against the penetration of
the bacteria, toxins, and acids. In vitro studies showed that a
dentin remaining of 0.5 mm thick is able to reduce the toxicity level of restorative materials up to 75%, while 1 mm thick
reduces up to 90% . With a remaining of 2 mm thick, on
most of the cases, the pulpal response is inexistent [75, ].
The dentin has an excellent buffering capacity to neutralize
the acids that come from the cariogenic activity, as well as the
one used for the acid etching for the adhesive technique. The
conservation of the dentin remaining is more important for
the health of the pulpal tissue than the application of any protective artificial material .
In an attempt to perform a more objective estimate about
the amount of dentin remaining, the electrical conductance
of the dentin can be evaluated. The method is based on fact
that the smaller is the remaining, the greater is the passage of
an electrical current. The Prepometer® device (Hager) presents an electrode to be placed on the oral mucosa of the
patient, while the reading tip closes the circuit when touching the dentin ( . Fig. 9.15). The visual indication about the
dentin remaining quantity is given by the LEDs that light up.
Depending on the cavity depth, the color of the LED that
lights up is changed. The green LEDs represent a safe distance, the orange ones represent a limit zone of safety, and
the red ones represent danger of pulpal exposure. In the
absence of this device, the dentist must develop a concept
about the cavity depth, through the observation of the cavities with exposed pulps or during the opening of the crown
for the endodontic treatment, associated to the analysis of the
radiographic images. Another possibility is the study using
extracted teeth, making cross sections on the mesiodistal and
facial-lingual directions.
Another factor that influences the necessity of a protective a material application is the presence of sclerotic dentin
on the cavity floor, which can be clinically seen as an area
A. C. de Mello Torres et al.
9
with darkened brownish or black color, extremely hard to the
touch (. Fig. 9.16a ). It indicates that a long-lasting and lowintensity aggression took place, allowing a deposition of minerals inside the tubule, leading to its sealing. Radiographically,
it can be seen as a radiopaque area ( . Fig. 9.16b ). The sclerotic dentin is capable to effectively seal the dentin and protect the pulp, making unnecessary the application of any
additional protective material.
> The sclerotic dentin can be clinically seen as an area
with darkened brownish or black color, extremely hard
to the touch. It is capable to effectively seal the dentin
and protect the pulp, making unnecessary the
application of any additional protective material.
9.8 Cleaning of the Tooth Preparations
After the tooth preparation with hand or rotary cutting
instruments, an amorphous and thin layer is deposited upon
the tooth surface, named smear layer, composed of organic
and inorganic materials from the tooth structure, oil from the rotary instruments, saliva, blood, and microorganism
from the carious process. This layer represents a natural protection of the dentin-pulp complex against the invasion of
bacteria and its toxic and acid by-products, because it
occludes the tubules and reduces the dentin permeability. On
the other hand, the presence of the smear layer also presents
disadvantages, as the direct interference on the bonding
mechanism of some adhesive systems and maintenance of
the bacteria in the preparation walls .
Due to those observations, the cleaning of the preparations is a recommended procedure, which allows the protection of the dentin-pulp complex by the reduction of
microorganisms through the friction, washing, or chemical
action. This procedure reduces the contamination, eliminating residues of the preparation and loose enamel and
dentin fragments, oil from the handpieces, blood, and
saliva, besides contributing with the action of the protective
agents. The cleaning of the preparation is a continuous process which starts with the use of cutting instruments and
washing the cavity with air/water spray, and continues with
the rubber dam placement and use of cleaning agents or
antiseptics, immediately before the application of a protective material and restoration of the tooth . The cleaning agents can be classified in demineralizing, when react
with the smear layer removing it partially or completely;
and non-demineralizing, when they act by the simple washing action, removing the loose residues or promoting the
disinfection.
9.8.1 Demineralizing Cleaning Agents
9.8.1.1 Phosphoric Acid
The acid gels, mainly the phosphoric acid, promote an effective cleaning of the tooth surface [23, 62, 91, ]. Several
acids may be used to produce the necessary microporosities
for the retention of the adhesive system on the enamel, but
the 30–50% phosphoric acid, more commonly 35–37%, is the
choice as a conditioning agent . After the tooth prepara-
.Fig. 9.15 Device to determine the cavity depth using the
measurement of electrical conductance (Prepometer—Hager)
a b
.Fig. 9.16 a Sclerotic dentin on the floor of the cavity exhibiting the brownish or darkened coloration; b radiopaque aspect of the sclerotic
dentin in the radiography (arrow)Protection of the Dentin-Pulp Complex
9tion, washing, and drying, the phosphoric acid is applied
over the preparation for 15 s. Its thoroughly washing with
water must be performed, at least, during the same time it
was used for conditioning .
After the washing, the tubules will be opened and the
dentin collagen fibers network exposed. When the surface is
dried with a stream of air the water inside the interfibrillar
spaces, which maintains the collagen web expanded, is evaporated, producing its collapse and closing the nanometric
interfibrillar spaces essential for adhesive monomer penetration. Therefore, the dentin overdrying must be avoided. The
fourthand fifth-generation adhesive systems produce better
results when applied over a wet dentin, that is, when just the
excess of water is to be removed with the blot drying technique, using small cotton pellets, leaving the surface slightly
wet . This procedure prevents the collapse of the collagen fibers, allowing a deeper penetration of the adhesive system and consequentially higher bond strength. In addition,
the blot drying also avoid the aspiration of the odontoblasts
cells into the dentinal tubules, generally observed when the
dentin is overdried with air stream.
9.8.1.2 Polyacrylic Acid
When the indicated protective agent is the glass ionomer
cement (GIC), the preparation cleaning can be performed
with 10–25% polyacrylic acid gel. It can be applied over the
preparation walls with disposable applicators during 10–30s,
followed by washing and drying with gently air stream. This
procedure increases the bond strength of the GIC to the
tooth structure, without the cause damage to the pulp on
shallow, medium, and deep cavities [39, ]. As it is less
aggressive, it just removes the smear layer but does not
expose the dentin collagen or opening of the tubules.
Therefore, the cavity can be dried with soft air stream without
the risk of collagen collapse. However, some studies disagree
about the effectiveness of the previous application of the
polyacrylic acid on the tooth surface, even though other
studies stated that it really works .
9.8.2 Non-demineralizing Cleaning Agents
9.8.2.1 Detergent
The anionic detergents are cleaning agents that act reducing
the surface tension of the liquids. They do not have a bactericide action, but they interact with the residues of the tooth
preparation, keeping them suspended in the solution and
allowing its removal . The detergent molecules have an
alkyl tail and a head formed by oxygen, sodium, and potassium atoms. The tail is hydrophobic and lipophilic, and the
head is hydrophilic, characterizing an amphoteric substance.
When the tail acts as an anion, the solution is called anionic.
When the tail is a cation, the detergent is cationic . The
anionic detergents are biocompatible, the opposite of the cationic ones, which have an antimicrobial activity, but harm
live tissues.The most used detergent is the sodium lauryl sulfate
(SLS) solution on pH 6.4. It is efficient in the removal of
blood and oil from the preparation, and it has a moistener
and emulsifier action but does not remove the smear layer
. It must be applied on the preparation using disposable
applicators, followed by washing and drying with soft air
stream. It may be used to clean the preparation walls before
the amalgam restoration procedure.
9.8.2.2 Aqueous Solution of Calcium
Hydroxide
The aqueous solution of calcium hydroxide may be used in
preparation of any depth, and is the most indicated to clean
deep and very deep cavities, during the stepwise excavation
and during the operative procedures for the direct protection
of the dentin-pulp complex. The aqueous solution of calcium
hydroxide, with pH 12, inhibits the enzymatic activity of the
microorganism, acting as a bacteriostatic and hemostatic
agent, besides stimulating the formation of sclerotic and
reparative dentin .
The solution can be prepared by the dentist, by adding 10
g of pure calcium hydroxide of pro-analysis (p.a.) quality
into ml of distilled water. After the mixture, a suspension is produced that may be immediately used. After some
time, the calcium hydroxide that did not dissolve will deposit
at the bottom of the bottle. There is no need to shake the
bottle before use, because the alkaline solution created is
already saturated. The solution can be stored for up to 3
months [ ].
After the end of the tooth preparation and isolation of the
operating field, the preparation can be washed with a calcium
hydroxide solution, using small hydrophilic cotton pellets or
disposable applicators soaked with the solutions, brushing it
for 15 s (active application) or using a Luer syringe with a
needle (passive application). Then, the cavity can be dried
with small hydrophilic cotton pellet or with soft air stream
. In case of pulpal exposure, the solution is applied on
the cavity with the small sterile cotton pellet until the hemostasis is obtained.
9.8.2.3 Chlorhexidine Gluconate
The chlorhexidine gluconate is an antimicrobial substance
commonly used as a mouthwash for the reduction of bacterial biofilm formation in the oral environments. Due to its
positive charge is adsorbed during the topic application on
the tooth surface, biofilm, and oral mucosa, which present a
negative charge. Its releasing is gradual, allowing a continuous antimicrobial effect (substantivity). It is also adsorbed by
the cellular walls of the bacterias causing the lysis of the
microorganisms . When used in low concentrations, its
action may be bacteriostatic by the inhibition of the ATP
synthesis by the bacteria. In high concentration, it presents
the bactericidal effect by the rupture of the cytoplasmic
membrane.
As cleaning agents of the tooth preparations, the 2%
chlorhexidine can be used for disinfection of the walls before
A. C. de Mello Torres et al.
9
or after the acid etching, and it does not interfere in the adhesion process [60, , ]. The chlorhexidine has been used
to inhibit the action of the protease enzymes improving the
durability of the hybrid layer [24, ]. The dentin matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a class of calciumand
zincdependent endopeptidases, incorporated into the mineralized dentin matrix during odontogenesis. Those may be
released after acid etching, producing the degradation of the
unprotected collagen fibers inside the hybrid layer . The
application of chlorhexidine on the collagen network exposed
by the acid etching, before the application of the adhesive,
reduces the degradation of the hybrid layer, increasing the
durability of the adhesion.
9.8.2.4 Fluoride Solution
The use of fluoride solutions has the aim to reduce the formation of secondary caries under amalgam restoration . A
2% sodium fluoride aqueous solution on a neutral pH can be
applied for 2–4 min [8 ]. The high concentrations of fluoride in
contact with preparation walls have a bactericidal or bacteriostatic effect, due to the capacity of the fluoride ion to penetrate
through the plasma membrane and destroy the bacteria .
Additionally, it promotes the deposition of calcium fluoride
over the preparation walls, acting as a fluoride reservoir that
will be released if there is a reduction of the pH. Its application
is indicated only before amalgam restorations because it can
impair the acid etching for adhesive procedures.
9.9 Protective Materials
The materials available to protect the dentin-pulp complex
have a large range of composition, depending on its physical,
chemical, mechanical, and biological behavior. In order for a
protective material to be considered ideal, it must be capable
to :
5Protect the dentin-pulp complex from thermal and
electrogalvanic shocks
5Be bactericidal or inhibit the bacterial activity
5Bond to the tooth structure and release fluoride
5Remineralize the demineralized dentin remaining after
tooth preparation of teeth with carious lesions of fast
progression
5Hypermineralize the underlying dentin
5Stimulate the formation of tertiary reactional or reparative dentin on the deep lesions or pulpal exposures
5Be biocompatible maintaining the pulp vitality
5Prevent the discoloration of the tooth, inhibiting the
penetration of metallic ions from the amalgam restorations into the surrounding dentin
5Avoid the penetration of toxic or irritating substances
from the restorative materials into the dentin tubules
and pulp
5Improve the marginal sealing of the restorations,
avoiding the microleakage of the saliva and microorganisms into the tooth/restoration interfaceA protective material should also present a modulus of
elasticity similar to the dentin, adequate mechanical strength,
low solubility and copolymerize with the resinous restorative
material . Unfortunately, no protective material presents
all those characteristics. The materials to protect the dentinpulp complex are indicated for the application over the
remaining dentin tissue or directly over the exposed pulp tissue. The dentist must evaluate the characteristics and the
properties of each material as well as carefully evaluate the
clinical case to be treated.
The materials to protect the dentin-pulp complex may be
classified in the following categories:
1. Sealers: They are materials that produce a thin protective
pellicle that covers the tooth structure recently cut
during the tooth preparation. They are applied over all
walls with the aim to seal the dentin tubules. Examples
are the varnishes, dentin desensitizer, and adhesive
systems.
2. Liner: They are materials applied in layers with a thickness between 0.2 and 1 mm, over the pulpal or axial
walls. They are used to act as a physical barrier to the
microorganisms and its by-products, to seal the dentin
tubules bonding to the tooth structure, besides acting as
a thermal and electrical isolator. They may also present a
therapeutic action through the antibacterial effect,
fluoride release, pain relief, recovery of the pulpal tissue
health, or stimulation the of the calcified tissue formation. Some examples are the calcium hydroxide and glass
ionomer cements. They are generally applied only on the
deeper areas of the preparations.
3. Bases: They are materials used to protect and/or replace
the dentin, allowing that a smaller volume of the restor -
ative material is applied. It can also be used to fill retentive areas in preparations for the indirect restorations or
to give an adequate geometry for amalgam preparations.
They are used in a thickness larger than 1 mm, according
to the need to reconstruct undermined walls. Some
examples are the zinc phosphate, zinc oxide-eugenol, zinc
polycarboxylate, and glass ionomer cements, besides the
flowable composites. The use of bases must be performed
with a caution for amalgam restorations, since the larger
the base thickness, the smaller the fracture resistance of
the amalgam restoration will be [55, 80].
There are several materials available to protect the dentinpulp complex, which the most used ones will be described
next. The adequate choice of the protective material must be
based on the evaluation of the pulpal tissue condition and on
the factors that lead the indication of the protective materials,
as it has already been described.
> The materials to protect the dentin-pulp complex are
applied over the remaining dentin tissue or directly
over the exposed pulp tissue. They are classified as
sealers (thin pellicle), liners (0.2 and 1 mm), or bases
(more than 1 mm).Protection of the Dentin-Pulp Complex
99.9.1 Cavity Varnish
It is composed of a natural (copal or colophony) or synthetic
(nitrocellulose) resin dissolved on an organic solvent, which
can be the acetone, chloroform, ether, etc. [ , ]. It presents a moderate thermal and electrical isolating property.
The cavity varnish can be considered a sealer and used to
protect the dentin-pulp complex under the amalgam restorations. The use of cavity varnish reduces the passage of the
electrical current and minimizes the diffusion of metallic
ions from the amalgam restorations into the tooth structure,
avoiding the darkening of the tooth when low-copper amalgam alloys are used. They allow an initial reduction of the
microleakage in association with amalgam restorations, and
would be indicated as a protective agent in shallow cavities or
in association with other protector materials in deeper cavities . Due to the fact that the film thickness is very thin, it
does not act as a thermal isolator .
The use of the cavity varnish has been drastically reduced,
since the high-copper amalgam alloys used today do not
present a significant γ2 phase (Sn7-8Hg) and, consequentially,
suffer less corrosion (deposition of metallic ions of tin oxide
and/or tin oxychloride) on the tooth-restoration interface
. Although they were largely used in the past, several
studies showed that the varnish is not capable to promote a
good sealing of dentin, even if applied on several layers. In
addition, it suffers dissolution with the time, leaving an
empty space on the interface that must be occupied by the
corrosion products of the amalgam. It is also less effective
than the use of the dental adhesives to reduce the marginal
microleakage [1 ]. For those reasons, they are almost not
used anymore.
9.9.2 Desensitizing Agents
Some studies indicate the use of a desensitizing agent after
the application of a liner or base, before amalgam restorations, despite the preparation depth, replacing the cavity var -
nish [14, ]. The goal of the desensitizer is to reduce the
dentin permeability and consequently the movement of fluids through the dentin tubules. Among the available materials, there are the aqueous solutions of 35% hydroxyethyl
methacrylate (HEMA) associated or not with 5% glutaraldehyde . The glutaraldehyde-based solutions promote the
precipitation of the dentinal fluid proteins, through its denaturation, forming plugs inside the tubules . Some studies analyzed the use of GLUMA Desensitizer (Heraeus
Kulzer) after the full crown preparation . They concluded
that tooth sensitivity was significantly reduced in comparison to preparation where the desensitizer was not applied.
In relation to the biocompatibility of desensitizer agent
components, some studies observed that glutaraldehyde and
the HEMA present cytotoxic, mutagenic, and cytopathic
effects [41, 70]. Another study suggested that the use of
desensitizer containing glutaraldehyde and/or HEMA must
be performed with care, because they present a high diffu-sion capability through the dentin, mainly on the cases of
young patients, as well as on very deep tooth preparations,
where the dentin is very permeable .
9.9.3 Adhesive Systems
The mechanism of action of an adhesive system, as a protective agent to the dentin-pulp complex, is based on obtaining
a sealing zone on the tooth surface, by deposition of a
homogeneous layer of resinous material which occludes the
dentin tubules . When applied on shallow and medium
depth cavities, they are biocompatibility and favorable for
the maintenance of the pulp vitality. However, on deep and
very deep preparations, its components can diffuse through
the dentin tubules and reach the pulpal tissue. Nonpolymerized residual monomers and resin globules that are
present inside the tubules may reach the pulpal chamber by
the dentin fluid. Some studies showed that the direct contact
of the resinous components with cell or pulpal tissue present
toxicity [41, 70, 81, , ]. Therefore, the adhesive systems must be used with care. For the indirect protection, on
the cases of deep or very deep preparation, more biocompatible liners or bases must be applied before the adhesive
system application.
The use of the adhesive systems as materials for direct
protection of the dentin-pulp complex was described some
years ago [ 84]. Even though some studies have showed promising results on animals, the persistent inflammatory response
of the pulpal tissue was verified on the cases of direct pulp
capping of human teeth, resulting in the phenomenon of
anachoresis, where the microorganisms invade the inflamed
pulpal tissue with low defense capability. Therefore, the cytotoxic and immunosuppressive effects of the adhesive system
components and the possibility of increasing of adhesive failures, in case of pulpal tissue exposure, contraindicate the use
of those materials for the direct protection of the dentin-pulp
complex .
9.9.4 Zinc Oxide-Eugenol Cement
The zinc oxide-eugenol cements (ZOE) are generally available
as a zinc oxide powder and a eugenol-containing liquid. The
setting is based on an acid-base reaction that consists in the
hydrolysis of the zinc oxide and a later reaction between the
zinc hydroxide and eugenol to form a chelate. There are four
different types of ZOE cements: Type I, used for temporary
cementation; Type II, indicated for long-lasting cementation
of fixed prosthesis; Type III, indicated as a temporary restor -
ative material or base for the thermal isolation; and Type IV ,
for long-lasting temporary restorations up to a year [2 ].
They were largely used in the past and, still today, are very
useful on dental procedures on the public health system as
temporary restoration. Although they present a deficient
marginal sealing, they are effective on the sealing against the
biological leakage due to its antibacterial properties [74, ].
A. C. de Mello Torres et al.
9
They must not be used in direct contact with the pulpal tissue, because of its irritating and cytotoxic effect .
The liner and bases prepared with this material allow a
good thermal isolation . However, they have
nonsatisfactory mechanical properties and can increase the
microleakage under amalgam restorations [55, 99]. In addition, the presence of the free residual eugenol on the cement
can interfere in the adequate polymerization of composites,
and they should never be associated [2 , 31, ]. Based on the
fact that materials with better properties are available, such as
the GICs, the ZOE cements must be used only as a temporary
filling material or for temporary cementation .
9.9.5 Glass Ionomer Cement
The glass ionomer cement is composed of a powder and a
liquid that when mixed together start a setting reaction to
form a solid material . On the conventional GIC, the
setting reaction is of the acid-base type, where the polyacrylic
acid attacks the surface of the glass particles (fluoridecontaining calcium aluminosilicate), and the calcium, aluminum, sodium, and fluoride ions are released into the aqueous
mean. The polyacrylic acid chains cross-links with the calcium ions, forming a solid mass (calcium cross-links). In the
next phase, the calcium is replaced by the aluminum ions in
24 h. The sodium and fluoride ions do not participate on the
cross-links of the cement, but they combine to be released as
sodium fluoride. The cross-linked phase becomes hydrated
throughout time, with the same water used for the mixture,
adding strength to the cement (maturation process). The por -
tion of the glass particles that did not react is covered by a
silica gel (silica gel sheath), formed by the leaching of cations
from the outer portion of the particles. This process may last
for up to 7 days . Right after the mixture of the material, the pH is acid, but it tends to neutralize in 24 h .
On the resin modified glass ionomer cement (RMGIC),
additionally to the acid-base reaction, a mechanism of chemical and/or light-activated polymerization was incorporated
to the material, so that some of the disadvantages of chemical
curing materials were minimized [2, , ]. Therefore,
hydrophilic monomers and the methacrylate modified polyacrylic acid are used and allow fast curing of the material
when light-activated. On some systems, during the monomer
polymerization process, a chemical reaction also occurs, promoted by an activator/initiator system, that has an advantage
to assure the complete curing of a resinous component even
in the absence of light.
The GICs present several positive properties for a protective material, such as the chemical bonding to the tooth
structure, fluoride release, and the antimicrobial effect [ ,
, ]. The conventional GIC presents coefficient of linear
thermal expansion similar to the tooth structure, while on
the RMGIC, this coefficient varies according to the percentage of the resinous component incorporated to the material
. In relation to the cytotoxicity, the conventional one has
been proven to be less toxic than the one modified by resin [3, ]. The incorporation of HEMA on the composition
increases the cytotoxicity of the material, probably due to the
residual uncured diffuses through the dentin tubules, which
is related its low molecular weight . Some studies verified
that the RMGIC is toxic to the culture of human pulp cells,
and it is not recommended on the cases of direct pulp protection . However, other studies verified that the RMGIC
did not cause an inflammatory reaction on the pulpal tissue
when applied as a liner on deep Class V preparation, and
they can be used as a material for the indirect protection of
the dentin-pulp complex [74, , ]. Although less toxic,
the conventional GIC should not be used as a material for
direct protection as well, because it presents certain toxicity
when in direct contact with the pulpal tissue, even though it
is very biocompatible when used for indirect protection,
even in deep preparations.
> The GICs present several positive properties for a
protective material, such as the chemical bonding to
the tooth structure, fluoride release, and the
antimicrobial effect.
Before using the conventional GIC, a 10–25% polyacrylic
acid conditioner should be applied on the tooth surface, for
15–30 s, followed by washing for 20–30 s and drying with a
gentle air stream. When the conventional cement is applied
as a liner or base, the restorative material is applied over, protecting it from the syneresis and water absorption phenomenon. However, when the conventional GIC is applied
completely filling the preparation, getting contact with the
saliva, there is a need for surface protection of the material
with a layer of some impermeable substance, such as the cavity varnish, clear nail varnish, or dental adhesives. When the
RMGIC is used, there is no need for a surface protection,
because the resinous matrix reduces drastically the syneresis
and water absorption by the material, resulting in the socalled umbrella effect.
When the conventional GIC is used as a line or base
before the adhesive restorative procedures, the acid etching of the cement must not exceed 20 s, in order to prevent
damages to the material. The acid etching of the GIC surface
increases its bonding to the composite applied later on, by the
increase of the superficial roughness of the cement layer .
Tip
5For improving the bonding of GIC to the tooth
structure, a previous polyacrylic acid etching can be
performed.
5When a preparation is completely filled with a conventional GIC, the surface must be protected with a
thin varnish or adhesive layer until the ending of the
setting reaction. This procedure is not necessary for
RMGIC.
5The GICs should not be directly applied over the
exposed pulp tissue.Protection of the Dentin-Pulp Complex
99.9.6 Calcium Hydroxide
The use of calcium hydroxide was introduced in Dentistry, in
, by Hermann . Until today, the calcium hydroxidecontaining products are still used for protection of the
dentinpulp complex due to its capability to stimulate the
formation of tertiary dentin, protect the pulp against ther -
moelectrical stimuli, antibacterial and acid neutralizer
action, antiexudative effect, besides promoting formation
mineralized tissue. The calcium hydroxide-containing products are available, according to the clinical application, as a
powder, paste, suspensions, solutions or cement.
The application of the calcium hydroxide powder over the
pulpal exposure must be limited to the exposed pulpal tissue
area only, and never extends up to the dentin walls and mar -
gins of the tooth preparation. The calcium hydroxide paste
may be prepared by the dentist with distilled water and calcium hydroxide powder or obtained readymade by a manufacturer (Calcicur—Voco, UltraCal—Ultradent). As all
calcium hydroxide powder or paste does not set, it is necessary to cover it with a layer of calcium hydroxide cement and,
over it, a layer of GIC .
The calcium hydroxide is also available as chemically
activated or light-cured cement and indicated as a cavity
liner. The calcium hydroxide cement promotes protection
against the thermoelectrical stimuli. The chemically activated cement is presented in two pastes that must be mixed
before the use. Its mechanical properties, especially compressive strength 7 min after the mixture and shear strength
after 10 min, allow it to be indicated as a liner in cases of
indirect protection on very deep cavities, under the amalgam restorations, because it would resist to the condensation
stress [ 35, ].
The solubility of the calcium hydroxide cements in acidic
conditions, under restorations with the deficient marginal
sealing, produces its softening and complete dissolution,
resulting in empty spaces in the tooth-restoration interface,
that may increase microleakage and reduce the fracture
resistance of the large restoration [22, 88, , ]. To over -
come this problem, light-activated materials were developed, being more acid resistant and having a higher
compressive strength. These materials do not need to be
mixed prior to use. The resinous monomers present on its
composition allow some bonding to the resinous restorative
materials.
According to several studies, the calcium hydroxide is
considered the most indicated material for direct application
over the exposed pulp, due to the consistent clinical and scientific evidence [13, 74, ]. In a revision of 14 clinical studies, including more than cases of direct pulp capping
with calcium hydroxide, a success rate above 90% was
observed . The exact mechanism explaining how the calcium hydroxide promotes the deposition of hard tissue over
the pulp exposure is not completely understood; however,
the sequence of repair after the treatment of a healthy exposed
pulp with the calcium hydroxide may be summarized as follows : 5Cauterization of the pulpal tissue due to the alkaline
properties of the calcium hydroxide (pH >12). Some
studies demonstrate that the calcium hydroxide is
capable to solubilize and release bioactive dentin
molecules that stimulate the formation of the calcified
tissue, such as the bone morphogenetic proteins and the
transforming growth factor, which are important
mediators of pulp repair .
5On the first few days, it was histologically verified the
formation of a superficial layer of necrotic tissue,
infiltrated of inflammatory cells and bleeding. The
alkaline pH neutralizes the lactic acid secreted by the
osteoclasts and may help to prevent the destruction of
the mineral tissue, acting as a buffer against the effects of
the inflammatory process . In addition, the calcium
ions may reduce the capillary permeability, allowing a
greater availability of the calcium ions on the mineralization regions .
5Throughout the days, the inflammatory response is
gradually reduced, and a matrix rich in collagen is
formed in contact with the necrotic zone or directly
adjacent to the liner material, by the differentiation of
stem cells in odontoblast-like cells and production of
amorphous and non-tubular dentin matrix.
5The mineralization occurs after the secretion of the
amorphous tissue that is irregular and contains numer -
ous cellular inclusions. After that, a dentin-like tissue
with tubules is formed, covered by odontoblast cells,
called “dentin bridge. ” It can be observed about 30–45
days after the direct capping.
The calcium hydroxide also presents the antimicrobial effect,
because few oral microorganisms survive on an alkaline
environment produced by this material, hindering the residual microorganisms that remain contaminating the site of
exposure to interfere on the repair . The low cost and the
predictable repair of the pulpal exposure, when the treatment
is performed based on the correct diagnosis and technique,
make the calcium hydroxide the best material for direct pulp
protection procedures .
> The calcium hydroxide is considered the best material
for direct application over the exposed pulp, with a
large clinical and scientific evidence of its efficacy.
9.9.7 Mineral Trioxide Aggregate (MTA)
The MTA was described initially by Lee et al., in .
Since then, it has been researched and indicated in several
clinical situations, such as the direct pulp capping, pulpotomy, retrograde obturation, sealing of root perforations, apical barriers for apexification or apexogenesis, and most
recently a sealer for root canal obturation [18, 74, , ,
, ].
The MTA is a mixture of the refined Portland cement,
bismuth oxide (that gives radiopacity), SiO2, CaO, MgO,
A. C. de Mello Torres et al.
9
K2SO4, and Na2SO4. It must be mixed with sterile water, on
the ratio of 3:1 (three parts of powder to one of water) .
The Portland cement is a mixture of a dicalcium silicate, tricalcium aluminate, gypsum or calcium sulfate (added to control the setting time of the cement), and the tetracalcium
aluminoferrite [28, ]. Portland cement is the worldwide
name for the material commonly known as a cement, used in
civil construction. It is defined as hydraulic binder, that is, a
product that hardens only through the reaction with water
but also forms a waterproof product.
However, the MTA and the Portland cement used on the
construction work are not identical materials, because the
first one has smaller and standardized particles and few toxic
heavy metals (such as copper, manganese, strontium, and
arsenic), following a strict manufacturing process for production of medical materials, which allows the standardization and purity of the composition, as well as the prevention
of the contamination [82, , ]. After the hydration of
the MTA, the material forms a colloidal gel that gets solid
after 2–3 h . The initial pH of the cement that has just
been prepared is 10.2 rising to 12.5 3 hours after the mixture.
When the MTA powder is mixed with water, there is a
formation of calcium hydroxide, which is responsible for the
high alkalinity after the hydration, allowing the material to
be considered bioactive and present a capacity to allow an
adequate environment for the repair of the pulpal and periradicular tissue. The calcium hydroxide formed releases calcium ions for adhesion and cell proliferation; creates an
alkaline mean with antibacterial and antifungal properties;
modulates the production of cytokines; promotes the differ -
entiation and migration of the hard tissue-forming cells; and
forms carbonated apatite when exposed to the physiological
solutions, promoting the biological repair [20, 59, 64, ,
]. However, different from the powder of calcium hydroxide, the MTA promotes a sealing of the tooth structure, when
used to seal the root or furcation perforations or for retrograde obturation. It is available in white or gray colors .
Due to the fact that the gray MTA may cause tooth staining
by the presence of iron and manganese ions on its composition, the white MTA was developed to be used on regions
that might have an esthetic involvement, even though some
studies also have verified discoloration of roots obturated
with white MTA [74, ]. The lower concentration of the
iron (FeO), aluminum, and magnesium ions on the white
MTA is responsible for its color [20, 46, 59]. The particles of
the white MTA are smaller than the ones of the gray MTA,
and its setting time is faster .
The setting time of the MTA is of 2 h and 45 min, which
requires, after the protection of the pulp tissue, the application of a fast setting cavity liner or base over it, such as a GIC
or a RMGIC, making possible to restore the tooth at the same
treatment session . Another option is to perform the
procedure to protect the pulp on two separate clinical sessions. In the first one, the direct protection with the MTA is
performed, and a small sterile cotton pellet embedded on
distilled water or physiological solution is applied over the
MTA, to allow the setting of the cement, followed by a tem-porary restoration. On the second session, the temporary
restoration is removed, and then a final restoration is made.
One disadvantage of the MTA is that its cost is higher than
the pure calcium hydroxide. The cost to buy 1 g of white
MTA corresponds approximately to the amount of money
enough to buy g of calcium hydroxide cement or g of
the calcium hydroxide p.a.
Clinically, the MTA has been used in the cases of direct
pulp protection. Many studies analyzed the effect of MTA on
pulp capping on intact teeth, using various animal models
(dogs, pigs, and cats) and demonstrate the capacity of the
MTA (gray or white) to promote the biological repair of the
exposed area with the formation of a thick barrier of the mineralized tissue, keeping the pulpal tissue without inflammation and maintaining the vitality [5, 11, 19, 25, 71, , ,
, ]. Clinical studies have shown that the MTA has a
similar capacity of calcium hydroxide to promote the pulp
repair in the case of exposure. Up to this moment, there were
not enough number of scientific evidences to claim that the
MTA is better than the traditional calcium hydroxide, which
effectiveness and high percentage of success are largely
reported in the literature . It seems that the greater
advantage of the MTA lies on the fact that it can set and a seal
by itself the exposed area. However, due to the long setting
time, it must be kept in mind the use of a GIC over the MTA
so that the immediate restoration can be performed, as it
happens with the calcium hydroxide p.a., which limits its
advantages on the cases of pulp exposure on a cavity that will
be immediately restored . On the other hand, the use of
the MTA in other circumstances, such as perforations on the
root and the retrograde obturation, turns it into a material
with incomparable value, once the chemical setting will make
it remain in a position and seal the cavity after closing and
suture the flap.
> There is not enough of scientific evidences that MTA is
better than the traditional calcium hydroxide for direct
pulp capping.
9.9.8 Materials Containing Bioactive
Molecules
Several dental materials have been studied and developed
based on the strategy of repair and regeneration of dentin,
through the stimulation of the pulpal cells by bioactive subtances that would be incorporated to the restorative materials.
The scientific knowledge in relation to the development of the
new materials has been obtained through researches on molecular biology, related to the odontogenesis and tissue repair
mechanisms . Several proteins are produced by the pulp
and are incorporated in the dentin matrix during the odontogenesis, such as the bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP) and
the transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β), known to be
capable to stimulate the hard tissue-forming cells [50, ]. The
proteins capable to modulate the cell functions have been
called cytokines, growth factors, or cell modulators .Protection of the Dentin-Pulp Complex
9In the cases of caries lesions, the bacterial acids promote
the demineralization of the dentin and the release of the
modulator proteins, which bind to specific membrane receptors of the odontoblasts and/or their cytoplasmic process.
That can stimulate the secretion of several types of specific
dentin proteins, resulting in mineral deposition inside the
dentin tubules near the carious lesion (dentin sclerosis), as
well the deposition of the reactionary dentin in the pulpal
chamber [98, , , ].
When the aggression is of high intensity, such as in the
cases of dentin overheat, overdrying, or application of acid
etching on very deep cavities, the death of odontoblasts
may occur with the aspiration of those cells into the dentin
tubules. This way, the undifferentiated mesenchymal cells
or pre-odontoblasts, according to the conditions and the
characteristics of the pulp before the aggression, are stimulated to differentiate into odontoblast-like cells and secrete
the amorphous and non-tubular dentin matrix, character -
istic of the tertiary reparative dentin. Several molecular
and biochemical events are involved in the process of the
biological repair of the pulpal tissue. However, the cell
membrane receptors may be activated by metabolically
active proteins [38, 40, 98, , , ]. Some studies
have shown positive results with the use of those molecules
on the direct pulp capping [67, ]. However, difficulties
on the developing of the materials containing those bioactive molecules have also been verified, especially on the
development of a scaffold to lead the molecules to the site
of pulp exposure . However, they may represent the
future of the protection agents for the dentinpulp complex
[38, ].
Dental materials that contain bioactive glasses have been
added to composites and RMGIC to improve its biological
effects, presenting the capability to release calcium and phosphate and to form the hydroxyapatite over the dentin. The
β-tricalcium phosphate, a bioceramic material that presents
the biological property to work as a scaffold for the bone
development, being progressively reabsorbed as the growth
of the mineralized tissue takes place, was used in a study as
material for direct pulp protection . The authors verified
that it promoted the repair of the pulpal exposure, with the
formation of the hard tissue and the preservation of the pulp
tissue vitality.
9.10 Techniques for Protection
of the Dentin-Pulp Complex
The techniques to protect the dentin-pulp complex may be
classified in two groups. The first one includes the techniques
of indirect protection, where the protective material is
applied over the dentin, while the second one includes the
techniques of direct protection, where the protective material
is applied over the exposed pulpal tissue.9.10.1 Indirect Pulp Protection
The indirect protection of the dentin-pulp complex consists
in the application of the protective materials over the remaining dentin, when pulpal tissue exposure has not occurred. It
can be performed after finishing the preparation and immediately before applying the restorative material, in deep and
very deep cavities, named just indirect pulp capping. It can
also be done after the partial removal of the carious tissue,
when it is intended to reopen the cavity later to finish the
removal of the remaining carious tissue, in case of the stepwise excavation procedure. In this last case, it is desired that
the protective material stimulates the remineralization of the
caries-affected dentin tissue, avoiding a pulpal exposure that
could occur if a total removal of the softened dentin had been
performed immediately.
9.10.1.1 Indirect Pulp Capping
The aims of the indirect pulp capping are to block the ther -
mal, electrical, and chemical stimuli that come from the restorations and from the oral environment, to produce a
therapeutic effect over the dentin-pulp complex, maintain
the pulp vitality, avoid or reduce the microleakage and the
bacterial growth under the restorations, and improve the
marginal sealing properties .
The indirect pulp capping is performed immediately
after the end of the tooth preparation, as an additional protection to the pulp in deep and very deep preparation, where
there is no sclerotic dentin. Generally, the dentists used to
recommend that all carious tissue should have been removed
before the restoration. However, exactly defining where is
the carious dentin tissue is a very hard task. Due to the
demineralization process, the dentin tissue becomes softened, and the analysis of this parameter was initially recommended in order to take a decision about what should be
removed. It was recommended that the entire softened dentin should be removed until a hard tissue was reached, which
could be identified due to a unique sound that the hard dentin produces when it was touched with the exploratory
probe. This procedure inevitably results in a great number of
pulpal exposures on deep and very deep cavities, especially
on acute lesions. Later studies have shown that the lesion
presents three distinct layers. The superficial layer corre-The indirect protection of the dentin-pulp complex
consists in the application of the protective materials
over the remaining dentin, when pulpal tissue exposure
has not occurred. The techniques are the indirect pulp
capping (after total infected dentin removal) and the
stepwise excavation (after partial infected dentin
removal).
A. C. de Mello Torres et al.
9
sponds to a liquefaction necrosis, highly contaminated.
Below it there is an intermediary layer of demineralized and
highly contaminated tissue, known as the infected dentin,
and then a deeper portion that is demineralized but little
infected, known as the affected dentin. It was then recommended that just the necrotic and infected dentin should be
removed, keeping the affected dentin which could reminer -
alize. However, although several attempts were performed
to differentiate both layers, with the use of dyes or other
methods, this distinction was many times very difficult, if
not impossible. On the other hand, some studies have shown
that even when infected dentin remained in the preparation
walls, the restored teeth presented a similar success rate to
the ones that had the entire softened dentin removed [61,
, , , ]. It was shown that the softened carious
dentin can remineralize and becomes hard again, and the
viable bacteria can be reduced or eliminated when the preparation is properly restored. It was proved that the removal
of the entire carious tissue is not necessary for the success of
the restorative treatment. However, it is essential to obtain a
restoration with an adequate marginal sealing in order to
eliminate the nutrition source for the remaining bacteria
[ , ].
> The removal of the entire carious tissue is not
necessary for the success of the restorative treatment.
However, it is essential to obtain a restoration with an
adequate marginal sealing in order to eliminate the
nutrition source for the remaining bacteria.
Apart from the kind of treatment to be selected, with the
total or partial removal of the carious tissue, when the preparation is deep or very deep, the use of a protective material
that stimulates the remineralization and isolates the pulp
from the irritating effect of the direct restorative material,
such as the adhesive systems and composite resins, or from
the thermal stimuli on the amalgam restoration, becomes
essential.
In order to make the indirect capping, after the end of the
tooth preparation, the cleaning of the cavity can be per -
formed with a of 2% chlorhexidine solution, anionic deter -
gents, or calcium hydroxide solution, before the application
of the protective agents of the dentin-pulp complex. The
materials indicated for indirect pulp capping are selected
according to the depth of the preparation and the restorative
material to be applied.
On shallow and of medium depth preparations, due to
the amount of remaining dentin protecting the pulp tissue,
no additional protective material is necessary, regardless of
the type of the restorative material to be used. For amalgam
restorations, a solution of anionic detergent can be applied
into the cavity, followed by washing and drying. The restor -
ative material may be directly applied. Another option is to
apply, after the detergent washing and drying, a 2% sodium
fluoride solution for 2–4 min on the preparation walls, fol-lowed only by drying with an air stream, which will result
in the deposition of calcium fluoride on the walls, aiming
to reduce the chances of a future caries lesion in the toothrestoration interface. Another possibility is to wash the
cavity with an air and water spray, followed by drying it
with air stream. Then, calcium hydroxide solution or 2%
chlorhexidine solution or a glutaraldehyde-based desensitizer is applied, followed by another drying with the air
stream. When the amalgam is chosen as a restorative material, the smear layer must not be removed, remaining on
the walls to seal the tubules and reduce the dentin permeability. Therefore, the demineralizing agents should never
be used.
For composite restorations on shallow and medium
depth cavities, the 35–37% phosphoric acid gel is applied if
a totaletch adhesive system will be used. After washing the
acid, the surface must remain wet, removing only the excess
of moisture by the blot drying technique, followed by adhesive system application. Another option is to gently dry the
surface with a soft air stream and then to apply a of 2%
chlorhexidine solution to hydrate it again and to impregnate
the collagen fibril network, in order to reduce the long-term
degradation of the collagen fibers by the dentin metalloproteinases. Then, the drying is performed through the blot
drying technique, using a small cotton pellet, followed by
the adhesive system application, drying, and light-curing. In
those cases, the adhesive layer applied will promote the sealing of the dentin tubules and control of the sensitivity,
besides bonding to the composite restorative material. In
case of the self-etching adhesives, the acid primer will promote the etching of the dentin and the formation of the
hybrid layer without the need of a previous phosphoric acid
application.
When performing amalgam restorations on deep preparation, when the proximity with the pulpal tissue is greater,
but it is not possible to observe any area in the pulpal or axial
walls with a pink discoloration, a protective material must be
applied in the internal walls in order to promote thermal isolation to the metallic restoration; otherwise, tooth sensitivity
will probably come up when hot or cold food contacts the
tooth. The material of choice is usually the chemical or lightcured GIC. The previous treatment of dentin with polyacrylic
acid for 15–30 s can be performed, followed by the washing
and drying with a gentle air stream. For composite restorations, the GIC should also be used ( . Fig. 9.17a–d ). The preferable instrument used for application is the calcium
hydroxide liner placement instrument, which has a small
sphere at the end that allows to precisely apply the material
on the internal preparation wall ( . Figs. 4.46b and . 9.17c ).
The calcium hydroxide cement does not need to be used on
deep cavities.
On very deep cavities, where areas of the internal walls
with pink discoloration can be observed, some clinically
undetected pulp microexposures may exist. Therefore, it is Protection of the Dentin-Pulp Complex
9
necessary to use a material that is capable to stimulate the
odontoblasts to form mineralized tissue to protect the pulp.
The most adequate material for this situation is the calcium
hydroxide cement, which can be dispensed over a mixing
pad, mixed with a No. 22 spatula and taken into position with
a calcium hydroxide liner placement instrument. Its application must be performed only over areas with pink discolor -
ation, in layers of 0.5–0.7 mm, and not over other regions
. Over the calcium hydroxide cement and in the rest of
the pulpal or axial wall with deep dentin, a layer of GIC
should be used . After the initial setting of the cement,
the amalgam or composite restoration can be performed
(. Fig. 9.18a–g ) .
> The indirect pulp capping is performed only in deep
and very deep preparation, when there is no sclerotic
dentin.
9.10.1.2 Stepwise Excavation
The stepwise excavation is indicated in the cases of very deep
acute carious lesion, in young patients, with the absence of
spontaneous pain and with response to the tactile and ther -
mal stimuli, specially to the cold with a fast relief [77, ]. It
is applied in a situation where the pulp is separated from the oral environment only by a thin layer of the carious dentin,
which if removed may cause the exposure of the pulp. It is
also recommended when there is doubt about the capacity of
the pulp to keep the vitality after a strong aggression caused
by the carious process. For that, the removal of the carious
dentin is performed in two clinical sessions, being possible to
re-evaluate the condition of the pulp and allow a remineralization of the dentin tissue.
On the first clinical session, the entire carious dentin is
removed from the external walls of the preparation, and only
the demineralized dentin tissue over the pulpal and axial
walls should remain, as it is shown in . Fig. 9.19a–f . After
that, the cleaning of the preparation is performed using a calcium hydroxide solution or an anionic detergent or a 2%
chlorhexidine solution, followed by drying of the walls with
soft air stream. Over the softened tissue on the internal walls,
a layer of calcium hydroxide cement liner is applied. The
whole preparation is then filled with a temporary restoration
made of GIC or RMGIC. The surface of the material must be
protected with a varnish, if a chemical curing GIC is used,
avoiding the syneresis or water absorption. In cases of large
preparations, the use of a syringe is recommended for easier material applications. Its technique of use is shown in
. Fig. 14.43a–f .
ab
cd
.Fig. 9.17 Indirect pulp capping on deep preparation using glass
ionomer cement. a Large carious lesion on tooth upper premolar; b
removal of the carious tissue, showing the deep internal walls; c mixed glass ionomer cement being caught by a calcium hydroxide liner
placement instrument; d liner material applied on the pulpal and axial
walls
A. C. de Mello Torres et al.
9
After finishing the temporary restoration, the occlusal
contacts must be adjusted and periapical radiography
obtained to use as control. This restoration can remain in
place for a period of 30–45 days up to 1 year, so that the carious lesion activity is reduced and allows that dentin-pulp
complex to remineralize the demineralized dentin and forms
sclerotic and/or tertiary, significantly reducing the number of microorganisms and the risk of pulpal exposure during the
removal of the remaining carious tissue, on the next opening
of the cavity [17, 74, 93, ].
On the second session, after the waiting period, the anamnesis, sensitivity, and pulp vitality tests must be repeated. The
radiographic exam may show the formation of sclerosis or
tertiary dentin below the remaining dentin. With a positive
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 9.18 Indirect capping in very deep preparation. a Initial
aspect; b opening the cavity to obtain full access to the lesion; c
removal of the carious tissue; d very deep region over the mesiolingual pulp horn with pink discoloration; e equal portions of the base
and catalyst pastes of calcium hydroxide cement being placed over the
paper mixing pad; f material being mixed with a No. 22 cement
spatula; g mixed material being caught with the end of a calcium hydroxide liner placement instrument; h application of the calcium
hydroxide cement over deepest area with pink discoloration; i
application of a layer of GIC over the entire pulpal wall; j application of
the primer; k application of the adhesive; l application of composite
increments in the undermined enamel areas; m placement of oblique
increments; n finished restorationProtection of the Dentin-Pulp Complex
9
.Fig. 9.18 (continued)
gh
ij
kl
mn
A. C. de Mello Torres et al.
9
determination of the pulp vitality and absence of any symptoms, the treatment can be continued, removing the remaining carious dentin. For that, the anesthesia and the isolation
of the operating field are performed. The cavity is open, and
the remaining carious dentin can be removed using large
diameter round bur (No. 4, 6, or 8) in low-speed handpiece.
Extreme care must be taken at this moment to avoid pulpal exposure. Then, the preparation cleaning is performed using
calcium hydroxide solution, anionic detergent, or 2%
chlorhexidine solution. Considering that the stepwise excavation is performed on very deep cavities, the protective material indicated is the calcium hydroxide cement, applied only
on areas next to the pulp with pink color, if they exist. If there
were no areas with pink discoloration, just a layer of GIC is
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 9.19 Stepwise excavation. a Deep carious lesion in which the
entire removal of the carious tissue could result in pulp exposure; b , c
total removal of the carious tissue from the surrounding walls, without
touching the pulpal wall; d necessary materials (1, calcium hydroxide
cement; 2, glass ionomer cement powder and liquid; 3, protective
varnish); e application of a calcium hydroxide cement layer over the
demineralized dentin; f temporary restoration with glass ionomer cement; g after the waiting period, removal of the temporary restoration and remaining carious tissue is performed avoiding to expose the
pulp; h lining with glass ionomer cement; i application of the universal
matrix and wooden wedge; j after the application of the adhesive
system, the restoration of the proximal contact was done; k restoration
of the dentin with opaque composite; l finished restoration after the
application of the enamel shade composite (Grandio SO—Voco)Protection of the Dentin-Pulp Complex
9
applied, and the final restoration is performed. After that, the
occlusal contact adjustment is required ( . Fig. 9.19g , h).
The aim of the stepwise excavation is to block the aggressions that reach the pulp from the carious lesions through
dentin tubules, hindering the metabolic circuit that occurs
due to the oral fluids and the bacteria of the carious tissue,
inactivate the bacteria by bacteriostatic or bactericide effects
of the calcium hydroxide, remineralize the remaining demineralized dentin, hypermineralize the underlying health dentin, and stimulate the formation of reactional dentin. Those
effects allow the complete removal of the remaining carious
tissue on the second clinical session, without the exposure of the pulpal tissue . Several studies have shown that when
the cavity is opened again, the color of the lesion changes
from light brown to dark brown, the consistency changes
from wet and soft to dry and hard, and the number of viable
Streptococcus mutans and Lactobacillus are significantly
reduced or even completely disappear. The radiographic
image may show no change or even decrease of the radiolucent area, the dentin sclerosis, or the formation of ter -
tiary dentin .
Clinical studies reported high success rate with the stepwise excavation and showed that, in 83% of the treated teeth,
the pulp presented normal clinical response to the vitality .Fig. 9.19 (continued)
gh
ij
kl
A. C. de Mello Torres et al.
9
tests . They observed that the immediate success (60–
90 days after the treatment) depends on the initial clinical
condition of the pulp, and the long-term success is directly
related to the quality of the final restoration. They also verified that the age of the patient did not influence the success
rate. In addition, just the partial removal of the carious tissue
reduces the risk of pulpal exposure in up to 98%, when compared to the removal of the entire carious tissue on deep
preparation . In order to perform the treatment, the pulp
vitality must be confirmed with pulp sensitivity testing, and
the reversibility of the inflammatory response must be evaluated. The report of spontaneous pain that is not relieved
with the use of analgesics turns the prognosis of the treatment somewhat doubtful. Radiographically, the tooth must
not present periapical alterations and internal or external
resorption.
The use of the calcium hydroxide on the stepwise excavation has its effectiveness proved by several authors, promoting the remineralization of the demineralized dentin and the
reduction of the inflammatory response of the pulp, due to its
bactericidal and bacteriostatic properties [51, 54, ].
However, the type of the material used is less important for
the success of the treatment than to obtain a restoration with
an adequate marginal sealing, during the waiting period
between the first and second clinical sessions [56, 74, ].
9.10.2 Direct Pulp Protection
The direct protection of the dentin-pulp complex consists of
the placement of a protective material directly over the
exposed pulp, to maintain its vitality and promote the pulp
healing and the formation of a mineralized barrier over it.
The technique for direct protection of the dentin-pulp complex may be divided in three types: direct pulp capping, pulp
curettage, and pulpotomy.
9.10.2.1 Direct Pulp Capping
The direct pulp capping is indicated in the cases of mechanical or accidental exposure, when the pulp is vital and sound,
or with a reversible inflammation . This situation gener -
ally occurs during the tooth preparation, where the accidental exposure of the pulp may happen, and in the cases of
dental traumas. The most important factors directly related
to the success of the direct pulp capping are the correct diagnosis of the pulpal condition, the absence of bacterial contamination, the use of adequate protective materials, and
the effective sealing of the cavity with a proper restoration
. Some studies showed that it is more probable that the
treatment of the exposed pulp is successful, when the exposure has happened due to mechanical reasons than when it
happens due to caries . The penetration of the caries
lesion toward the pulp will result in the bacterial invasion
and the pulp inflammation. This causes the pulp to be less
capable to respond and to heal itself, compared to what is
seen when there is a mechanical exposure and the inflammation is not present .
> The key factors for the success of the direct pulp
capping are the correct diagnosis of the pulpal
condition, the absence of bacterial contamination, the
use of adequate protective materials, and the effective
sealing of the cavity with a proper restoration.
The presence of bacteria on the pulp exposure areas must be
avoided, once several studies have shown the adverse effects
of the bacterial contamination [22, 42, 43]. Therefore, the
direct pulp capping is more indicated when the exposure is
recent, and any contamination is not associated with a real
pulp infection. In addition, the rubber dam isolation and the
operating field disinfection are important to reduce the contamination possibility. In the cases of pulp contamination
due to trauma, it is important to evaluate the patient’s clinical
history, the time that pulp is exposed to the oral environment, the extension of the tooth fracture, the quality of the
tooth remaining, and the viability of the restorative treatment. The most favorable responses are obtained when the
treatment of the pulpal tissue occurs up to 24 h after the
trauma .
The calcium hydroxide powder or paste is still the most
used material for the direct protection of the dentin-pulp
complex . However, the MTA has also been indicated
and used for this purpose. A clinical study evaluated the
direct pulp capping made with the calcium hydroxide in
teeth, during 16 years . The authors verified that the
treatment was most favorable in patients with age under 40
years old in relation to the patients with age over 60 years old.
They also verified that the probability of loss of the pulp vitality after the treatment was significantly greater in the first 5
years of treatment. In the favorable cases, the dentin bridge
closing the exposure must be formed 30–45 days after the
procedure .
> The greater chances of success of direct pulp capping
are on patients under 40 years old in relation to those
with age over 60 years old. After a trauma, the most
favorable responses are obtained when the treatment
occurs within the first 24 h.
If the exposure happens during the cut of healthy dentin, on
the final phase of the tooth preparation, the protection of the
exposed area must be performed before the preparation is
concluded. If the preparation is being performed without the
rubber dam isolation and an exposure occurs, the immediate
isolation and the antisepsis of the operating field with 2% The direct protection of the dentin-pulp complex
consists of the placement of a protective material
directly over the exposed pulp, to maintain its vitality
and promote the pulp healing and the formation of a
mineralized barrier over it. The techniques are direct
pulp capping, pulp curettage (superficial pulp removal),
and pulpotomy (pulpal chamber pulp removal).Protection of the Dentin-Pulp Complex
9chlorhexidine solution should be performed before the capping. However, the chlorhexidine must not be applied over
the exposed pulp. If the exposure occurs during the removal
of a deep caries lesion, and the removal of the remaining
carious tissue will result in an increase of the exposure, it
must be interrupted and the capping be made. If the remaining carious tissue does not coincide with the exposure area,
the capping should be performed and the remaining carious
tissue removed, since this procedure does not lead to new
exposures. To avoid the contamination of the exposed pulp
area, the complete removal of the surrounding carious tissues
is always recommended before using cutting instruments on
the internal walls, because if an exposure occurs, the contamination will be reduced.
In . Figs. 9.20a–i and . 9.21a–d , it is shown the sequence
for the direct pulp capping. The preparation is irrigated with
a saline solution or calcium hydroxide solution, because
they are less aggressive to the pulpal tissue . Bleeding
must be controlled to allow adequate contact between the
protective material and the exposed pulpal tissue. Among
the factors that have shown a significant role in the success
of the treatment is the bleeding control. The presence of the
interposed blood clot, between the calcium hydroxide or
MTA and the pulp, may make the lesion repair reactions difficult. In addition, the bleeding that does not stop may indicate a greater degree of pulp inflammation, resulting in a
reduction of the reparative capacity. The moisture and the
contamination of the dentin area adjacent to exposure, due
to the bleeding, may turn it difficult to reach an adequate
sealing of the restoration and to prevent the later marginal
microleakage .
> During direct pulp capping, the bleeding must be fully
controlled to allow adequate contact between the
protective material and the exposed pulpal tissue. The
presence of the interposed blood clot between the
calcium hydroxide and the pulp will make the repair
difficult.
After the hemostasis, the cavity is dried with sterile small cotton pellets or a sterile piece of absorbent paper. After that, a
solution composed by an association of antibiotics and antiinflammatory, sold with the name of Otosporin® (GlaxoSmithKline—otologic suspension—association of
hydrocortisone, polymyxin B sulfate, and neomycin sulfate)
or Maxitrol (Alcon—ophthalmic solution—association of
dexamethasone, polymyxin B sulfate, neomycin sulfate), is
applied using small pellets soaked with the medication dur -
ing 10 min, directly over the pulpal tissue ( . Fig. 9.20e ). A
new irrigation with saline or calcium hydroxide solution is
performed to remove the medication. Then, the area is dried
with a sterile cotton pellet.
Then a material to stimulate the formation of dentin
bridge is applied over the exposed area. This material can be
the MTA or calcium hydroxide p.a. (powder or paste). The
protective material must be applied over the pulpal tissue,
without compression, and only on the surface of the exposed
pulp, and the excess is removed ( . Figs. 9.20g and 9.21b ). In order to facilitate the placement of the material in the correct
place, an intraoral carrier can be used ( . Fig. 4.50b ), which is
filled with the material. It presents a plunger that, when
pushed, projects the material outward the tip, allowing its
application ( . Fig. 9.20f ). Over this material a layer of calcium hydroxide cement should be applied, covering a little
further than the exposed area, in such a way that the applied
powder is protected ( . Figs. 9.20h and 9.21c ). As the calcium
hydroxide cement must be protected from the acid etching,
and the rest of the cavity is deep and also needs to be protected, a layer of GIC is applied over the whole internal wall,
in case the final restoration is immediately performed
(. Fig. 9.20i ) . After the GIC setting, the cavity may be
restored with amalgam or composite, and then the occlusal
contact evaluated.
Another option is to completely fill the cavity with GIC,
to certify that there are no symptoms of pain on the days following the procedure ( . Fig. 9.21d ). It is necessary to wait a
period of 45–60 days for the postoperative control. After this
time the pulp sensitivity testing to cold is performed, and
also a new radiographic exam is done, in order to evaluate
the periapical area looking for signals of pulpal necrosis. The
tooth must remain without symptoms . In the case of
pulp vitality, absence of symptoms and periapical lesions, the
removal of the superficial portion of the GIC can be done,
and the final restoration is performed.
9.10.2.2 Pulp Curettage
This procedure is recommended, for example, when the pulp
has been exposed due to a dental trauma and the pulp horn is
projected outward the dentin wall, or when the patient has
delayed some time to look for the dental treatment, resulting
in the contamination of the superficial pulpal tissue. It
is mostly indicated on teeth with incomplete apex formation.
The procedure consists in the superficial removal of a small
amount of the pulpal tissue, exposing the underlying tissue
without inflammation or bacteria, increasing the exposed
area available for contact with the protective material .
According to some authors, on the cases where the pulp is
too contaminated, this technique presents the inconvenience
of not knowing exactly if all the necrotic focus in the pulpal
tissue were removed, especially the ones that are on other
areas of the coronary pulp far from the pulp exposure site. In
this case, the pulpotomy should be the better indication .
Other authors claimed that the curettage must be performed
only on the cases of incomplete root formation, due to the
fact that in this case, the pulp presents a greater blood supply
. In the cases where the root apex is complete, the pulpotomy should be performed to increase the success rates of
the procedure [9, 10, 26].
The sequence for pulp curettage is presented in
. Fig. 9.22a–l . To perform this procedure, the anamnesis,
radiographic exam, and clinical diagnosis of the pulp condition have to be performed. After that, the anesthesia, rubber
dam isolation and disinfection of the operating field with a
2% chlorhexidine solution are done. The complete removal of
any remaining carious tissue must be performed, and the
A. C. de Mello Torres et al.
9
cavity irrigated with saline or calcium hydroxide solution.
After that, the superficial curettage of the exposed pulp is
done using a very sharp spoon excavator or a large diameter
round diamond point, on high-speed handpiece and copious
irrigation ( . Fig. 9.22f ) . Then, an abundant irrigation
with saline or calcium hydroxide solution is performed, and
the walls and pulp tissue are dried with small sterile cotton
pellets until the hemostasis is reached. When the bleeding stops, the characteristics of the remaining pulp tissue must be
evaluated, and it must have a firm consistency and bright red
color. Then, the corticosteroid/anti-inflammatory solution is
applied for 10 min, and a new irrigation with saline or a calcium hydroxide solution is performed to remove the medication. The drying is performed with small sterile cotton pellet,
and the material to stimulate the formation of the mineralized tissue is applied.
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 9.20 Direct pulp capping. a Initial aspect; b removal of the
carious tissue; c accidental exposure of the distobuccal pulp horn; d
materials necessary for the direct capping (1, Otosporin; 2, calcium
hydroxide p.a.; 3, calcium hydroxide cement); e application of the
association of corticosteroid/anti-inflammatory; f application of the
calcium hydroxide powder using an MTA carrier (Angelus); g calcium hydroxide p.a. applied over the exposed pulp; h application of the
calcium hydroxide cement a little further than the area covered by the
powder, closing the exposure area; i protection of the pulpal wall with
glass ionomer cement; j acid etching; k application of the adhesive
system; l restoration with composite resin (Grandio SO—Voco)Protection of the Dentin-Pulp Complex
9
Over the exposed area, a thin layer of the calcium hydroxide p.a. (powder or paste) or MTA is applied. The protector
material must be inserted with no compression over the pulp
tissue, and only over the exposed pulp surface, using an intraoral carrier ( . Fig. 4.50b ), and the excesses removed. Over
this material, a layer of the calcium hydroxide cement is
applied, covering the exposed area and a small region around
it. Over the calcium hydroxide cement and the rest of the
internal wall with deep dentin, a layer of GIC is placed, and
the final restoration can be immediately done. Another option
is to completely fill the preparation with GIC to follow up the
pulp tissue response after the procedure. A period of 45–60 days can be waited before the postoperative control. After this
period, the pulp sensitivity testing to cold can be performed,
as well a new radiographic examination to evince the status of
the periapical area. The tooth must have no symptoms . In
the cases of pulp vitality, the absence of symptoms and periapical lesion, a superficial layer of the glass ionomer can be
removed and the final restoration performed.
9.10.2.3 Pulpotomy
The pulpotomy consists of the removal of the inflamed coronary pulp tissue, maintaining the integrity of the radicular
pulp. It is indicated on the tooth with incomplete root forma- .Fig. 9.20 (continued)
gh
ij
kl
A. C. de Mello Torres et al.
9
tion in which the pulp remained exposed for more than 24 h.
It is also indicated on teeth with large coronary destruction,
but just on cases where there is no necessity to place an intracanal post . In order to perform the pulpotomy, a good
clinical and radiographic diagnosis is required. Some authors
verified that the percentage of success of the pulpotomy
(clinically and radiographically) was of % on young
patients and 84% on adults . The pulpotomy must be
indicated only when there is no bone rarefaction on the periapical region or internal resorption and there is an integrity
of lamina dura. In the clinical exam, the coronary pulp tissue
will be considered macroscopically vital when it presents
firm consistency, resistance to the cut, followed by a slight
bleeding with bright red color, that stops in a few minutes
after the cutting . The pulpotomy may be performed on a
single session (immediate technique) or in two sessions
(delayed technique).
For the immediate technique, the anamnesis, radiographic exam, and clinical diagnosis of the pulp condition
are performed. Then, the anesthesia, rubber dam isolations,
and the disinfection of the operating field with a 2% chlorhexidine solution must be done. The complete removal of the
carious tissue, when there is any, is performed with round
burs in a low-speed handpiece, and the opening of the pulpal chamber is done with diamond burs on high-speed handpiece. The cut of the coronary pulp tissue is performed with
sterile and sharp dentin spoon excavator or a round diamond
point on high-speed handpiece, with good refrigeration. The
use of burs on low-speed must be avoided, because dentin
shaves can be pressed over the pulpal tissue, interfering on
the reparative process . The bleeding must be controlled
to allow the adequate contact between the protective material
and the exposed pulp tissue. In order to do this, the irrigation
of the cavity must be performed with saline or calcium
hydroxide solution. Then the cavity must be dried with sterile
small cotton pellets ( . Fig. 9.23a–i ).
The antibiotics/anti-inflammatory solution (Otosporin
or Maxitrol) is applied for 10 min over the pulp tissue with a
small cotton pellet soaked with the medication. A new irrigation with saline or calcium hydroxide solution is performed
to remove the medication, and the cavity is dried with a small
sterile cotton pellet. Then, the pulp tissue must be covered by
calcium hydroxide p.a. (powder or paste) or MTA. The protective material must be inserted without any compression
over the exposed pulpal tissue, using an intraoral carrier, and
the excess be removed. Over it the calcium hydroxide cement
is applied covering the exposed area. The final restoration
may be performed on the same session, followed by the
ab
c d
.Fig. 9.21 Direct pulp capping associated to the temporary
restoration. a Accidental pulp exposure happened on the axial wall of
the distal box during the tooth preparation; b after controlling the bleeding, application of the calcium hydroxide p.a. over the area of the
exposure; c application of the calcium hydroxide cement covering the
entire axial wall; d temporary restoration with glass ionomer cementProtection of the Dentin-Pulp Complex
9occlusal contact adjustment. If the final restoration is not
performed in this same session, a temporary sealing of the
cavity must be done with GIC, waiting for 45–60 days for the
postoperative control. During the procedure, it is important
to analyze the details of the remaining pulpal tissue. On teeth
with several roots, there might be pulp with no conditions to
be preserved in one or more roots, and it will contraindicate
the pulpotomy. In this case, the conventional endodontic
treatment will be the first choice.In the delayed technique, immediately after the removal
of the coronary pulp and the hemostasis, a piece of cotton
soaked on an association of corticosteroids/antibiotics is
placed over the pulp tissue for 48–72 h, which will be closed
with a temporary restoration. This procedure is performed to
reduce the inflammation caused by the cut of the pulp, reducing the increase of intrapulpal pressure, which could
adversely affect the reparative process . After this period,
on the second session of treatment, the cotton pellet is
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 9.22 Pulp curettage. a , b Fracture of the tooth No. 21; c
surgically open area to expose the fracture limits; d fragment removed
showing the involvement of the pulp horn; e rubber dam isolation; f
curettage of the superficial contaminated pulp with a diamond point;
g application of the corticosteroid/antiinflammatory solution (Otosporin, Glazo Smith Kline); h aspect of the pulp after curettage and
hemostasis; i application of the calcium hydroxide p.a.; j covering of
the region with calcium hydroxide cement; k finished restoration and
suture; l aspect after 3 weeks
A. C. de Mello Torres et al.
9
removed, and the root pulp is covered with an adequate protector material, according to what is described on the immediate technique ( . Fig. 9.24a–i ).
After pulpotomy, the tooth must be preferably restored
at the same session. However, on the delayed pulpotomy
technique, it is necessary to use a material for temporary
restorative material. The GIC or RMGIC is the most indicated one for the temporary sealing. Between the sessions of
treatment, it is very important that there is no displacement
or fracture of the temporary restoration, which would allow
the microleakage of microorganisms, leading to failure of
the procedure.The postoperative follow-up must be performed at least
for 2 years. Once the coronary pulp is removed, the sensitivity tests are not considered trustworthy for the evaluation of the pulp vitality. To determine the success, it is
important to observe the absence of the signals and symptoms, as well the integrity of the lamina dura and the presence of a mineralized barrier or dentin bridge, although
is not always possible seen on radiography, besides the
absence of a periapical lesion [6 ]. In the cases where the
teeth have incomplete apex and the pulp is already on
the initial phase of necrosis, apexification techniques must
be applied. .Fig. 9.22 (continued)
gh
ij
klProtection of the Dentin-Pulp Complex
9
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 9.23 Pulpectomy with the immediate technique. a Fracture of
the tooth 21 resulted on a large pulp exposure on a tooth with an
incomplete apex formation; b , c surgery to expose the region and
rubber dam isolation; d curettage of the coronary pulp with the
spherical diamond point; e irrigation with saline solution to promote the bleeding control; f coronary pulp removed; g application of the
calcium hydroxide p.a. over the pulpal tissue; h covering with the
calcium hydroxide cement; i closing of the cavity with the glass
ionomer cement
A. C. de Mello Torres et al.
9
ab c
.Fig. 9.24 Pulpectomy with the delayed technique. a –c Initial
aspect of the fractured incisor with an incomplete apex formation. The
pulp was exposed to contamination for more than a week. The
coronary pulp was removed and a medication with corticosteroid/
anti-inflammatory association applied, remaining for 48 hours; d the
coronary pulp on the second session; e application of the calcium
hydroxide p.a.; f after 90 days, testing of the presence of the dentin bridge with a gutta-percha cone; g formation of the dentin bridge
clinically visible; h application of the calcium hydroxide cement over
the dentin bridge; i filling of the cavity with a glass ionomer cement.
(Images kindly supplied by Associate Prof. Carlos Henrique Ribeiro
Camargo, Professor of the Endodontics, ICT, São José dos Campos –
UNESP) .Fig. 9.23 (continued)
gh
iProtection of the Dentin-Pulp Complex
9
Conclusion
The aim of this chapter was to teach about materials, techniques, and principles currently available concerning the pro -
tection of the pulp-dentin complex. The histology and
physiology of this complex was explained, as well the origins
of pulpal alterations and the defense mechanisms. The methods to assess of pulp condition and create the diagnostic
hypothesis were also presented. The knowledge about the
cleaning and protective agents were presented, before describing the different techniques and its indications. Due
to the constant developments of materials and new scientific
findings, some recommendations will certainly be changed in
the next years. However, the search for the best technique
should be kept in the dentist’s mind. The particularities of
each human being must be considered by the clinicians, and
the procedures should not be always standardized but be
recommended according to the clinical conditions and par -
ticularities of each clinical case. .Fig. 9.24 (continued)
de
fg
hi
A. C. de Mello Torres et al.
9
References
1. Alptekin T, Ozer F, Unlu N, Cobanoglu N, Blatz MB. In vivo and
in vitro evaluations of microleakage around class I amalgam and
composite restorations. Oper Dent. ;35: –8. https://doi.
org/10. /10- -L.
2. Anusavice KJ. Phillips: dental materials. In: Elsevier. 11th ed; .
3. Aranha A, Giro E, Souza P , Hebling J, De Souza Costa C. Effect of
curing regime on the cytotoxicity of resin-modified glass-ionomer
lining cements applied to an odontoblast-cell line. Dent Mater.
;22: –9. https://doi.org/10. /j.dental. .11. .
4. Araujo MAM, Valera MC. Tratamento clínico dos traumatismos
dentários. São Paulo: Artes Médicas; .
5. Asgary S, Eghbal MJ, Parirokh M, Ghanavati F, Rahimi H. A comparative study of histologic response to different pulp capping
materials and a novel endodontic cement. Oral Surg Oral Med
Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. ; : –14. https://doi.
org/10. /j.tripleo. .06. .
6. Assed S, Silva LAB. Pulpotomia. In: Leonardo MR, editor. Endodontia Trat canais radiculares princípios técnicos e biológicos. São
Paulo: Artes Médicas; . p. 49–66.
7. Avery JK. Polpa. In: Bhaskar SN, editor. Histol e Embriol Orban.
10th ed. São Paulo: Artes Médicas; . p. –5.
8. Baratieri LN. Dentística. Procedimentos preventivos e restauradores. 2nd ed. São Paulo: Santos; .
9. Baratieri LN, Mondelli J, Francischone CE. Curetagem pulpar como
opção de tratamento conservador. Rev Gaúcha Odontol.
;33: – .
10. Baratieri LN, Monteiro S, Caldeira de Andrada MA. Pulp curettage-
-surgical technique. Quintessence Int. ;20: –93.
11. Barrieshi-Nusair KM, Qudeimat MA. A prospective clinical study of
mineral trioxide aggregate for partial pulpotomy in cariously
exposed permanent teeth. J Endod. ;32: –5. https://doi.
org/10. /j.joen. .12. .
12. Baume LJ, Holz J. Long term clinical assessment of direct pulp
capping. Int Dent J. ;31: –60.
13. Bergenholtz G, Horsted-Bindslev P , Reit C. Endodontia. Rio de
Janeiro: Guanabara Koogan; .
14. Berry FA, Parker SD, Rice D, Muñoz CA. Microleakage of amalgam
restorations using dentin bonding system primers. Am J Dent.
;9: –8.
15. Bjørndal L, Darvann T. A light microscopic study of odontoblastic
and non-odontoblastic cells involved in tertiary dentinogenesis in
well-defined cavitated carious lesions. Caries Res. ;33:50–60.
https://doi.org/10. / .
16. Bjørndal L, Darvann T, Thylstrup A. A quantitative light micro -
scopic study of the odontoblast and subodontoblastic reactions
to active and arrested enamel caries without cavitation. Caries
Res. ;32:59–69. https://doi.org/10. / .
17. Bjørndal L. The caries process and its effect on the pulp: the science is changing and so is our understanding. J Endod.
;34:S2–5. https://doi.org/10. /j.joen. .02. .
18. Bogen G, Kim JS, Bakland LK. Direct pulp capping with mineral
trioxide aggregate: an observational study. J Am Dent Assoc.
; : –15; quiz –15. https://doi.org/10. /jada.
archive. . .
19. Bortoluzzi EA, Broon NJ, Bramante CM, Consolaro A, Garcia RB, de
Moraes IG, et al. Mineral trioxide aggregate with or without calcium chloride in pulpotomy. J Endod. ;34: –5. https://doi.
org/10. /j.joen. .09. .
20. Boutsioukis C, Noula G, Lambrianidis T. Ex vivo study of the efficiency of two techniques for the removal of mineral trioxide
aggregate used as a root canal filling material. J Endod.
;34: –42. https://doi.org/10. /j.joen. .07. . 21. Brännstrom M. Dentin and pulp in restorative dentistry. London:
Wolfe; .
22. Brännström M. Communication between the oral cavity and the
dental pulp associated with restorative treatment. Oper Dent.
;9:57–68.
23. Brännström M, Johnson G. Effects of various conditioners and
cleaning agents on prepared dentin surfaces: a scanning electron
microscopic investigation. J Prosthet Dent. ;31: –30.
24. Breschi L, Mazzoni A, Ruggeri A, Cadenaro M, Di Lenarda R, De
Stefano Dorigo E. Dental adhesion review: aging and stability of
the bonded interface. Dent Mater. ;24:90– . https://doi.
org/10. /j.dental. .02. .
25. Briso ALF, Rahal V, Mestrener SR, Dezan Junior E. Biological
response of pulps submitted to different capping materials.
Braz Oral Res. ;20: –25. https://doi.org/10. /S180683242006000300007.
26. Busato ALS. Dentística: Filosofia, conceitos e prática clínica. 1st ed.
São Paulo: Artes Médicas; .
27. Busato ALS, Hernandez PAG, Macedo RP . Dentística: restaurações
estéticas. 1st ed. São Paulo: Artes Médicas; .
28. Camilleri J, Montesin FE, Brady K, Sweeney R, Curtis RV, Ford
TRP . The constitution of mineral trioxide aggregate. Dent Mater.
;21: – . https://doi.org/10. /j.dental. .05. .
29. Camp JH. Diagnosis dilemmas in vital pulp therapy: treatment for
the toothache is changing, especially in young. immature teeth J
Endod. ;34:S6–12. https://doi.org/10. /j.joen. .03. .
30. Carneiro FC, Nadanovsky P . Dentística ultraconservativa: Fundamentos e técnicas de tratamento da cárie em dentina. São Paulo:
Santos; .
31. Carvalho CN, de Oliveira Bauer JR, Loguercio AD, Reis A. Effect of ZOE
temporary restoration on resin-dentin bond strength using different
adhesive strategies. J Esthet Restor Dent ;19: – .; discussion . https://doi.org/10. /j. - . . .x.
32. Ten Cate AR. Histologia oral, desenvolvimento, estrutura e função.
5th ed. São Paulo: Mosby; .
33. Chambers IG. The role and methods of pulp testing in oral diagno -
sis: a review. Int Endod J. ;15:1–15.
34. Charlton DG, Moore BK, Swartz ML. In vitro evaluation of the use
of resin liners to reduce microleakage and improve retention of
amalgam restorations. Oper Dent. ;17: –9.
35. Chong WF, Swartz ML, Phillips RW. Displacement of cement bases
by amalgam condensation. J Am Dent Assoc. ;74:97– .
36. Cohen S, Hargreaves KM. Caminhos da polpa. 9th ed. Rio de
Janeiro: Elsevier Editora; .
37. Consolaro A. Alterações pulpares: correlações clínico-radiográficas e microscópicas. In: Leonardo MR, Leal JM, editors. Endodontia Trat canais radiculares. 3rd ed. São Paulo: Panamericana; .
p. 41–61.
38. Costa CAS, Teixeira HM, Nascimento ABL. Presente e futuro dos for -
radores e capeadores pulpares. In: Cardoso RJA, Gonçalves EAN,
editors. Dentística/Laser. São Paulo: Artes Médicas; . p. 75–93.
39. Costa CAS. Compatibilidade biológica do ionômero de vidro foto -
polimerizável (Vitremer 3M). Avaliação histológica dos seus efeitos sobre dentina e tecido pulpar em dentes de rato. Rev Odontol
USP . ;10: –63.
40. Costa CAS, Hebling J, Campos EA, Lessa FCR, Oliveira CF. Reper -
cussões dos procedimentos operatórios e técnicas sobre o complexo dentino-pulpar. In: Porto CLA, Pereirra JC, Netto CA, editors.
Cariol Grup Bras Profr Dentística. São Paulo: Artes Médicas; .
p. –95.
41. Costa CA, Vaerten MA, Edwards CA, Hanks CT. Cytotoxic effects of
current dental adhesive systems on immortalized odontoblast
cell line MDPC-23. Dent Mater. ;15: –41. https://doi.
org/10. /S0109- (99) -8.Protection of the Dentin-Pulp Complex
9 42. Cox CF. Biocompatibility of dental materials in the absence of bac -
terial infection. Oper Dent. ;12: –52.
43. Cox CF, Keall CL, Keall HJ, Ostro E, Bergenholtz G. Biocompatibility
of surface-sealed dental materials against exposed pulps. J Prosthet Dent. ;57:1–8.
44. Cox CF, Sübay RK, Ostro E, Suzuki S, Suzuki SH. Tunnel defects in
dentin bridges: their formation following direct pulp capping.
Oper Dent. ;21:4–11.
45. Dammaschke T, Leidinger J, Schafer E. Long-term evaluation of
direct pulp capping--treatment outcomes over an average period
of 6.1 years. Clin Oral Investig. ;14: –67. https://doi.
org/10. /s00784- - -9.
46. Dammaschke T, Gerth HUV, Züchner H, Schäfer E. Chemical and
physical surface and bulk material characterization of white Pro -
Root MTA and two Portland cements. Dent Mater. ;21: –8.
https://doi.org/10. /j.dental. .01. .
47. De Deus QD. Endodontia. 5th ed. Rio de Janeiro: Medsi; .
48. Diamon RD, Stanley HR, Swerdlow H. Reparative dentin formation
resulting from cavity preparation. J Prosthet Dent. ;16: –
34. https://doi.org/10. / - (66) -6.
49. Dörfer CE, Staehle HJ, Wurst MW, Duschner H, Pioch T. The nanole -
akage phenomenon: influence of different dentin bonding agents,
thermocycling and etching time. Eur J Oral Sci. ; : –51.
https://doi.org/10. /j. - . . .x.
50. Duque C, Hebling J, Smith AJ, Giro EMA, Oliveira MF, De Souza Costa
CA. Reactionary dentinogenesis after applying restorative materials and bioactive dentin matrix molecules as liners in deep cavities
prepared in nonhuman primate teeth. J Oral Rehabil. ;33: –
61. https://doi.org/10. /j. - . . .x.
51. Eidelman E, Finn SB, Koulourides T. Remineralization of carious dentin treated with calcium hydroxide. J Dent Child. ;32: –25.
52. Eikenberg S, Vandre R. Comparison of digital dental X-ray systems
with self-developing film and manual processing for endodontic
file length determination. J Endod. ;26:65–7.
53. Estrela C. Ciência Endodôntica. São Paulo: Artes Médicas; .
54. Fairbourn DR, Charbeneau GT, Loesche WJ. Effect of improved
Dycal and IRM on bacteria in deep carious lesions. J Am Dent
Assoc. ; : –52.
55. Farah JW, Clark AE, Mohsein M, Thomas PA. Effect of cement base
thicknesses on MOD amalgam restorations. J Dent Res.
;62: –11. https://doi.org/10. / .
56. Fejerskov O, Kidd E. Cárie dentária: A doença e seu tratamento
clínico. São Paulo: Santos; .
57. Felton DA, Bergenholtz G, Kanoy BE. Evaluation of the desensitizing effect of Gluma Dentin Bond on teeth prepared for completecoverage restorations. Int J Prosthodont. ;4: –8.
58. Ferracane JL, Cooper PR, Smith AJ. Can interaction of materials
with the dentin-pulp complex contribute to dentin regeneration?
Odontology. ;98:2–14. https://doi.org/10. /s10266- -5.
59. Ferris DM, Baumgartner JC. Perforation repair comparing two
types of mineral trioxide aggregate. J Endod. ;30: –4.
https://doi.org/10. / - - .
60. Filler SJ, Lazarchik DA, Givan DA, Retief DH, Heaven TJ. Shear bond
strengths of composite to chlorhexidine-treated enamel. Am J
Dent. ;7:85–8.
61. Foley J, Evans D, Blackwell A. Partial caries removal and cariostatic
materials in carious primary molar teeth: a randomised controlled
clinical trial. Br Dent J. ; : – . https://doi.org/10. /
sj.bdj. .
62. Francischone C. Efeitos de alguns agentes de limpeza sobre a dentina, observado através de microscopia eletrônica de varredura.
Estomat Cult. ;14:49–56.
63. Francischone C. Avaliação clínico e radiográfica, feita a curto e
longo prazo, de uma técnica de pulpotomia em função da idade
do paciente, do grupo de dentes e da propedêutica. [Bauru]: Fac -
uldade de Odontologia de Bauru. Universidade de São Paulo;
. 64. Fridland M, Rosado R. MTA solubility: a long term study. J Endod. ;
31: –9. https://doi.org/10. /01.DON. . .3e .
65. Fruits TJ, Khajotia SS, Nicholson JW. Biologic considerations. Summitt’s fundam oper dent. 2nd ed. Chicago: Quintessence; .
p. 1–36.
66. Garone Netto N, Carvalho RCR, Russo E, Sobral MAP , Luz
MAAC. Proteção do complexo dentina-polpa. In: Garone Netto N,
editor. Introdução à Dentística Restauradora. São Paulo: Editora
Santos; . p. –66.
67. Garrocho-Rangel A, Flores H, Silva-Herzog D, Hernandez-Sierra F,
Mandeville P , Pozos-Guillen AJ. Efficacy of EMD versus calcium
hydroxide in direct pulp capping of primary molars: a randomized
controlled clinical trial. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol
Endodontol. ; : –8. https://doi.org/10. /j.tripleo. .12. .
68. Granath LE, Hagman G. Experimental pulpotomy in human bicuspids with reference to cutting technique. Acta Odontol Scand.
;29: –63. https://doi.org/10. / .
69. Gwinnett AJ, Tay F. Early and intermediate time response of the
dental pulp to an acid etch technique in vivo. Am J Dent.
;11:S35–44.
70. Hanks CT, Strawn SE, Wataha JC, Craig RG. Cytotoxic effects of
resin components on cultured mammalian fibroblasts. J Dent Res.
;70: –5.
71. Hasheminia SM, Feizi G, Razavi SM, Feizianfard M, Gutknecht N,
Mir M. A comparative study of three treatment methods of direct
pulp capping in canine teeth of cats: a histologic evaluation.
Lasers Med Sci. ;25:9–15. https://doi.org/10. /s10103008- -9.
72. Hebling J, Giro EMA, Costa CAS. Human pulp response after an
adhesive system application in deep cavities. J Dent. ;27: –
64. https://doi.org/10. /S0300- (99) -2.
73. Heithersay GS. Calcium hydroxide in the treatment of pulpless
teeth with associated pathology. J Br Endod Soc. ;8:74–93.
74. Hilton TJ. Keys to clinical success with pulp capping: a review of
the literature. Oper Dent. ;34: –25.
75. Hilton TJ. Cavity sealers, liners, and bases: current philosophies
and indications for use. Oper Dent. ;21: –46.
76. Hinoura K, Moore BK, Phillips RW. Tensile bond strength between
glass ionomer cements and composite resins. J Am Dent Assoc.
; : –72.
77. Holland R, de Souza V. Clinical diagnosis and indication for treat -
ment of inflamed dental pulp. Rev Assoc Paul Cir Dent.
;24: –93.
78. Holland R, Souza V, Russo MC. Tratamento conservador da polpa
dental. Ars Curandi Odont. ;2:3–17.
79. Hollinger J, Wong ME. The integrated processes of hard tissue
regeneration with special emphasis on fracture healing. Oral Surg
Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. ;82: – .
80. Hormati AA, Fuller JL. The fracture strength of amalgam overlying
base materials. J Prosthet Dent. ;43:52–7.
81. Huang FM, Chang YC. Cytotoxicity of dentine-bonding agents on
human pulp cells in vitro. Int Endod J. ;35: –9. https://doi.
org/10. /j. - . . .x.
82. Islam I, Chng HK, Yap AU. Comparison of the physical and mechanical properties of MTA and Portland cement. J Endod. ;32: –
7. https://doi.org/10. /j.joen. .10. .
83. Jafarzadeh H, Udoye CI, Kinoshita J. The application of tooth temperature measurement in endodontic diagnosis: a review. J Endod.
;34: –40. https://doi.org/10. /j.joen. .09. .
84. Kanca J 3rd. Replacement of a fractured incisor fragment over
pulpal exposure: a long-term case report. Quintessence Int.
;27: –32.
85. Karjalainen S. Secondary and reparative dentin formation. In:
Linde A, editor. Dentin dentinogenes. Boca Raton: CRC Press;
. p. –20.
86. Katritzky AR, Wang M, Wilkerson CR, Yang H. A novel approach to
substituted 2 H -azirines. J Org Chem. ;68: –8. https://doi.
A. C. de Mello Torres et al.
9
org/10. /jo034472i.
87. Khocht A, Janal M, Harasty L, Chang KM. Comparison of direct
digital and conventional intraoral radiographs in detecting alveo -
lar bone loss. J Am Dent Assoc. ; : –75.
88. Krejci I, Lutz F. Mixed class V restorations: the potential of a dentine
bonding agent. J Dent. ;18: –70. 1.
https://doi.org/10. / - (59) -5.
90. Lan WH, Lan WC, Wang TM, Lee YL, Tseng WY, Lin CP , et al. Cytotox -
icity of conventional and modified glass ionomer cements. Oper
Dent. ;28: –9.
91. Lee HL Jr, Orlowski JA, Scheidt GC, Lee JR. Effects of acid etchants
on dentin. J Dent Res. ;52: –33.
92. Lee SJ, Monsef M, Torabinejad M. Sealing ability of a mineral triox -
ide aggregate for repair of lateral root perforations. J Endod.
;19: –4. https://doi.org/10. /S0099- (06) -3.
93. Leksell E, Ridell K, Cvek M, Mejare I. Pulp exposure after stepwise
versus direct complete excavation of deep carious lesions in young
posterior permanent teeth. Endod Dent Traumatol. ;12: –6.
94. Leonardo MR. Endodontia: tratamento de canais radiculares:
princípios técnicos e biológicos. São Paulo: Artes Médicas; .
95. Leonardo MR, Leal JM. Endodontia. São Paulo: Panamericana;
.
96. Lohmann Soares IM, Soares IJ, Holland R. Immediate effect of the
action of various rotary instruments and curets used in pulpot -
omy. Histological evaluation in dog teeth. Rev Esp Endod.
;4:3–9.
97. Lopes HP , Siqueira JF Jr. Endodontia: Biologia e técnica. Rio de
Janeiro: Médica e Científica Ltd; .
98. Magloire H, Bouvier M, Joffre A. Odontoblast response under carious lesions. Proc Finn Dent Soc. ;88(Suppl 1): –74.
99. Manders CA, Garcia-Godoy F, Barnwell GM. Effect of a copal var -
nish, ZOE or glass ionomer cement bases on microleakage of
amalgam restorations. Am J Dent. ;3:63–6.
. Martins LRM. Estudo de propriedades mecânicas (resistência ao
cisalhamento, por puncionamento, à compressão e tração diametral) de 7 cimentos utilizados como base protetora de restaurações. [Bauru]: Faculdade de Odontologia de Bauru. Universidade
de São Paulo; .
. Matos AB. Estudo “in vitro” de diversos agentes utilizados para
limpeza de superfície dentinária. Rev Pós-gr fac Odont USP .
;2:37–44.
. Matthews B, Andrew D, Ames TR. The functional properties of
intradental nerves: dentin-pulp complex. Chicago: Quintessences
Publisching Co; .
. Meiers JC, Kresin JC. Cavity disinfectants and dentin bonding.
Oper Dent. ;21: –9.
. Menezes R, Bramante CM, Letra A, Carvalho VGG, Garcia RB. Histo -
logic evaluation of pulpotomies in dog using two types of mineral
trioxide aggregate and regular and white Portland cements as
wound dressings. Oral Surgery, Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol
Endodontology. ;98: –9. https://doi.org/10. /j.tripleo. .03. .
. Mertz-Fairhurst EJ, Curtis JW Jr, Ergle JW, Rueggeberg FA, Adair
SM. Ultraconservative and cariostatic sealed restorations: results
at year 10. J Am Dent Assoc. ; :55–66.
. Meryon SD. The model cavity method incorporating dentine. Int
Endod J. ;21:79–84.
. Mjör IA. Pulp dentin biology in restorative dentistry. Chicago:
Quintessence; .
. Mjör IA, Fejerskov O. Embriologia e histologia humana. São Paulo:
Panamericana; .
. Mjör IA, Ferrari M. Pulp-dentin biology in restorative dentistry.
Part 6: reactions to restorative materials, tooth-restoration
interfaces, and adhesive techniques. Quintessence Int.
;33:35–63. . Modena KC da S, Casas-Apayco LC, Atta MT, Costa CA de S, Hebling
J, Sipert CR, et al. Cytotoxicity and biocompatibility of direct and
indirect pulp capping materials. J Appl Oral Sci. ;17: –54.
https://doi.org/10. /S167877572009000600002.
. Mondelli J. Proteção do complexo dentinopulpar. São Paulo: Artes
Médicas; .
. Mondelli J. Dentística operatória. 4th ed. São Paulo: Sarvier; .
. De Munck J, Van Meerbeek B, Yoshida Y, Inoue S, Vargas M, Suzuki
K, et al. Four-year water degradation of total-etch adhesives
bonded to dentin. J Dent Res. ;82: –40. https://doi.
org/10. / .
. Nagem FH. Adesão – adesividade em Odontologia. OdontoMaster – Estética. ;2:5–17.
. Nagem Filho H, de Abreu Poletto LT, Vieira LC, Pereira JC. Chemical
properties and biocompatibility of Ca(OH)2. Rev Odontol da Univ
Sao Paulo. ;1:20–3.
. Navarro MFL, Pascotto RC. Cimentos de ionômero de vidro. 1st ed.
São Paulo: Artes Médicas: Série EAP-APCD; .
. van North R. Introduction to dental materials. 4th ed. London:
Mosby; .
. Orhan AI, Oz FT, Ozcelik B, Orhan K. A clinical and microbiological
comparative study of deep carious lesion treatment in deciduous
and young permanent molars. Clin Oral Investig. ;12: –78.
https://doi.org/10. /s00784- - -6.
. Pameijer CH, Wendt SL. Microleakage of “surface-sealing” materials. Am J Dent. ;8:43–6.
. Parirokh M, Torabinejad M. Mineral trioxide aggregate: a compre -
hensive literature review-part III: clinical applications, drawbacks,
and mechanism of action. J Endod. ;36: –13. https://doi.
org/10. /j.joen. .09. .
. Parirokh M, Torabinejad M. Mineral trioxide aggregate: a compre -
hensive literature review-part I: chemical, physical, and antibacte -
rial properties. J Endod. ;36:16–27. https://doi.org/10. /j.
joen. .09. .
. Pashley DH. Dynamics of the pulpo-dentin complex. Crit Rev Oral
Biol Med. ;7: –33. https://doi.org/10. /
.
. Pashley DH, Carvalho RM. Dentine permeability and dentine
adhesion. J Dent. ;25: –72. https://doi.org/10. /
S03005712(96) -7.
. Pashley DH, Horner JA, Brewer PD. Interactions of conditioners on
the dentin surface. Oper Dent. ;Suppl 5: –50.
. Perdigão J. Dentin bonding: variables related to the clinical situation and the substrate treatment. Dent Mat. ;26:e24–37.
. Perdigão J, Denehy GE, Swift EJ. Effects of chlorhexidine on dentin
surfaces and shear bond strengths. Am J Dent. ;7:81–4.
. Pereira JC, Berbert A, Segala AD. Long term clinical and radio -
graphic evaluation of teet submitted to indirect pulp capping. J
Dent Res. ;76(Spec. I):Abstract n. .
. Pereira JC, Furuse AY, Benetti AR, Hannas AR, Canova GC, Costa LC,
et al. Proteção do complexo dentinopulpar. In: Busato AL, editor.
Dentística Filos Conceitos e prática clínica. São Paulo: Artes Médicas; . p. – .
. Pereira JC, Manfio AP , Franco EB, Lopes ES. Clinical evaluation of
Dycal under amalgam restorations. Am J Dent. ;3:67–70.
. Pesce HF, Medeiros JMF, Capriglione V, Santos M. Avaliação do
teste elétrico pulpar quando alicado nos diferentes grupos dentais. Odontol Mod. ;17:7–9.
. Peters DD, Augsburger RA. In vitro cold transference of bases and
restorations. J Am Dent Assoc. ; : –6.
. Petersson K, Soderstrom C, Kiani-Anaraki M, Levy G. Evaluation of
the ability of thermal and electrical tests to register pulp vitality.
Endod Dent Traumatol. ;15: –31.
. Powis DR, Folleras T, Merson SA, Wilson AD. Improved adhesion of
a glass ionomer cement to dentin and enamel. J Dent Res.
;61: –22.
. Reston EG, de Souza Costa CA. Scanning electron microscopy
evaluation of the hard tissue barrier after pulp capping with calProtection of the Dentin-Pulp Complex
9cium hydroxide, mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA) or ProRoot
MTA. Aust Endod J. ;35:78–84. https://doi.
org/10. /j. - . . .x.
. Ribeiro CC, Baratieri LN, Perdigão J, Baratieri NM, Ritter AV. A clinical, radiographic, and scanning electron microscopic evaluation
of adhesive restorations on carious dentin in primary teeth. Quintessence Int. ;30: –9.
. Ricketts D, Kidd E, Innes NPT, Clarkson JE. Complete or ultraconservative removal of decayed tissue in unfilled teeth. In: Ricketts
D, editor. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Chichester: Wiley; . p.
CD003808. https://doi.org/10. / .CD003808.pub2.
. Rickoff B, Trowbridge H, Baker J, Fuss Z, Bender IB. Effects of ther -
mal vitality tests on human dental pulp. J Endod. ;14: –5.
https://doi.org/10. /S0099- (88) -3.
. Ritter A, Baratieri LN, Monteiro JS. Caderno de Dentistica proteção
do complexo dentina-polpa. São Paulo: Santos; .
. Roberson TM, Heymann H, Swift EJ, Sturdevant CM. Sturdevant’s
art and science of operative dentistry. London: Mosby/Elsevier;
.
. Roberts HW, Toth JM, Berzins DW, Charlton DG. Mineral trioxide
aggregate material use in endodontic treatment: a review of the
literature. Dent Mater. ;24: –64. https://doi.org/10. /j.
dental. .04. .
. Rode SM, Cavalcanti BN. Proteção do complexo dentinapolpa: o
papel do hidróxido de cálcio e da hibridização. In: Cardoso RJA,
Gonçalves EAN, editors. Dentística/Laser. São Paulo: Artes Médicas; . p. 57–74.
. Sarkar N, Caicedo R, Ritwik P , Moiseyeva R, Kawashima I. Physico -
chemical basis of the biologic properties of mineral trioxide
aggregate. J Endod. ;31:97– . https://doi.org/10. /01.
DON. . .41.
. Schupbach P , Lutz F, Finger WJ. Closing of dentinal tubules by
Gluma desensitizer. Eur J Oral Sci. ; : –21.
. Shayegan A, Petein M, Vanden Abbeele A. The use of betatricalcium phosphate, white MTA, white Portland cement and
calcium hydroxide for direct pulp capping of primary pig teeth.
Dent Traumatol. ;25: –9. https://doi.
org/10. /j. - . . .x.
. Silva e Souza Jr MH, Correa ILV. Microleakage: influence of cavity
moisture. J Dent Res. ; 76: .
. Smith AJ. Reparative processes in dentin and pulp. In: Addy M,
Embery G, Edgar WM, editors. Tooth wear sensit. London: Dunitz;
. p. 53–66.
. Smith AJ, Cassidy N, Perry H, Bègue-Kirn C, Ruch JV, Lesot H. Reac -
tionary dentinogenesis. Int J Dev Biol. ;39: –80.
. Smith AJ, Matthews JB, Hall RC. Transforming growth factorbeta1
(TGF-beta1) in dentine matrix. Ligand activation and receptor
expression. Eur J Oral Sci. ; (Suppl): –84.
. Smith AJ. Vitality of the dentin-pulp complex in health and disease: growth factors as key mediators. J Dent Educ. ;67: –
89.
. Smulson MH. Classification and diagnosis of pulpal pathoses.
Dent Clin N Am. ;28: – .
. de Souza Costa CA, Hebling J, Randall RC. Human pulp response
to resin cements used to bond inlay restorations. Dent Mater.
;22: –62. https://doi.org/10. /j.dental. .10. .
. De Souza Costa CA, Giro EMA, Do Nascimento ABL, Teixeira HM,
Hebling J. Short-term evaluation of the pulpo-dentin complex
response to a resin-modified glass-ionomer cement and a bonding agent applied in deep cavities. Dent Mater. ;19: –46.
https://doi.org/10. /S0109- (03) -6.
. de Souza Costa CA, Hebling J, Garcia-Godoy F, Hanks CT. In vitro
cytotoxicity of five glass-ionomer cements. Biomaterials.
;24: –8. https://doi.org/10. /S0142- (03) -9.
. De Souza Costa CA, Teixeira HM, Lopes Do Nascimento AB,
Hebling J. Biocompatibility of resin-based dental materials
applied as liners in deep cavities prepared in human teeth. J Biomed Mater Res – Part B Appl Biomater. ;81: –84. https://
doi.org/10. /jbm.b. .
. Sowden JA. A preliminary report on the recalcification of carious
dentin. J Dent Child. ;23: –8.
. Stanley HR. Human pulp response to restorative dental proce -
dures. 2nd ed. Florida: Starter Printing; .
. Stanley HR, Pereira JC, Spiegel E, Broom C, Schultz M. The detec -
tion and prevalence of reactive and physiologic sclerotic dentin,
reparative dentin and dead tracts beneath various types of dental
lesions according to tooth surface and age. J Oral Pathol.
;12: –89.
. Stanley HR, White CL, McCray L. The rate of tertiary (reparative)
dentine formation in the human tooth. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral
Pathol. ;21: –9.
. Taira M, Wakasa K, Yamaki M, Matsui A. Heat generated when cut -
ting natural tooth enamel, composite resin model tooth enamel
and glass-ceramic Typodont tooth. Hiroshima Daigaku Shigaku
Zasshi. ;22: –2.
. Tam LE, Pulver E, McComb D, Smith DC. Physical properties of calcium hydroxide and glass-ionomer base and lining materials.
Dent Mater. ;5: –9. https://doi.org/10. / (89) -8.
. Tay FR, Gwinnett AJ, Pang KM, Wei SH. Structural evidence of a
sealed tissue interface with a total-etch wet-bonding technique
in vivo. J Dent Res. ;73: –36.
. Thompson VT, Craig RG, Curro FA, Green WS, Ship JA. Treatment of
deep carious lesions by complete excavation or partial removal. J
Am Dent Assoc. ; : –12. https://doi.org/10. /jada.
archive. . .
. Torabinejad M, Hong C, MC Donald F, Pittford T. Physical and chemical properties of a new root-end filling material. J Endod.
;21: –53. https://doi.org/10. /S0099- (06) -2.
. Torabinejad M, Chivian N. Clinical applications of mineral trioxide
aggregate. J Endod. ;25: – . https://doi.org/10. /
S0099- (99) -3.
. Torabinejad M, Parirokh M. Mineral trioxide aggregate: a compre -
hensive literature review—part II: leakage and biocompatibility
investigations. J Endod. ;36: – . https://doi.
org/10. /j.joen. .09. .
. Torres CRG, Carvalho JC, Valera MC, Araújo MAM. Materiais ósseoindutores para o complexo dentino pulpar. Rev Fac Odontol São
José dos Campos. ;3:88–96.
. Trowbridge HO. Pathogenesis of pulpitis resulting from dental
caries. J Endod. ;7:52–60.
. Trowbridge HO, Kim S. Pulp development, structure and function.
In: Cohen S, Burns RC, editors. Pathways pulp. 6th ed. St. Louis:
Mosby; . p. – .
. Tuna D, Ölmez A. Clinical long-term evaluation of MTA as a direct
pulp capping material in primary teeth. Int Endod J. ;41: –
8. https://doi.org/10. /j. - . . .x.
. Tziafas D, Alvanou A, Panagiotakopoulos N, Smith AJ, Lesot H,
Komnenou A, et al. Induction of odontoblast-like cell differentiation in dog dental pulps after in vivo implantation of dentine
matrix components. Arch Oral Biol. ;40: –93. https://doi.
org/10. / - (95) -2.
. Tziafas D, Belibasakis G, Veis A, Papadimitriou S. Dentin regeneration in vital pulp therapy: design principles. Adv Dent Res.
;15:96– . https://doi.org/10. /
01.
. Tziafas D, Smith A, Lesot H. Designing new treatment strategies in
vital pulp therapy. J Dent. ;28:77–92. https://doi.org/10. /
S0300- (99) -0.
. Tziafas D. Experimental bacterial anachoresis in dog dental pulps
capped with calcium hydroxide. J Endod. ;15: –5. https://
doi.org/10. /S0099- (89) -8.
. Uribe Echevarria JU. Operatoria dental: Ciencia y pratica. Madrid:
Avances Medico-dentales; .
A. C. de Mello Torres et al.
9
. Vieira DF, Mondelli J. Fracture strength of class II amalgam restorations condensed over protective bases. J Prosthet Dent.
;30: –72.
. Weine FS. Tratamento endodôntico. 5th ed. São Paulo: Editora
Santos; .
. Weisleder R, Yamauchi S, Caplan DJ, Trope M, Teixeira FB. The validity of pulp testing. A Clinical Study J Am Dent Assoc. ; : –
7. https://doi.org/10. /jada.archive. . . . Weyne S. Cariologia, a cárie como uma doença infecciosa e transmissível. In: Baratieri LN, editor. Dentística – procedimentos Prev e
restauradores. 3rd ed. Rio de Janeiro: Santos; . p. 1–42.
. Yap AU, Shah KC, Loh ET, Sim SS, Tan CC. Influence of eugenolcontaining temporary restorations on bond strength of composite to dentin. Oper Dent. ;26: –61.
. Zach L, Cohen G. Pulp response to externally applied heat. Oral
Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol. ;19: –30.
Protection of the Dentin-Pulp Complex
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG
C. R. G. Torres (ed.), Modern Operative Dentistry, Textbooks in Contemporary Dentistry,
https://doi.org/10. / -3- - -0_10335 10
Tooth Preparations
for Amalgam Restorations
Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres and Deepak Mehta
10.1 Introduction –
10.2 Instruments and Materials –
10.3 Previous Procedures –
10.4 Class I or Site 1 Preparations –
10.4.1 Simple Preparation –
10.4.2 Compound Preparation –
10.5 Class II or Site 2 Preparations –
10.5.1 Access Through the Occlusal Surface –
10.5.2 Access Through the Buccal or Lingual Surfaces –
10.6 Class V or Site 3 on Free Smooth Surface –
10.6.1 Outline Form –
10.6.2 Resistance Form –
10.6.3 Retention Form –
10.6.4 Convenience Form –
10.6.5 Removal of the Remaining Carious Tissue –
10.6.6 Finishing the Enamel Walls –
10.6.7 Cleaning of the Preparation –
10.6.8 Final Characteristics of the Preparation –
References –
10Learning Objectives
The learning objectives of this chapter are related to the following topics:
5The instruments and materials necessary to perform a
tooth preparation for amalgam.
5The previous procedures that must be performed before
starting.
5The steps for Class I preparations of simple and complex
cavities.
5The steps for Class II preparations by access through the
occlusal or free smooth surfaces.
5The steps for Class V preparation on smooth surfaces.
5The final characteristics of all kinds of preparation for
amalgam.
10.1 Introduction
The dental amalgam is a restorative material that has been
used for a long time to restore teeth affected by the caries
disease. Although there is a huge discussion about its use
nowadays due to the presence of the mercury and the unfavorable esthetics, it is still largely used around the world to
restore posterior teeth, especially because of its versatility,
low cost, and excellent physical properties, resulting to highquality and long-lasting restoration. As a great disadvantage,
this material does not bond to the tooth structure, being necessary that some specific characteristics are observed during
the preparation, allowing that remaining tooth structure and
restoration may resist to the masticatory stress. On this chapter, the necessary steps to make the tooth preparation for
amalgam restoration are presented, in a way to allow the
reader to be able to perform this procedure. During the initial training of the dental students, all the stages of the tooth
preparation should be performed on dental training model
with simulations of the carious lesions. The use of dental
models without the lesion simulation, with intact teeth,
induces the student to learn stereotyped forms for the tooth
preparation, because they do not have any reference of what
should be removed. On the modern perspective, only the
portion of the tooth affected by the lesion must be treated
invasively, and the preparation must be smaller as possible.
Therefore, for each lesion size, there will be different shapes
for the preparation, even though the general principles will
always be followed. The extension for prevention must be
replaced by the implementation of preventive procedures,
such as to give instructions to the patient about the disease,
mechanical removal of biofilm, rational use of fluoride, and
when the biofilm control is hard, the use of pit and fissure
sealants. For didactic purposes, the different situations
involving the tooth preparations for amalgam will be presented separately, according to Black’s and Mount and Hume’s
classifications.10.2 Instruments and Materials
To perform a tooth preparation for amalgam restoration in
preclinical dental training, the following materials and
instruments are necessary:
5Personal protective equipment such as gloves, mask,
mob cap, and safety glasses.
5Dental training model with simulations of the carious
lesions to be placed inside a dental simulator phantom.
5Low-speed handpiece and contra-angle. Although most
dental procedures are performed in the real patient with
the high-speed handpiece, the initial training with dental
models should be performed in low speed, until the
students develop the manual skills and have complete
mastery of the technique.
5Dental tweezer.
5Flat first surface clinical mirror.
5Double exploratory probe.
5Rotary instruments for low-speed contra-angle (RA/CA)
or for high-speed handpiece (FG) with an adaptor for
the contra-angle. It can be used the carbide or diamond
points (. Fig. 10.1 ). Those instruments are identified by
the shape of the head.
5Round – No. diamond point or No. 2, 4, and 6
carbide burs
5Long inverted cone with flat end and round corners –
No. and diamond point or No. carbide bur
5Short inverted cone with flat and sharp edges – No.
diamond point or No. 33 1⁄2 carbide bur
5Cylinder with flat end and round corners – No.
1090A and 1092A diamond points
5Conical with flat end – No. and diamond
point or No. carbide bur
5Enamel hatchet – 14/15 (10-6-14).
5Gingival margin trimmers – 28 (10-95-7-14) and 29
(10-80-7-14).
5Miller articulating paper forceps.
5Thin double-sided articulating paper (<10 μm) of two
colors (e.g., black and red).
5Tofflemire matrix retainer.
5Matrix band – 5 and 7 mm.
5Wooden wedges.
The necessary instruments and materials must be placed over
the working area in a logical sequence of use, as it can be
observed in . Fig. 10.2 .
10.3 Previous Procedures
As it has already been mentioned on 7 Chap. 6, before starting
the tooth preparation, some details must be evaluated to guar -
antee the success of the treatment. First of all, the conditions
C. R. G. Torres and D. Mehta
10
of the periodontal tissues and pulp must be verified, taking a
radiography whenever necessary, to evaluate the depth of the
lesion and its proximity with the pulpal chamber ( . Fig. 6.22a ,
b). The preprocedural antisepsis of the oral cavity is performed
with 0.12% chlorhexidine gluconate mouth rinse during 1
min, followed by local anesthesia [4 ]. On the cases of restorations that involve the occlusal and/or proximal surfaces, it must also be evaluated if any tooth migration or extrusion has
happened that will adversely affect the correct restoration of
the original tooth anatomy ( . Fig. 6.21a , b). Then, the occlusion evaluation is performed making a two-tone representation of static and dynamic occlusion, using a thin-articulating
paper and a Miller forceps . The first step is to inspect the
eccentric contacts (dynamic occlusion). The red side of the
1090A 1092A 2 4 6 .Fig. 10.1 Rotary instruments
used for the tooth preparation
for amalgam restorations
.Fig. 10.2 Instruments and
materials organized for the tooth
preparation
Tooth Preparations for Amalgam Restorations
10paper is placed facing the tooth that will receive the treatment,
asking the patient to perform protrusive and lateral excursive
movements. The marked contacts are analyzed, as well as the
presence of interferences during the disocclusion movement.
The second step is to analyze the concentric contacts (static
occlusion). For that, the paper is turned in the forceps so the
black side faces the tooth to be restored. The patient is asked
to bite, registering the contacts in centric occlusion (CO)
(. Fig. 10.3a, b ). The color sequence can, of course, be altered.
No contact with the antagonist tooth should be located at the
cavosurface angle ( . Fig. 6.26a , b).
The preparation may be performed with or without rubber dam isolation. However, if the dental floss tear when
passing between the teeth due to sharp areas, it may be better
to isolate later to prevent the tearing of the rubber sheet .
On the case of very deep and large cavities, the previous isolation avoids the greater contamination of the pulp in case it
is accidently exposed, increasing the chances of success of a
conservative pulp treatment by means of the direct pulp capping . If the preparation was started without the isolation
and the cavity is becoming too deep, with an increased risk of
pulp exposure, it should be stopped and the isolation applied
before continuing.
Tip
If the preparation was started without isolation and the
cavity is becoming too deep, with an increased risk of
pulp exposure, it should be stopped and the isolation
applied before continuing.
10.4 Class I or Site 1 Preparations
They are preparations located on the region of pit and fissures
and may include only one tooth surface, named simple preparation, or more than one surface, named compound preparation.10.4.1 Simple Preparation
Merely for illustrative purposes, examples of the complete
preparation sequence are presented on the tooth 34 and 37.
However, the principles presented may be applied for all the
posterior teeth ( . Figs. 10.4a–i and 10.5a–f ).
10.4.1.1 Outline Form
When treating a tooth with a hidden carious lesion, that can
be observed radiographically but with intact enamel surface,
the opening of the cavity must be performed with rotary
instruments, using a round diamond point or carbide bur,
with its long axis placed perpendicularly to the occlusal sur -
face, or a cylinder or long-inverted cone diamond point or
carbide bur, leaning at the mesiodistal direction at an angle of
45° (. Fig. 10.4b, c ) . With this leaning, the edge between
the bur’s tip and its side will contact the surface, increasing
the cut or grinding efficacy . The cavity is gradually
enlarged to create access to the dentin. In some situations,
the cavity may have already open due to the collapse of the
undermined enamel, created by the caries lesion, so this step
will not be needed. The opening should begin on the groove
more affected by the caries lesion, or on the most distal one,
to get a better visibility for the mesial extension . The bur
must penetrate the structure while spinning, and it should
not stop until it is removed away from any contact with the
tooth [ 22]. However, the handpiece should not go in or out
the patient’s oral cavity with the bur still rotating.
> The bur must penetrate the structure while spinning,
and it should not stop until it is removed away from
any contact with the tooth. However, the handpiece
should never go in or out the patient’s oral cavity with
the bur still rotating.
After the cavity opening, the outline of the preparation can
be defined. The basic principle to be considered is the maximum preservation of the remaining tooth structure. In the
past, the width of the preparation in the buccolingual direction was standardized, defined by calculating 1/3 of the disa b
.Fig. 10.3 Evaluating the occlusal contacts. a Using the Miller forceps to position the carbon-articulating paper between the dental arches;
b contacts marked during centric occlusion (black) and lateral movement (red)
C. R. G. Torres and D. Mehta
10
tance between the tips of the cusps, which led to a considerably
weakening of the tooth, with reduction of approximately 33%
of its fracture resistance. More recently, this standard was
reduced to 1/4 of the distance between the tips of the cusps,
with a smaller reduction of the tooth resistance . However, nowadays, the extension for prevention is no longer
recommended, as well as no stereotyped outlines must be followed. Therefore, only the area affected by the carious lesion is included in the preparation [11, 20]. The margins are cut
until they reach intact enamel, even though it is undermined.
The undermined enamel can be later reinforced with artificial dentin, using glass ionomer cements.
Other factor that determines the width of the preparation
is the need to obtain enough access to perform the restoration. Therefore, even in a very small lesion, the outline must
have the minimum size that allows the use of the smaller
ab
efcd
.Fig. 10.4 Class I or Site 1 tooth preparation on a mandibular molar.
a Marking the contacts with articulating paper; b opening of the cavity
with the round diamond point perpendicular to the occlusal surface; c
opening with a long inverted cone point leaned in relation to the
occlusal surface; d –f penetration of half head of the No. rotary instrument and delimitation of the outline shape; g analysis of the
preparation walls to evaluate for the presence of remaining carious
tissue (arrows); h modification of the outline to remove the affected
areas; i final aspect
Tooth Preparations for Amalgam Restorations
10
amalgam condenser available, which can be considered a
convenience form . When preparing tooth with small
lesions, the opening is started with the smallest rotary instrument available . The conservative preparation minimizes
the pulp response and keeps the resistance of the remaining tooth structure, reducing the chances of cuspal fracture
[8, 12, 20]. In addition, narrow restorations, generally smaller
than 1 mm, present less marginal fractures and ditching than
the large ones, reducing the need of replacement later on [20,
23]. This happens due to the fact that the small occlusal isthmus usually locates the preparation margins far from the
contact areas with the opposite tooth, which allows contacts
occur over the remaining tooth structure [2, 7, 23]. In addition, the smaller restorations are better condensed due to the
use of small pluggers, which produce a greater condensation
pressure, removing more mercury and improving the adaptation of the restorative material . According to Almquist
et al. , if the patient is taught to completely clean his teeth,
it is not necessary to extend the preparation margins more
than the necessary to give it an adequate form. Any restoration that can be correctly polished by the dentist can be properly cleaned by the patient. If the patient does not clean his
teeth, it does not matter the amount of extension for prevention performed because it will not be capable to prevent additional carious lesions and eventually the total destruction of
the tooth.On the posterior teeth, the inclines of adjacent cusps are
separated by developmental grooves, which represent lines of
union between lobes of the crown during its formation. The
enamel of both lobes, on the bottom of the groove, may have
been perfectly connected during the tooth formation or a
linear fault may sometimes have happened creating a fissure,
which represents a lack of union between the cups inclines.
This fissure directly connects the oral environment to the
dentin on the dentinoenamel junction (DEJ) area. Even
though the carious lesion generally begins at an occlusal fissure, it is frequently isolated in only one place or few places
along the extension of the groove. It rarely happens on the
entire groove. When there are lesions in fissures which are
not connected, separated by areas of intact groove, individual
preparations must be performed, without the need to connect them, unless there is less than 0.5 mm between the
preparations ( . Fig. 6.24a–c ) . After the preparations are
completed, if necessary, the areas of the groove not affected
by carious lesion but highly susceptible to caries can be protected with a pit and fissure sealant . As a general rule,
the larger the restoration, the less it will last .
If the preparation is conservative, size 1 or 2 according to
Mount and Hume , the No. or No. diamond
point or the No. bur, with a long-inverted cone shape
should be used ( . Fig. 10.1). With these instruments, the
vertical surrounding walls will be slightly convergent toward
g
ih
.Fig. 10.4 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres and D. Mehta
10
the occlusal surface. If the preparation is large, No. 3 or 4 bur
or No. 1090A or No. 1092A diamond point, with cylinder
shape and round corners should be used ( . Fig. 10.1). With
these instruments, the vertical surrounding walls will be
parallel to each other [11, 12]. At the moment of the outline
form of the preparation, the penetration of the rotary instrument is restricted to about 0.2–0.5 mm [12, 16] further than
the DEJ, which will create a preparation with about 1.5 mm
deep on the central groove, or 2 mm in relation to the buccal
or lingual cavosurface angle . It is considered as a refer -ence area for the depth of the preparation the deepest area of
the central groove. Consequently, outside this area, the sur -
rounding vertical walls will have a greater height, allowing a
greater thickness of the restorative material. It is possible to
use the head length of a bur or diamond point as a reference
for the preparation depth evaluation . The No. diamond point and the No. bur heads have a length of
3 mm. Therefore, the penetration of half its length into the
tooth structure will create the minimal necessary depth for
an amalgam preparation ( . Fig. 10.4d–f ). When using the
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 10.5 Class I or Site 1 preparation on the mandibular first
premolar. a Demarcation of the contact points; b opening the
preparation with a round diamond point; c positioning of the diamond
point perpendicular to the plane that tangents the tips of the cusps; d delimitation of the preparation outline; e aspect of the surrounding
walls convergent towards the occlusal surface, due to the use of the
inverted conicaltrunk instrument; f final aspect of the tooth
preparation
Tooth Preparations for Amalgam Restorations
10No. , 1090A, or 1092A diamond points, which have the
head length of 4 mm, the use of half this length will also
provide a satisfactory reference value. After penetrating the
necessary depth into the carious lesion, the rotary instrument should be moved on the mesiodistal direction, with its
long axis parallel to the long axis of the tooth, maintaining a
uniform preparation depth. At this step, the preparation
depth is maintained, even though old restorative material or
carious tissue remains on the pulpal wall, because they will
be removed during the final phase of the preparation. On the
other hand, the cavosurface angles of the vertical surrounding walls must reach sound enamel ( . Fig. 10.4g, h ). After
this step, the occlusal contacts with the antagonist tooth are
analyzed, checking if it will not be located at the interface
between the tooth and the future restoration. In this case,
the outline must be changed through an additional cut of
wall in this area, positioning the contact over the restorative
material.
10.4.1.2 Resistance Form
To improve the resistance of preparation and restoration, the
walls must be flat, uniform, and smooth, improving the
adaptation of the restorative material. The flattening and the
smoothness of the walls can be obtained moving the rotary
instrument to and fro . The depth of the preparation
should allow a minimum depth of 1.5 mm for the amalgam
on the contact area or at the center of the restoration, in the
region of the central groove . The pulpal wall is flat,
which is obtained through the flat tip of the rotary instrument’s head . The flat pulpal wall allows a better distribution of the stress and prevents the rotation of the restoration
(. Fig. 6.28a–c ). On most of the posterior teeth, the pulpal
wall must be parallel to the occlusal plane of the dental arch,
making it perpendicular to the direction of the occlusal
loads. To perform that, the long axis of the rotary instrument
is positioned parallel to the long axis of the tooth
(. Fig. 10.6a ). One exception to this rule is the mandibular
first premolar, where there is a large difference on the volume of the buccal and lingual cusps. That creates the need
that the pulpal wall should be prepared parallel to the plane touching the tip of both cusps, avoiding the exposure of the
buccal pulp horn, besides preserving the dentin under the
lingual cusps ( . Fig. 6.14a, b ). For that, the rotary instrument is positioned perpendicular to the intercuspal plane
(. Fig. 10.5c, d ).
The resistance form is also obtained with the use of rotary
instruments with round corners, which creates round inter -
nal line angles of the second set, and allows a better distribution of the stress, reducing the probability of fracture of the
remaining tooth structure ( . Fig. 6.39) [2, 12, 23]. This is
particularly important on the cases of large preparations,
where the tooth structure is fragile [11, 16]. In addition, the
round angles allow a better adaptation of the restorative
material [2, 23]. The use of traditional No. 56 or No. 57
straight fissure or No. and No. cylinder diamond
points, even though create parallel vertical surrounding
walls, also produce sharp internal line angles of the second
set, which concentrate the stress in the angle area of the
remaining tooth structure, exactly on the cases where this
detail is more relevant, such as the large lesions.
In relation to the restoration margins, the resistance form
is obtained first by avoiding the contact of the antagonist
tooth on the tooth restoration interface, protecting it from
the occlusal loads . Second, the resistance can also be
improved by the convergence of the buccal and lingual walls
toward the occlusal surface, which create a greater marginal
angle of the restoration, at least 70° [12, 13]. This greater
thickness of the restorative material on the restoration mar -
gins decreases its marginal degradation. However, on large
cavities, the preparation of parallel surrounding vertical walls
is more favorable because of the use of the convergent walls
may weaken even more the already fragile structure
(. Fig. 6.36a, b ).
During the preparation, it is extremely important to evaluate if the long axis of the rotary instrument is properly positioned, perpendicular to the occlusal plane. Otherwise, in
one of the sides of the preparation, there will be undermined
enamel susceptible to fracture, while on the other side there
will be a thin margin of the restorative material and more
chances of pulp exposure ( . Fig. 10.6a, b ) .
ab
.Fig. 10.6 Direction of the resulting walls in relation of the leaning of the rotary instrument. a Correct; b incorrect
C. R. G. Torres and D. Mehta
10
To preserve the resistance of the remaining tooth structure on large cavities, the mesial and distal walls in contact
with the marginal ridge should be slightly expulsive toward
the occlusal surface [12, 13, 16, 25]. This avoids that the
remaining dentin under the ridge is removed ( . Fig. 6.41a–f )
. This characteristic is obtained leaning the rotary instrument toward the proximal surface in more or less 10°
(. Fig. 10.7b ) . Although the resistance of the remaining
tooth structure is preserved, this inclination produces thin
margins for the restoration, with a greater chance of fracture
. On the other hand, on smaller preparations, where the
marginal ridge has more than 1.6 mm of thickness in premolars or 2 mm in molars, those walls can be convergent toward
the occlusal surface [3, 22]. It is possible to have an idea about
the thickness of the marginal ridge using the diameter of the
rotary instrument head as a reference ( . Fig. 10.7a ) .
On cases of teeth with oblique enamel ridges, as the maxillary molars, or the transverse ridge on the first mandibular
premolars, it is important its maximum preservation to keep
the resistance of the remaining tooth structure . The
resistance of the tooth structures is greater than of amalgam.10.4.1.3 Retention Form
The retention of the restorations is obtained by the conver -
gence of the buccal and lingual walls when a long-inverted
cone-shaped rotary instrument is used. It is also achieved
when the preparation is deeper than wide when using a cylinder rotary instrument. When the walls are prepared parallel to each other and the buccolingual dimensions of the
preparation are wider than the depth, additional mechanical
retention must be prepared. Small coves are made under the
cusps, which are the areas with larger volume of dentin
(. Fig. 10.8a, b ) . For that, an inverted cone instrument
is used, such as No. diamond point or No. 33 1⁄2 bur. A
small round instrument can also be used, such as No. 1⁄2 or
the No. diamond point ( . Fig. 10.1) . According to
Sturdevant , the retentions performed with round
instruments are better than the ones prepared with the
inverted cone, because the amalgam can be better condensed
on round than on sharp areas, resulting on a better adaptation of the restorative material. The cut must be performed
exclusively on the buccal or lingual walls ( . Fig. 6.44a, b ).
The retention can be tested by pressing the tip of an explor -
ab
.Fig. 10.7 a Evaluation of the marginal ridge remaining using as a reference the No. diamond point; b preparation of the proximal walls
slightly expulsive towards the occlusal surface
ab
.Fig. 10.8 Additional retention on the base of the cusps. a Position of the rotary instrument during the preparation, b retention test with an
exploratory probe
Tooth Preparations for Amalgam Restorations
10atory probe inside the cove and simultaneously pulling
toward the occlusal surface ( . Fig. 10.8b ) . On the cases
where a cavity liner or base is applied, the additional retentions are prepared only after the walls have been filled with
that material [3 ].
10.4.1.4 Convenience Form
In relation to the Class I preparation, the convenience form is
limited to the cases of small lesions. On this situation, the
fitting of the smallest amalgam condenser instrument inside
the preparation must be evaluated, allowing an adequate
condensation of the restorative material. If the contour of the
preparation is too small, it must be slightly enlarged, only
enough to allow an adequate restoration.
10.4.1.5 Removal of the Remaining Carious
Tissue
At this moment, in cases of small lesions, the entire carious tissue was already removed. In larger lesions, if some
highly infected dentin tissue remained in any region, it
can be removed with a round bur at low speed, of larger
size compatible with the preparation contour, or with a
spoon excavator. Those regions with irregular walls can
later be flattened with the application of a base material, and the undermined enamel be reinforced with GIC
(. Fig. 6.6a–d ).
10.4.1.6 Finishing the Enamel Walls
The smoothness of the preparation wall margins allows
removal of the undermined enamel susceptible to fractures
. However, on this type of preparation, the use of cor -
rectly positioned rotary instruments will by itself create a
smooth surface, without undermined enamel prisms at the
margins. Therefore, no additional procedures would be
necessary. The final evaluation of the preparation is done
with an exploratory probe, to analyze if there is any residual carious tissue, the shape of the walls is correct, and the
enamel margins are supported by natural or artificial
dentin .
10.4.1.7 Cleaning of the Preparation
The preparation is cleaned with air and water spray and
then receives the application of an anionic detergent, with a
small cotton pellet or a disposable applicator, followed by
washing with water and drying with air stream . After
that, the disinfection of the preparation can be performed
with a chlorhexidine solution followed only by drying .
Another option is to apply a 2% neutral sodium fluoride
solution for 2–4 min, followed by drying. This procedure
will promote the deposition of calcium fluoride over the
preparation walls, acting as a fluoride reservoir that will be
release if there is a drop of pH [3 ]. The application of the
fluoride solution can reduce up to 60% of the formation of
secondary caries on the amalgam restoration margins and
interface [1 ].10.4.1.8 Final Characteristics
of the Preparation
Smalland Medium-Size Preparations (Sizes 1
and 2)
5Flat, uniform, and smooth walls
5Buccal and lingual walls slightly convergent toward the
occlusal surface
5Mesial and distal walls in contact with the marginal
ridge slightly expulsive toward the occlusal surface,
when there is little remaining of the ridge, or convergent
toward the occlusal surface, when there is a large
marginal ridge remaining
5Round internal line angles of the first and second sets
5Walls in contact with the oblique enamel ridges, in the
maxillary molars, or the transverse ridge on the first
mandibular premolars, convergent toward the occlusal
surface
Large Cavities (Size 3 and 4)
5Flat, uniform, and smooth walls
5Buccal and lingual walls parallel to each other
5Mesial and distal walls in contact with the marginal
ridges expulsive toward the occlusal surface
5Round internal line angles of the first and second sets
5Walls in contact with the oblique enamel ridges, in the
maxillary molars, or the transverse ridge on the first
mandibular premolars parallel to each other
10.4.2 Compound Preparation
For illustrative purposes, the details about the preparation
will be presented on the tooth 26. However, the same principles can be applied on other similar situation such as on the
mandibular molars ( . Fig. 10.9a–r ).
10.4.2.1 Outline Form
A round diamond point or carbide bur, with its long axis
positioned perpendicularly to the occlusal plane, or a cylinder or long-inverted cone diamond point or carbide bur,
leaning to the mesiodistal direction, can be used to open the
cavity (. Fig. 10.9b ). On the maxillary and mandibular
molars, where both the occlusal and the buccal or lingual
surfaces were involved by the caries lesion, the outline form
of the preparation may be variable, as it can be observed in
. Fig. 10.10a–d . The occlusal cavity may connect to the buccal or lingual cavity, or they might stay as two independent
simple cavities.
The outline must be the most conservative possible but
enough to remove the entire carious tissue until it reaches
intact enamel . The depth of penetration is restricted to
0.2–0.5 mm beyond the DEJ on the region of the central
groove. The preparation starts by delimitation of the occlusal
outline, with a rotary instrument parallel to the long axis of
the tooth, maintaining a constant depth and coming closer to
the groove of the smooth surface ( . Fig. 10.9c–e ) . Then,
C. R. G. Torres and D. Mehta
10
the rotary instrument is inserted on the region of the lingual
groove, with its long axis parallel to the surface, in a depth of
approximately 0.75 mm ( . Fig. 10.9f ) . Considering that
the No. and No. 1090A diamond points have 0.8 mm of
diameter, it is possible to know that the preparation has the
minimum necessary depth when the instrument has penetrated almost completely on the tooth structure ( . Fig. 10.9g ).10.4.2.2 Resistance Form
The walls must be flat, uniform, and smooth to improve the
stress distribution and adaptation of the restorative material.
The minimal depth is 1.5 mm on the region of the central
groove and 0.75 mm on the smooth surface to give resistance
to the restoration. The pulpal wall must be parallel to the
occlusal plane . On small or medium preparations (Sizes
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 10.9 Class I or site 1 compound preparation on a maxillary
molar. a Marking of the contact points; b opening the cavity with a
round diamond point; c , d preparation of the occlusal part of the
groove with the long-inverted cone diamond point. e Finished occlusal
box; f–g lingual groove preparation with the long axis of the diamond
point parallel to the surface lingual; h analysis the preparation to verify
the presence of remaining carious tissue; i , j removal of the remaining carious tissue; k filling of the region with the GIC as a base material;
l preparation of the mesioaxial line angle with the diamond point
perpendicular to the axial wall. m preparation of the distoaxial line
angle; n, o rounding of the axiopulpal angle with the tip of the
diamond point or with a gingival margin trimmer. p trimming of the
gingival cavosurface angle with a gingival margin trimmer; q , r final
aspect of the tooth preparation
Tooth Preparations for Amalgam Restorations
10
g h
ij
kl
mn
.Fig. 10.9 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres and D. Mehta
10
1 and 2), the surrounding walls of the occlusal box are convergent toward the occlusal surface to increase the thickness
of the restoration margin, improving its resistance . For
that, a No. or No. inverted cone diamond point or
a No. bur must be used. If the marginal ridge is too fragile, the wall that is in contact with it must be expulsive toward
the occlusal surface. On large cavities (Size 3 and 4), the sur -
rounding walls of the occlusal box are left parallel among
each other. For that, the No. 1090A or No. 1092A cylinder
diamond points are used. The distal walls of the occlusal box,
in contact with the marginal ridge, have to be expulsive
toward the occlusal surface to preserve its dentin support
. The internal line angles of the second set are round,
which can be achieved when using the described rotary
instruments.
The axial wall must be expulsive toward the occlusal sur -
face, in a way to follow the leaning of the lingual surface and
allow a homogeneous thickness of the restorative material,
increasing the final resistance of the restoration. This is
achieved positioning the long axis of the rotary instrument
parallel to the lingual surface on the buccolingual direction,
penetrating about 0.2–0.5 mm further than the DEJ or
enough so that the carious tissue is removed and a minimum
thickness of the restorative material is obtained ( . Fig. 10.9f,
g) . The tip of the bur must be positioned at the end of the
lesion creating the gingival wall, with the internal line angles of the first set round. The dentist must keep a good control of
the rotary instrument and not let it roll outside the preparation, over the lingual surface, which may damage the cavosurface margin . When a No. or No.
long-inverted cone diamond point or a No. bur is used
for the preparation of the lingual box, the mesial and distal
walls will be slightly convergent toward the occlusal and lingual surfaces ( . Fig. 10.9r ) . If a cylinder instrument is
used, those walls will be parallel to each other.
To better define the mesoaxial and axiodistal angles, the
long-inverted cone or cylinder rotary instrument is positioned with its long axis perpendicular to the lingual surface,
with the tip touching the axial wall, and moved in the
occluso-cervical direction , without changing the axial
wall (. Fig. 10.9l, m). If a long-inverted cone point or burs are
used, the mesial and distal walls will be retentive toward the
lingual surface, while if cylinder instruments are used, they
will be parallel between each other .
The gingival wall must be parallel to the pulpal wall and
the occlusal plane, allowing the distribution of the occlusal
loads because they are perpendicular to the direction of the
load . This is obtained by positioning the bur parallel to
the long axis of the tooth. The internal angles are round,
which is automatically obtained due to the round corners of
the rotary instrument heads, with the exception of the
axiopulpal angle. This must be rounded with a No. 29 gingiop
qr
.Fig. 10.9 (continued)
Tooth Preparations for Amalgam Restorations
10
val margin trimmer, moved in the mesiodistal direction, or
with the flat tip of a rotary instrument adequately positioned
(. Fig. 10.9n, o ) .
10.4.2.3 Retention Form
On the occlusal box, the retention is obtained by the conver -
gence of the surrounding walls toward the occlusal surface.
When the walls are created parallel to each other and the cavity is wider than the deep, additional retention like a cove can
be made under the distobuccal cusp, as it was described for
the simple cavity ( . Fig. 10.11a, b ). On the lingual box, when
the inverted cone instrument is used, the cavity is selfretentive toward the occlusal and lingual surfaces . When
the cylinder bur is used, the parallelism of the mesial and
distal walls already creates retention toward the occlusal sur -
face. However, it can be not enough on the lingual direction,
especially if the occlusal box is shallow and little retentive on
this direction. On this case, the additional mechanical retentions can be created through the retention locks on the
mesioaxial and distoaxial line angles, on the dentin of the
mesial and distal walls, but never on the enamel . Those
retentions may be created with a conic instrument, such as
the No. diamond point or No. bur, or a round instrument such as the No. diamond point or the No. 1⁄2
bur. When a conical rotary instrument is used, it is leaned to
the mesiodistal direction so that the tip first touches the
region next to the mesiogingival or distogingival angles,
resulting on the pyramid-shaped retention and not surpass
the axiopulpal angle ( . Fig. 10.11c–e ) . The retention is
tested inserting the tip of an exploratory probe and moving it
toward the lingual surface . The retention must hinder
the probe to directly move toward the lingual surface
(. Fig. 10.11f ) .
Tip
Additional mechanical retentions must be always
prepared on dentin tissue and never on enamel or close
do DEJ.
10.4.2.4 Convenience Form
It is restricted at this preparation the necessary width so that
the smaller condenser instrument may reach the deepest
areas near to the internal walls.
a
cdb .Fig. 10.10 Variations on the
preparation outline due to the
extension of the lesion on the
maxillary and mandibular molars.
a, c Preparation outline when the
lesions extend on the entire
groove of the smooth surface;
b, d preparation outline when
the lesion is restricted to the pits
on the smooth surfaces. The
occlusal and buccal/lingual
boxes should not be connected
C. R. G. Torres and D. Mehta
10
10.4.2.5 Removal of the Remaining Carious
Tissue
In general, at this phase of the preparation, no more carious
tissue probably remained. However, if there is any, it can be
removed as it has already been described for the simple cavity, and the undermined enamel area filled with GIC
(. Fig. 10.9h–k ).10.4.2.6 Finishing the Enamel Walls
The undermined enamel at the region of the gingival cavosurface angle is trimmed with a No. 29 gingival margin trimmer, by moving it to the mesiodistal direction ( . Fig. 10.9p ).
10.4.2.7 Cleaning of the Preparation
It is performed as it has already been described for the simple
cavity.
ab
cd
e ff
.Fig. 10.11 Preparation of additional retentions. a , b Preparation of retention on the occlusal box; c –e preparation of retentions on the lingual
box, on the mesioaxial, and on the distoaxial line angles; f retention test
Tooth Preparations for Amalgam Restorations
.4.2.8 Final Characteristics
of the Preparation
Smalland Medium-Size Preparations
(Sizes 1 and 2)
5Flat, uniform, and smooth walls
5Buccal and lingual walls slightly convergent toward the
occlusal surface
5Mesial wall in contact with the oblique enamel ridge
convergent toward the occlusal surface
5Distal wall in contact with the marginal ridge convergent
toward the occlusal surface
5Internal line angles of the first and second sets and
external line angle round
5Mesial and distal walls of the lingual box convergent
toward the occlusal and lingual surfaces
Large-Size Preparation (Sizes 3 and 4)
5Flat, uniform, and smooth walls
5Buccal and lingual walls parallel to each other
5Mesial wall in contact with the oblique enamel ridge
perpendicular to the pulpal wall
5Distal wall in contact with the marginal ridge expulsive
toward the occlusal surface
5Internal line angles of the first and second sets and
external line angle round 5Mesial and distal walls of the lingual box parallel to each
other
5Additional retention of the mesioaxial and distoaxial
line angles
10.5 Class II or Site 2 Preparations
This type of cavity involves the proximal surfaces of the posterior teeth, where the caries lesions are located below the contact point. When there are no carious lesions on the occlusal
surface, or when the occlusal lesion is far from the marginal
ridges, the preparation of the proximal area can be independent from the occlusal preparation. The access to the proximal
lesion is performed in the marginal ridge, and this kind of
preparation is called proximal box preparation or vertical slot
preparation ( . Fig. 10.12 ). If the occlusal surface has also been
affected by the lesion and reaches the proximal lesion, the
preparation of the occlusal surface is connected to the proximal one, resulting to mesio occlusal, occluso distal, or mesio
occlusodistal preparations ( . Fig. 10.13 ). When the caries
lesion is too far from the occlusal surface, such as on the cases
of teeth with long clinical crowns or on teeth with gingival
recession, with the carious lesion at the CEJ, the access can be
performed from the buccal or lingual surfaces, and the preparation is called horizontal slot preparation ( . Fig. 10.16a–l ).
ab
.Fig. 10.12 Vertical slot tooth preparation. a Marking of the contact
points; b proximal view of the lesion; c separated preparation of the
occlusal lesions; d access to the lesion through an opening in the
marginal ridge using a round diamond point; e the dentist feels a
sensation to fall on an empty space when reaching the lesion; f cavity
opened allowing access to the lesion. g , h penetration of the inverted
cone point, which is moved in the buccolingual direction and toward
the marginal ridge; i marginal ridge remaining; j –l fracture of the ridge
with an excavator spoon; m , n outline of the walls with the pendulum
motion on the buccolingual direction. o occlusal aspect after the opening; p preparation of the axial wall with the leaned diamond
point; q evaluating the presence of the residual carious tissue with an
exploratory probe; r removal of the carious tissue with the round bur; s
treatment of the tooth structure for the application of the base
material; t application of the glass ionomer cement; u , v preparation of
the mechanical retentions. w , x evaluating the retentions with an
exploratory probe; y , z finishing of the buccal and lingual cavosurface
angles; a′, b′ trimming of the gingival cavosurface angle; c ′, d′ final
aspect of the preparation
C. R. G. Torres and D. Mehta
10
cd
ef
gh h
i jj
.Fig. 10.12 (continued)
Tooth Preparations for Amalgam Restorations
10
mn
op
qrkk l
.Fig. 10.12 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres and D. Mehta
10
st
uv
wx
yz
.Fig. 10.12 (continued)
Tooth Preparations for Amalgam Restorations
10
a b
.Fig. 10.13 MOD preparation. a Initial aspect; b radiographic aspect
of the proximal lesions; c opening of the cavity with a leaned inverted
cone diamond point; d , e outline of the occlusal box weakening the
marginal ridges; f –h fracture of the marginal ridges with a hand
instrument. Obs.: As shown on the picture a and b , on this example,
performed on extracted teeth, there is only a pigmented groove on the
occlusal surface, without the presence of the caries on the dentin. On a
real situation, this groove should not be prepared, and two separated
vertical slot preparation could be performed. On this example, the
occlusal surface was prepared only for didactic purposes to exemplify a
MOD preparation. i –l preparation of the buccal and lingual walls of the mesial box; m –o fracture of the distal marginal ridge; p preparation of
the lingual wall of the distal box. q lingual wall of the distal box
prepared; r, s buccal wall of the distal box being prepared; t inadver -
tently grinding of the protective matrix band with the diamond point;
u, v evaluating the complete removal of the remaining carious tissue;
w, x dentin surface treatment and GIC-based material application. y , z
rounding of the axiopulpal angle; a ′, b′ preparation of the mechanical
retentions in the proximal boxes; c ′, d′ finishing of the buccal and
lingual cavosurface angles of the proximal boxes; e ′, f′ trimming of the
gingival cavosurface angles. g ′ final aspect of the preparation
a' b'
c' d'
.Fig. 10.12 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres and D. Mehta
10
ggh
ij
cd
ef
.Fig. 10.13 (continued)
Tooth Preparations for Amalgam Restorations
10
mn
op
qr
kl
.Fig. 10.13 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres and D. Mehta
10
uv
wx
yz
st
.Fig. 10.13 (continued)
Tooth Preparations for Amalgam Restorations
10
g'
a' b'
c' d'
e' f'
.Fig. 10.13 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres and D. Mehta
10
10.5.1 Access Through the Occlusal Surface
10.5.1.1 Outline Form
If there is an occlusal lesion near the marginal ridge, its opening is performed as it has already been described for the Class
I preparation, and then the preparation is extended to the
proximal area. However, when the lesion is restricted to the
proximal surface, it is not necessary to extend the tooth preparation toward the occlusal grooves, because it will unnecessarily weaken the tooth turning it more susceptible to
fractures . Therefore, the vertical slot preparation is recommended. On this case, if necessary, the occlusal grooves
may receive a pit and fissure sealant to prevent new lesion,
but it should never be grinded or cut to receive a restoration.
A clinical study reported the effectiveness of sealant and
amalgam restoration association . When there is a carious lesion on the occlusal surface far from the marginal ridge,
it is treated as a separated Class I lesion ( . Fig. 10.12c ).
However, if there is 0.5 mm or less of the tooth structure
remaining in between the occlusal and the proximal preparation, it is better to connect them, avoiding a later fracture of
this weakened area.
When the preparation to treat the proximal lesion is
made separately, the opening to the cavity to access the lesion
is performed directly over the marginal ridge. The proximal
box is always prepared on the direction of the interproximal
contact, despite the tooth position on the arch, i.e., if one
tooth is twisted and it is in contact with the adjacent tooth
through the buccal surface, the proximal box will be prepared on this region .
The proximal surface of the adjacent tooth must be protected from the action of the rotary instrument, to avoid an
iatrogenic grinding. For that, an interproximal guard, as
shown on . Fig. 6.10a, b should be used, or even small piece
of the steel matrix strip assembled on the matrix retainer,
positioned on the adjacent tooth. This will avoid the bur or
diamond point inadvertently touches the intact proximal
surface of the neighboring tooth and causes, in fraction of a
second, something that the caries disease would take years
to cause [3 ]. Clinical studies showed that 69% of the adjacent teeth were damaged by the bur during the preparation
of the Class II cavities, and the risk of proximal caries on
those teeth is almost tripled, due to the bacterial biofilm
growing inside the iatrogenic cavitation . It should also
be applied a wooden wedge in the interproximal space, to
protect the interdental papilla and the rubber dam, as it can
be observed on . Figs. 10.12d and 10.13e . It can be
noticed that the wooden wedge is placed between the tooth
that is being prepared and the matrix strip in the neighbor
tooth [ 22]. If any undesired contact of the rotary instrument
with the proximal surface of the adjacent tooth happens,
when it is minimal, it will be possible to be corrected the
damaged proximal surface with abrasive strips. However, a
larger iatrogenic grinding would require a restoration of the
contour and smoothness of this surface, filling the cavity
created and allowing a correct cleaning of this area by
flossing .Using a round diamond point, the opening of the cavity
until it reaches the lesion is performed. The rotary instrument penetrates toward the cervical region, moving it in the
buccolingual direction, following the DEJ, which guides the
dentist helping to avoid the contact with the adjacent tooth.
It will create a ditch that should be 2/3 on the enamel and 1/3
on the dentin, taking care not to overextend this opening in
the buccolingual direction [3, 22]. If it is prepared only on the
dentin, the proximal box will be too large . This penetration continues until it reaches the lesion, which depending
on its size, will produce a feeling of falling in a hollow space
(. Fig. 10.12d–f ). Using the long-inverted cone rotary instrument for the small and medium cavities or the cylinder ones
for large cavities, the grinding performed to access the lesion
is extended toward the marginal ridge, leaving a thin layer of
enamel ( . Figs. 10.12g–i and 10.13d, e ) [3, 13, 22, 23].
The mesiodistal extension of the gingival walls should
have the approximate dimension of 0.5–0.6 mm further the
DEJ on the dentin, in case mechanical retentions are needed
, allowing also enough thickness for the restorative material [2, 12]. If there is no more enamel on the gingival cavosurface angle, it may have 0.8 mm of total extension that
corresponds to the tip of the No. bur or the No.
diamond point . The lesions are located immediately
below the contact point, due to the lack of self-cleaning of
this region . The thin layer of enamel still touching the
adjacent tooth generally breaks by itself due to the action of
the rotary instrument when making it thinner [13, 25]. If this
does not happen, the pressure of a hand instrument, such as
a dentin spoon, can be applied ( . Figs. 10.12j–l and 10.13f–h )
[3, 15].
As the caries lesion on the proximal surface generally has
an elliptic shape, with its buccolingual dimension greater
than the occlusocervical, a pendulum motion is performed
to remove the entire carious tissue, without opening too
much the preparation in the marginal ridge area
(. Figs. 10.12m, n and 10.13i–k ). That preserves this functional area, leaving the restoration less exposed to the masticatory loads and consequently to a tooth fracture [6, 16]. This
way, the surrounding walls of the proximal box will be convergent toward the occlusal surface, creating the self-retentive preparation, which will also result to thicker restoration
margins on the marginal ridge area. The cervical limit of the
preparation is located at the end of the lesion, in a way that all
margins are placed in healthy enamel.
The white spot lesions on this region are removed,
because it can appear as a more radiolucent area than the
intact tooth in any future radiography, giving the idea of
recurrent caries. Because of that, it must be completely eliminated. This does not mean, however, that the entire gingival
wall needs to be deepened. This reduction can be performed
only on the specific area that corresponds to the lesion.
The removal of the contact with the adjacent tooth may
simplify the matrix placement and the finishing of the restoration, and it used to be generally recommended as a convenience form. It was also considered as a kind of extension for
prevention, due to the fact that the margins are placed on a
Tooth Preparations for Amalgam Restorations
10more easy to clean region . The classic recommendation
was that after the end of the preparation, there was a separation of about 0.2–0.3 mm of the adjacent tooth, which cor -
responds to the tip of a very thin exploratory probe passing
through this region . However, considering that the
patient must initially have the caries disease controlled and
will undergo several preventive measurements, before and
after the restorative intervention, the simple reason of extension for prevention becomes unnecessary. According to
Almquist et al. , for a patient that uses dental floss on the
interproximal space, the extension of the proximal walls
must be limited necessary for removal of carious tissue and
finishing the restoration. An additional extension would only
make any sense if the oral hygiene of the patient was restricted
to brushing.
In some cases, such as on the maxillary premolars and the
first molars, the removal of the contact with the adjacent
tooth on the buccal wall of the mesial box can expose the
margin of the restoration and result in an unnecessary
esthetic involvement [3, 11, 20, 22]. In addition, it is possible
to make an adequate tooth restoration without removing the
contact. Therefore, the removal of the contact should never
be done intentionally and is not desired [3, 11, 20, 22].
10.5.1.2 Resistance Form
On the cases of smalland medium-size lesion, the conver -
gence of the surrounding walls toward the occlusal surface
creates thicker margins for the restoration . On the
proximal box, the buccal and lingual walls are convergent
toward the occlusal surface aiming to remove the entire
carious tissue below the contact point with maximum preservation of the marginal ridge, making that food bolus to
contact mostly the remaining tooth structure, instead of the
restoration.
It is known that in a circumferential direction, the long
axis of the enamel prisms forms a 90° angle with the tangent
that touches the tooth surface on the region of the tip of each
prism [12, 22]. Keeping this in mind, it is important that after
the tooth preparation, there is no undermined enamel prism
on the region of the cavosurface angles. The preparation of
the buccal and lingual walls of the proximal box convergent
toward the proximal surface or parallel among each other
would leave undermined prisms that, with the time, would
fracture and result in a marginal ditching ( . Fig. 6.38a–f ).
The preparation of those walls divergent toward the proximal
surface solves this problem.
The morphology of most posterior teeth, with the buccal
surface larger than the lingual one, makes the proximal sur -
faces converge markedly to the lingual surface. That influences the cavosurface angle of the lingual and buccal walls, in
the proximal box of the preparation, and result in thin restoration margins, mostly on the buccal wall ( . Fig. 6.38a–f )
. This problem is solved by preparing on the buccal wall
the Hollenback’s reverse curve or S-shaped curve [2, 12]. It is
performed in a way that the buccal wall of the proximal box to have a concave contour toward the buccal surface of the
tooth. This curve is made only enough to create an amalgam
margin at 90° in relation to the external proximal surface. On
the lingual side, it is not necessary due to the larger lingual
embrasure [12, 22].
Other characteristics that give resistance to the preparation are the pulpal and gingival walls prepared flat and parallel to the occlusal plane. That allows a more homogeneous
stress distribution due to the occlusal loads hiting this area at
a 90° angle, besides to avoid the rotation and displacement of
the restoration when receiving an eccentric load [12, 22].
One exception happens at the mandibular first premolar,
because its lingual cusp is much smaller than the buccal one,
making the occlusal plane of this tooth very leaned in the
buccolingual direction. To avoid an exposure of the buccal
pulp horn, the rotary instrument is placed perpendicular to
the occlusal plane of this tooth, which tangents both cusps.
That will create a leaned pulpal wall in relation to the long
axis of the tooth ( . Fig. 10.5c ) . However, the gingival
wall can be made perpendicular to the long axis of the tooth,
up to the cervical limit of the lesion, avoiding an unnecessary
invasion of the biological width ( . Fig. 10.14 , ).
Due to the use of rotary instruments with flat end and
round corners, all the internal line angles of the second set
and point angles will consequently be round, improving the
stress distribution adaptation of the restorative material. The
exception is the axiopulpal external line angle which will be
sharp. The buccogingival and linguogingival angles should
always be round, because the sharp angles can increase the
chances of failures during amalgam condensation and of
future secondary caries lesion on this region [9, 16]. The
axiopulpal angle must also be rounded to avoid the stress
concentration inside the restoration in this area, consequently improving the final resistance [12, 22, 25]. This
rounding can be performed with a No. 29 gingival margin
trimmer by scraping from the buccal toward the lingual sur -
face and vice versa or with the side of the rotary instrument
correctly positioned ( . Fig. 10.13y, z ).
.Fig. 10.14 Direction of the pulpal and gingival walls of the
mandibular first premolar
C. R. G. Torres and D. Mehta
10
10.5.1.3 Retention Form
On the occlusal box, when the preparation is performed
with the long-inverted cone instrument, it will be self-retentive toward the occlusal surface. When it is done with a cylinder instrument, if the resulting preparation is deeper than
wider, it will also be self-retentive. However, if the resulting
preparation is wider than deeper, it will be necessary to add
retention coves at the base of the cusps, as it has already
been described for the Class I preparation ( . Fig. 10.8a, b ).
Toward the proximal direction, the retention is provided by
the occlusal contour on the occlusolingual and/or occlusobuccal developmental grooves or by a dovetail lock on the
triangular fossae ( . Fig. 6.47b ). In relation to the proximal
box, it will be self-retentive toward the occlusal surface due
to the convergence of the buccal and lingual walls. On the
proximal direction, due to the lack of retention related to
divergence of the buccal and lingual walls toward the proximal surface, the retention needs must be analyzed in relation to the occlusal box characteristics, because the amalgam
restoration isthmus that connects the occlusal box to the
proximal one aids to retain the restorative material in the
proximal box .
If the occlusal box of the preparation is narrow, with
about 1.2 mm or less on the buccolingual direction, the small
volume of amalgam may be not enough to prevent the fracture of the restoration at the isthmus region . This may
occur due to the masticatory load that hits the marginal ridge
of the restoration, which will cause simultaneously tensile
and flexural stress at the isthmus region . On this case,
the retention locks must be prepared at the buccal and lingual walls of the proximal box ( . Fig. 6.47a ). Some authors
recommend the use of those locks only on the cases that the
proximal boxes are wide. However, if the occlusal box of the
Class II preparation is wide due to the carious lesion extension or due to previous restorations, the retention locks on
the proximal box will rarely be necessary .
A study analyzed in vitro the resistance to displacement
of amalgam restorations toward the proximal surface when
different Class II preparation designs were performed . A
vertical slot preparation, without any involvement of the
occlusal groove but with retention locks in the buccal and
lingual walls, resisted to a displacement load of 18.09 kg. A
preparation with the occlusal box in the central groove and
the dovetail lock resisted only 7.12 kg. On the other hand, an
association of the occlusal box with dovetail locks and proximal box locks resisted to a load of 22.77 kg. They proved that
the preparation of locks at the proximal boxes is much more
effective than the occlusal box, to retain a restoration on the
proximal direction, besides the fact that it preserves the
intact tooth structure on the occlusal surface.
To prepare the retention locks, the conical No. diamond point or No. bur is applied on the buccoaxial and
linguoaxial line angles, grinding or cutting dentin of the buccal and lingual walls and never on the direction of the pulp,
avoiding a pulpal exposure ( . Figs. 10.12u, v and 10.13a ′, b′)
[11, 13, 20, 22, 25]. In case of large and deep carious lesions, the locks must be prepared only after the irregular areas have
been filled with GIC and the walls have been flattened, avoiding that the recently prepared retentions are covered by the
base material. Those locks are prepared with the one-third of
the rotary instrument active head near to the tip, grinding
more on the region closer to the gingival wall than to the
occlusal surface. The grinding is performed mainly with the
tip of the head, with the instrument leaning slightly toward
the direction of the wall, allowing the penetration at the same
depth of the tip diameter, near to the point angle. It is ecomended to reduce the depth toward the occlusal surface and
finish at the buccoaxiopulpal or linguoaxiopulpal point
angles in case of a preparation that involves the occlusal sur -
face (. Fig. 10.13a ′, b′) or before the DEJ on a vertical slot
preparations ( . Fig. 10.12u, v ). This procedure results or
retention shaped like a pyramid ( . Fig. 6.45b – retention 2)
. A refrigeration only with air will improve the visibility,
and the reduced speed of handpiece will improve the tactile
feeling and the control of the instrument . The end of the
retention must be located at 0.2 mm internally from the DEJ,
avoiding to produce undermined enamel. The retention efficacy can be evaluated by positioning the tip of the explor -
atory probe at this region and pulling it toward the proximal
surface ( . Fig. 10.12w, x ). This retention can also be prepared
with a gingival margin trimmer, although some dentists prefer to use the small round rotary instruments. The bur is
placed on the point angle near to the gingival wall and moved
along the buccoaxial and linguolabial, up to the point angle
with the pulpal wall . However, the conical rotary instrument is easier to control than a round one . According to
Gilmore and Lund , this retention reduces the stress at
the restoration isthmus, also contributing for its resistance.
They make the masticatory loads over the proximal box of
the restoration dissipate on the vertical walls of the proximal
box, instead of creating high stress inside the amalgam, at the
isthmus region. This separates the retention and resistance of
the occlusal box from the proximal one .
10.5.1.4 Convenience Form
The axial wall must be slightly expulsive toward the occlusal
surface, and it is performed leaning the rotary instrument
(. Fig. 10.12p ) . This leaning allows a visualization of the
gingival wall during the preparation and simplifies the condensation of the restorative material. Therefore, it is a convenience form ( . Fig. 6.49a, b ). In addition, it increases the
material thickness at the region of the limit between the
occlusal and proximal box, increasing the resistance of this
area. The axial wall is generally flat on the buccolingual direction .
10.5.1.5 Removal of the Remaining Carious
Tissue
The remaining carious tissue is removed with a round bur in
the low-speed handpiece. The irregularities of the preparation geometrical shape may be corrected by the application
of a GIC base ( . Figs. 10.12q–t and 10.13u–x ).
Tooth Preparations for Amalgam Restorations
.5.1.6 Finishing the Enamel Walls
The preparation of the proximal box of a Class II preparation with rotary instruments will, certainly, leave under -
mined enamel on the buccal and lingual walls near the
margins ( . Fig. 10.15a–d ), which will fracture with the time
and produce marginal ditches. A study showed that if not
correctly finished, the undermined enamel margins shown
microfractures after the application of the matrix bands dur -
ing the restorative procedure [5 ]. Therefore, the use of hand
instruments is essential. As it was mentioned by Howard
, to obtain a complete and conservative preparation,
which ensures a long-lasting restoration, is much more
important than save some few seconds that will be necessary
to use the proper hand instruments [13, 20, 22]. The only
situation that the correct finishing of the buccal and lingual
wall margins of the proximal box can be achieved only with
a rotary instrument would be on the case of the absence of
the adjacent tooth. However, the use of the gingival margin
trimmer would still be indispensable at the gingival cavosurface angle.
The enamel margin trimming of buccal and lingual walls
of the proximal box is performed with a No. 14–15 enamel
hatchet, with the bevel facing inside of the preparation .
The No. 14 hatchet trims the lingual wall, and the No. 15 works on the buccal one ( . Figs. 10.12y, z and 10.13c ′, d′). At
the region of the cavosurface angle of the gingival wall, due to
the cervical leaning of the enamel prisms at this area, when
the wall is made parallel to occlusal plane, there may remain
undermined enamel prisms. They can be removed with the
gingival margin trimmers, working from buccal toward the
lingual surface and vice versa ( . Figs. 10.12a ′, b′ and 10.13e ′,
f′). For the mesial cavity, the No. 28 trimmer is used (10- -14) (R and L) . The dentist should take care for not
making a large bevel but only to trim enough to remove all
the short and undermined enamel prisms . The leaning
of this trimmed area will be of 15–20° toward the gingiva in
relation to the gingival wall surface ( . Fig. 6.50) . If there
is no enamel at the gingival cavosurface angle, this procedure
will not need to be performed.
10.5.1.7 Cleaning of the Preparation
It is performed with air-water spray, followed by the application of detergent solutions, which is washed, and the surface
dried with an airstream. Then, it is possible to apply 2%
sodium fluoride solution for 2 min, followed by drying, or
applying 2% chlorhexidine antimicrobial solution, followed
by washing and drying, according to what has been previously described for the Class I cavities.
a b
cd
.Fig. 10.15 Finishing of the enamel walls. a Only with the rotary instruments; b –d with the hand cutting instrument (enamel hatchet)
C. R. G. Torres and D. Mehta
10
10.5.1.8 Final Characteristics
of the Preparation
Occlusal Box
5The same as the simple Class I preparation.
Proximal Box
5Flat, uniform, and smooth walls
5Gingival wall parallel to the occlusal plane
5Buccal and lingual walls divergent toward the proximal
surface and convergent toward the occlusal surface
5Axial wall expulsive toward the occlusal surface
5Internal line angles of the first and second sets, the exter -
nal line angles and point angles round
5Round axiopulpal angle
5Hollenback’s reverse curve on the buccal wall of the
proximal box
5Trimming of the gingival cavosurface angle
5Mechanical locks on the buccal and lingual walls of the
proximal box
10.5.2 Access Through the Buccal or Lingual
Surfaces
The access to a proximal carious lesion on a posterior tooth,
through the buccal or lingual surfaces, can be chosen when
there are cavitated carious lesions below the contact point,
preferably with a small depth in dentin, cervically located,
with a remaining tooth structure of at least 2 mm of intact
enamel below the marginal ridge . It is especially advantageous when the lesion is located slightly displaced toward
the buccal or lingual surfaces, reducing the amount of
structure to be grind or cut to access the lesion. This situation is commonly found on lesions at the root and on the
proximal surfaces of the patients with the gingival recession
due to periodontal problems ( . Fig. 10.16a ) . This type
of lesion is classified as a Class II according to Black but is
considered Site 3 according to Mount and Hume. This kind
of preparation, named horizontal slot, was developed by
Roggenkamp et al. and has advantages of saving time,
preservation of the tooth structure, and better esthetic
results, besides not changing the occlusal relations and the
natural proximal contact . It also shows advantages on
rotated teeth. The preparation technique can be observed in
. Fig. 10.16a–l .
10.5.2.1 Outline Form
The opening of the cavity is performed with round-shaped
No. diamond point or No. 1⁄2 or 1 carbide bur, which is
placed below the contact point toward the lesion, at the buccal or lingual surface, according to the proximity to the lesion
and the need to hide the presence of the restoration
(. Fig. 10.16b ). The adjacent tooth must be protected by a
metallic matrix band, stabilized by a wooden wedge, inserted
on the opposite surface of which the access will be performed. The outline is performed with the cylinder-shaped No. 1090A
diamond point or No. 56 straight fissure carbide bur. It will
enter the preparation until it reaches the limit of the lesion on
the opposite surface ( . Fig. 10.16c ) and moved on the occlusogingival direction, creating this way the axial wall. Placing
the rotary instrument on the occlusal limit of the lesion, it is
then moved in the mesiodistal direction, creating the occlusal wall ( . Fig. 10.16d ). The same procedure is repeated to
prepare the gingival wall ( . Fig. 10.16e ). This way, the occlusal and gingival walls will be parallel between each other and
perpendicular to the axial wall. The wall opposite to the
lesion access will be flat and perpendicular to the other walls.
10.5.2.2 Resistance Form
The resistance form is obtained by the preservation of the
marginal ridge, which maintains the resistance of the tooth
structure. The surrounding walls form a right angle with the
external surface of the tooth, allowing an adequate thickness
of the restorative material on the restoration margins.
10.5.2.3 Retention Form
Toward the surface where the access to the lesion was per -
formed, the retention is obtained by the fact that the cavity is
larger on the buccolingual direction than on the gingivoocclusal direction. On the proximal direction, additional retention grooves must be prepared on the gingivoaxial and
occlusoaxial line angles, in a way to avoid the displacement of
the restoration. For that, a round No. diamond point or
No. 1⁄4 or 1⁄2 carbide bur or even the conical No. diamond point or No. carbide bur is applied on an oblique
position in relation to gingival and occlusal walls, as it can be
observed in . Fig. 10.16f, g , on the entire extension of the line
angles. It is very important that the grinding or cutting is per -
formed exclusively on the occlusal and gingival walls, but
never on the axial wall, due to the complete lack of effectiveness of this grinding on the retention and because of the
pulpal exposure possibility. The retention grooves do not
have to reach the external surface of the tooth, and it is properly prepared entirely on the dentin.
> Additional mechanical retention locks or coves should
be never prepared on pulpal or axial walls.
10.5.2.4 Convenience Form
The access to the lesion by the buccal or lingual surface is
already a convenience form because it allows preservation of
the tooth structure.
10.5.2.5 Removal of the Remaining Carious
Tissue
If there is any remaining carious tissue, it must be removed
the way it has already been described for the other types of
tooth preparation, with round burs in low-speed handpiece,
using the larger diameter compatible to the size of the caries
lesion or using dentin spoon excavators.
Tooth Preparations for Amalgam Restorations
.5.2.6 Finishing the Enamel Walls
It is performed on the gingival, occlusal, lingual, or buccal
walls, using the No. 14/15 hatchet ( . Fig. 10.16h–j ).
10.5.2.7 Cleaning of the Preparation
It is performed with an air-water spray followed by a deter -
gent solution, which is washed, and the cavity is dried with
an air stream. The disinfection of the preparation walls can
be performed with a 2% chlorhexidine antimicrobial solution, followed by washing and drying. Another option is to apply 2% sodium fluoride for caries prevention, followed
only by air drying, according to what has already been
described for Class I preparations.
10.5.2.8 Final Characteristics
of the Preparation
5Access through the buccal or lingual surface
5Flat, uniform, and smooth surfaces
5Gingival and occlusal walls parallel between each other
and perpendicular to the axial wall
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 10.16 Horizontal slot preparation. a Caries lesion on the CEJ; b
access to the lesion with the round diamond point; c penetration with
the cylinder diamond point; d preparation of the occlusal wall. e
preparation of the gingival wall; f , g preparation of the mechanical retentions; h–j finishing of the gingival, occlusal and buccal cavosur -
face angles (the arrows indicate the direction of the movement); k , l
final aspect of the preparation
C. R. G. Torres and D. Mehta
10
5Axial wall parallel to the proximal surface; buccal or
lingual wall perpendicular to the other walls
5Additional retentions on the occlusal and gingival walls
10.6 Class V or Site 3 on Free Smooth
Surface
They are preparations performed on the cervical third of the
tooth crown. According to Black, it is considered Class V
only the lesions that are located on the free smooth surfaces
(buccal and lingual), whereas according to Mount and Hume, besides those, it is also considered Site 3 the cervical
lesions on the mesial and distal surfaces. In the following
explanation, it will be included the Site 3 preparations on the
buccal or lingual surfaces. Nowadays, the use of amalgam on
this type of cavity is restricted to the posterior teeth, when
there is no esthetics involvement, especially on molars. They
can be shallow lesions on the mechanical point of view, but
they are deep on the biological point of view, due to the
proximity to the pulpal chamber, and special care should be
taken to avoid an accidental pulpal exposure. In
. Fig. 10.17a–o , it is shown the preparation of a large lesion
on the buccal surface of the second mandibular molar.
gh
ij
kl
.Fig. 10.16 (continued)
Tooth Preparations for Amalgam Restorations
.6.1 Outline Form
In general, this kind of lesion is already open due to the collapse of the carious enamel. If the lesion is closed, with only a
white or dark spot and intact surface, it is subsurfacial and has
to be treated only by preventive measures. The outline is per -
formed with a cone-shaped rotary instrument, such as the No.
or diamond point or No. carbide bur positioned perpendicular to the surface. The sides of the instru-ment create the surrounding walls of the preparation, and its
tip creates the axial wall , maintaining the depth of penetration of the rotary instrument at 0.5 mm further than the
DEJ, even if still there is carious tissue further than this region
(. Fig. 10.17b, c ). This creates a preparation depth of
1–1.25 mm on the gingival cavosurface angle, allowing that
the retention grooves may be prepared later without leaving
any undermined enamel . On the case of gingival margins
on the cement, the penetration can be only 0.75 mm . The
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 10.17 Class V or site 3 preparation on the buccal surface. a
Initial aspect of the caries lesion; b , c beginning of the preparation of
the occlusal wall with the conical diamond point; d –f preparation of
the mesial and gingival walls. g Preparation of the distal wall; h
removal of the remaining carious tissue with the round bur; i , j treatment of the dentin and flattening of the axial wall with a glass
ionomer cement. k , l preparation of mechanical retentions on the
axiogingival line angle. m , n preparation of the retentions on the
axioocclusal line angle; o aspect of the preparation finished
C. R. G. Torres and D. Mehta
10
gh
ij
kl
.Fig. 10.17 (continued)
Tooth Preparations for Amalgam Restorations
10
gingival margin generally follows the curvature of the mar -
ginal gingiva, because it is a place where the biofilm grows and
the lesion border is located. On the large lesion, the mesial and
distal margins generally reach the buccomesial and buccodistal or linguomesial and linguodistal axial angles. In general,
those preparations take an oval or kidney shaped .
However, the dentist must keep in mind that the final dimensions and the shape of the cavity must be a result of the lesion
shape and the extension, with maximum preservation of the
healthy remaining tooth structure ( . Fig. 10.18a–c ) .
10.6.2 Resistance Form
On this type of preparation, the restoration will not be submitted to direct masticatory loads but only to the stress distributed inside the tooth structure. However, specific
characteristics may favor its durability. During the preparation, the axial wall follows the contour of the external surface
of the tooth on the mesiodistal direction, creating a homogeneous thickness of the restorative material and the resistance
of the final restoration ( . Fig. 10.19a, b ) [22, 25]. If the preparation is large on the gingivoocclusal direction, the axial wall
can also follow the curvature of the tooth . In narrow
cavities, the axial wall is generally flat on the gingivoocclusal
direction .Due to the convex shape of the buccal and lingual sur -
faces, to the walls to follow the leaning of the prisms, the sur -
rounding walls must be divergent toward the external surface
of the tooth, to obtain a 90° cavosurface angle ( . Fig. 10.20 ),
which is obtained with the use of cone-shaped rotary instruments with flat tip ( . Fig. 10.17c–g ) [13, 22].
On the mesiodistal direction, due to the convex shape of
the tooth surface near to the axial angles, the mesial and distal walls must be slightly divergent toward the external sur -
face, in a way to follow the direction of the prisms and form
a right angle with the external tooth surface . To improve
the adaptation of the restorative material and the mechanical
behavior of the restoration, the walls must be flat, uniform,
and smooth.
10.6.3 Retention Form
Due to the non-retentive shape of the surrounding walls,
additional retention must be prepared. For that, retention
grooves are prepared along the entire extension of the occlusoaxial and gingivoaxial line angles, on the occlusal and gingival walls. It is done with a short inverted cone point (No.
) or carbide bur (No. 33 1⁄2), positioned with its long axis
perpendicular to the axial wall, or with a round diamond
point (No. ) or carbide bur (No. 1⁄2), with a depth of
mn
o
.Fig. 10.17 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres and D. Mehta
10
0.25 mm, which corresponds to half diameter of the rotary
instrument head ( . Fig. 10.17k–n ) [16, 22, 25]. The use of the
round rotary instruments is especially recommended on the
maxillary molars, once the access adversely affects the cor -
rect placement of the inverted cone instrument . To ver -
ify the retention quality, the tip of an exploratory probe is
placed inside the retention groove and pulled toward the
external surface.10.6.4 Convenience Form
In the case of large cavities on the mesiodistal direction, due
to the fact that the free smooth surfaces of the tooth are convex, the axial wall of the preparation should also be convex
(. Fig. 10.19b ) . It is also considered a convenience form
because it avoids an accidental pulpal exposure, which could
happen in case it was prepared flat [16, 25]. In the case where
a
cb
.Fig. 10.18 a–c Variations on the outline form of the Class V preparation. The outline must be the most conservative as possible, involving only
the tooth structure affected by the lesion
ab
.Fig. 10.19 a, b Contour of the axial wall in small and large preparation, respectively, in relation to the mesiodistal direction
Tooth Preparations for Amalgam Restorations
10the cavities are small on the mesiodistal direction, the axial
wall is generally flat ( . Fig. 10.19a ).
10.6.5 Removal of the Remaining Carious
Tissue
On this stage, any remaining carious tissue can be removed
with a large round bur at low speed, of a diameter compatible
of the preparation size, or with an excavator spoon
(. Fig. 10.17h ). The undermined or irregular areas of the
remaining tooth structure can be filled with GIC and the geometrical shape prepared over the base material ( . Fig. 10.17i,
j). If a base is necessary, the retention grooves must be prepared after its placement, in a way to avoid its closing during
the base material application.
10.6.6 Finishing the Enamel Walls
Due to the expulsive shape of the surrounding walls, no
undermined enamel prisms will be left after the use of the
rotary instrument.
10.6.7 Cleaning of the Preparation
It is performed in the same way as described for other preparations.
10.6.8 Final Characteristics
of the Preparation
5Flat, uniform, and smooth walls
5Round line angles of the first set
5Sharp line angle of the second set
5Convex axial wall following the contour of the buccal or
lingual surface on large preparation or flat axial wall on
small preparation 5Divergent surrounding walls
5Additional retention grooves on the occlusoaxial and
gingivoaxial line angles
Conclusion
This chapter described the principles associated with the
preparation of posterior teeth to receive amalgam restorations. The preparation procedure for Class I, II, and V cavities
was presented, including all characteristics on each case to
get retention and strength for the restoration. Due to its nonadhesive characteristics, the details shown are extremely
important for the durability of the restoration, and must be
kept in mind when this kind of procedure is performed by the
clinician. Although the use of amalgam is being extremely
reduced in recent years, it is still an excellent alternative in
cases where the control of moisture is difficult or the access
to modern material is restricted due to economic reasons.
References
1. Alexander WE, Mc Donald RE, Stookey GK. Effect of stannous fluo -
ride on recurrent caries—results after 24 months. J Dent Res.
;52: . https://doi.org/10. / .
2. Almquist TC, Cowan RD, Lambert RL. Conservative amalgam resto -
rations. J Prosthet Dent. ;29: –8.
3. Baratieri LN. Dentística. Procedimentos preventivos e restauradores. 2nd ed. Sao Paulo: Santos; .
4. Baratieri LN, Monteiro Junior S, Andrada MA, Ritter AV. Odontologia
Restauradora: Fundamentos e Possibilidades. Santos: São Paulo;
.
5. Boyde A, Knight PJ. Scanning electron microscope studies of class II
cavity margins. Matrix band application. Br Dent J. ; : –7.
6. Bronner FJ. Engineering principles applied to class II cavities. J Dent
Res. ;10: –9.
7. Crockett WD, Shepard FE, Moon PC, Creal AF. The influence of proximal retention grooves on the retention and resistance of class II
preparations for amalgams. J Am Dent Assoc. ;91: –6.
8. Dérand T. Marginal failure of amalgam class II restoration. J Dent
Res. ;56: –5. https://doi.org/10. /
01.
9. Elderton RJ. The prevalence of failure of restorations: a literature
review. J Dent Elsevier. ;4: –10. https://doi.
org/10. / - (76) -X.
10. Ewoldsen N. Facial slot class II restorations: a conservative technique revisited. Can Dent Assoc. ;69:25–8.
11. Fichmann DM, Santos W. Restaurações à amálgama. Savier: São
Paulo; .
12. Gilmore HW, Lund MR. Operative dentistry. Saint Louis: Mosby;
.
13. Howard WW. Atlas of operative dentistry. 2nd ed. St. Louis: Mosby;
.
14. Mertz-Fairhurst EJ, Curtis JW, Ergle JW, Rueggeberg FA, Adair
SM. Ultraconservative and cariostatic sealed restorations: results at
year 10. J Am Dent Assoc Elsevier. ; :55–66. https://doi.
org/10. /JADA.ARCHIVE. . .
15. Mondelli J, Franco EB, Pereira JC, Ishikiriama A, Francischone CE,
Mondelli RL, et al. Dentística: Procedimentos Pré – Clínicos. Santos:
São Paulo; .
16. Mondelli J, Ishikiriama A, Galan JJ, Navarro MF. Dentística Oper -
atória. Sarvier: São Paulo; .
17. Mooney B. Operatoria dental. Panamericana: Buenos Aires; .
18. Mount GJ, Hume WR. A revised classification of carious lesions by
site and size. Quintessence Int (Berl). ;28: –3.
.Fig. 10.20 Direction of the gingival and occlusal walls of the Class
V preparations
C. R. G. Torres and D. Mehta
10
19. Neto NG, Carvalho RC, Russo EM, Sobral MA, Luz MA. Dentística Restauradora: Restaurações diretas. Santos: São Paulo; .
20. Osborne JW, Summitt JB. Extension for prevention: is it relevant
today? Am J Dent. ;11: –96.
21. Qvist V, Johannessen L, Bruun M. Progression of approximal caries
in relation to iatrogenic preparation damage. J Dent Res.
;71: –3. https://doi.org/10. / .
22. Roberson TM, Heymann H, Swift EJ. Sturdevant’s art and science of
operative dentistry. Orlando: Mosby/Elsevier; .
23. Rodda JC. Modern class 2 amalgam cavity preparations. N Z Dent J.
;68: –8. 24. Roggenkamp CL, Cochran MA, Lund MR. The facial slot preparation:
a nonocclusal option for class 2 carious lesions. Oper Dent.
;7: –6.
25. Simon WJ. Clinical operative dentistry. Philadelphia: Saunders;
.
26. Stratis S, Bryant RW. The influence of modified cavity design and
finishing techniques on the clinical performance of amalgam resto -
rations: a 2-year clinical study. J Oral Rehabil. ;25: –78.
https://doi.org/10. /j. - . . .x.
27. Vale W. Cavity preparation. Iri Dent VRev. ;2:33–41.
Tooth Preparations for Amalgam Restorations
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG
C. R. G. Torres (ed.), Modern Operative Dentistry, Textbooks in Contemporary Dentistry,
https://doi.org/10. / -3- - -0_11373 11
Amalgam Restorations
Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres, Shankargouda Patil, and Graziela Ribeiro Batista
11.1 Introduction –
11.2 Instruments and Materials –
11.3 Restorative Technique –
11.3.1 Class II Restorations (Site 2) –
11.3.2 Restoration of Compound Class I Preparations –
11.3.3 Restoration of Class V Preparations (Site 3) –
11.3.4 Restoration of Horizontal Slot Preparations –
11.4 Finishing and Polishing –
11.5 Durability of Amalgam Restorations –
11.6 Controversy About the Use of Amalgam –
References –
11Learning Objectives
The learning objectives of this chapter are related to the following topics:
5Instruments and materials necessary to perform the
restoration
5Restorative technique for Class I (simple and compound),
II, and V preparations
5Application of the matrix and wedge for Class II and V
restorations
5Trituration and condensation
5Pre-carve burnishing procedure
5Carving of occlusal and smooth surfaces
5Post-carve burnishing procedure
5Occlusal adjustment or a new restoration
5Finishing and polishing of amalgam restoration
5Durability of amalgam restorations
5Controversy about the use of the amalgam
11.1 Introduction
Amalgam means any material that contains mercury as the
main ingredient on its composition. A specific combination
based on the mixture of silver-tin alloy with mercury is called
dental amalgam. It is condensed into a tooth preparation,
becoming solid after crystallization . It is one of the oldest
restorative materials that is still in use. An old Chinese medical text written by Su Gon in a.d. describes the use of a
silver paste to restore teeth. Another text, from , describes
the composition of such silver paste, which should be prepared with 10 parts of mercury, 4.5 parts of silver, and 9 parts
of zinc. Around , this material was brought from Europe
to the United States, causing being rejected from most dentists of that time which considered that only the cohesive gold
foil should be used for tooth restorations. That began the socalled amalgam war, and the American Society of Dental Sur -
geons (ASDS) declared that the use of amalgam should be
considered malpractice, trying to oblige all members to never
use this material and sign a pledge to abstain from its use. This
attitude leads to the premature disbanding of ASDS because
most of its affiliated members decided to leave the society
. The composition of amalgam alloy was studied by
the famous professor Greene Vardiman Black, in , who
improved its physical properties and created its standardization, which increased its acceptance by the practitioners.
According to Markley, amalgam has saved and continues to
save more teeth than all the other restorative materials combined . Several factors contributed and continue to con-tribute for this material’s huge clinical success. Among them
are the low cost in relation to the indirect restorations and the
direct composite and its simple technique of use. It is also less
sensible to some variations of the restorative procedure. It
presents a high resistance to masticatory loads and wear.
After the polishing, its superficial roughness is satisfactory,
which results in a smaller bacterial adhesion in relation to the
other direct restorative material. It also presents the capacity
of self-sealing the tooth/amalgam interface, by deposition of
corrosion products, which progressively reduces the mar -
ginal microleakage with time, preventing the occurrence of
caries lesions in the interface and decreasing the postoperative sensitivity . The corrosion products deposited on the
interface are tin oxide, tin oxychloride, and some copper
oxides, as can be observed in . Fig. 11.1 . All those factors
allow an excellent clinical durability for those restorations,
which can reach 20 years or more.
However, one of the most important deficiencies of the
silver amalgam is its metallic color, creating unesthetic restorations with artificial appearance. This has resulted in the
decrease of amalgam use, especially on more economically
developed countries. Despite the efforts of the researchers to
develop an esthetic material that could replace amalgam, a
large number of restorations are still made using this material
worldwide . However, on the economically deprived
countries, the access to dental treatment has increased, and
amalgam is still used for the treatment of teeth affected by
caries lesion. This made the amount of dental amalgam sold
on the entire world still big, despite the fact that the prefer -
ence for its use is decreasing.
Nowadays, the dental amalgam is indicated only for restorations on the posterior teeth, where the esthetics is not a
main concern, such as on mediumto large-sized Class I and
II preparations and large Class V preparation. Its choice as a
restorative material is based on the size of the area to be
restored; on the materials used on the nearby areas, such as Amalgam means any material that contains mercury
as the main ingredient on its composition. A specific
combination based on the mixture of silver-tin alloy with
mercury is called dental amalgam.
.Fig. 11.1 Restoration removed showing oxides deposited on the
walls, which promote the sealing of the interface
C. R. G. Torres et al.
11
on the adjacent and antagonist teeth; economical factors; and
whether it will produce an acceptable esthetic result . The
physical properties of the crystallized amalgam have a great
influence on its clinical applications. The compressive
strength of the enamel is about MPa, while for the amalgam, it is around – MPa. However, its tensile strength
is only 48–70 MPa, which produces a good resistance to
compressive loads during mastication but predisposes to
fracture when strong tensile forces are predominant .
Therefore, its ideal indication is intracoronal tooth
preparation, where it will mostly undergo compressive loads.
When comparing the characteristics between the amalgam and composite resin, some factors can be considered.
The amalgam has a coefficient of thermal expansion 2.5 times
bigger than the tooth structure, but smaller than composite
which is 3–6 times greater than the tooth. That makes the
restoration to suffer higher volumetric changes than the
tooth structure during thermal variations in the oral cavity.
In addition, it is more wear resistant than the composite and,
therefore, is indicated on restorations of teeth with heavy
occlusal load or when all the occlusal contacts of the teeth
must be restored, situations which are challenging to the
composites . It is also indicated on the cases where the
lesions reach the root surface, with absence of enamel on gingival margin, due to the poor adhesion of composites to the
dentin/cementum margin and formation of marginal gaps
. It is also the best material on the areas of hard isolation
of the operating field, because of the higher risk of preparation contamination with water, saliva or blood. Even though
contamination is never desired, it is less damaging for amalgam restorations than for composite. However, due to its
adhesive properties, composites allow more conservative
tooth preparations than amalgam and are the first choice on
very small carious lesions . Therefore, amalgam is mainly
indicated for large cavities on severely destroyed posterior
teeth .
Other advantage of amalgam over direct composite restoration is that the first is condensed into the cavity instead of
just adapted into it. The condensation pressure toward the
gingival wall helps to assure that no internal empty spaces
remain along the margins. The condensation toward the
proximal direction aids to assure to obtain the proximal contact and the adequate contour. When using composite resin,
the application does not move the band toward the contact.
The proximal contact and the contour are obtained mainly
due to the correct use of matrix and wedge system .
The dental amalgam alloy may vary according to its composition. Although the basic components are silver, tin, copper, and zinc, the amount of each ingredient varies between
the commercial brands. Conventional alloys have 65–70%
silver, 25–30% tin, 0–6% copper, and 0–2% zinc . Silver is
the main component, while tin is more soluble in mercury
and provides a better crystallization reaction, also improving
the characteristics for handling and adaptation in the preparation. The first dental amalgams used to contain less than
5% of copper and showed limited corrosion resistance. In
, the first high-copper amalgam alloy was available in market, which was proved to be much more resistant to cor -
rosion. Amalgam alloys are considered high-copper-content
ones when they have 10–30% of this metal . The higher
copper level of these alloys reduces the formation of λ2 phase,
produced by the reaction between tin and mercury, since tin
reacts with copper forming the ε and η1 phases (copper-tin)
. Those alloys are preferred in relation to the low-copper
content ones because they produce more resistance and
durable restorations.
On . Fig. 11.2, it is shown the setting reactions of silver
amalgam, according to its composition. After the mixture,
mercury begins to dissolve and react with the external layer
of silver-tin particles. About 15% of these particles are consumed to produce a complete reaction with mercury to
yield a matrix of solid materials derived from the reaction.
The particles of the alloy that do not react remain mixed
inside the matrix to contribute to the mechanical strength.
Initially, the material shrinks due to particle dissolution.
However, with the crystals growing, an expansion finally
happens and compensates the initial shrinkage. The amount
of copper on the alloy influenced the amalgam creep, which
is the plastic deformation of the material after its setting
when receiving a constant low-level load, such as the occlusal contact over the restoration. When deforming, the amalgam is projected beyond the margins, resulting in marginal
degradation. The larger the copper level in the alloy, the
lower the creep will be.
There are two types of high-copper-content alloys. The
first is a mixture of low-copper-content lathe-cut particle
with high-copper-content spherical particles. On this case,
the reaction occurs in two stages. On the first stage, the for -
mation of λ2 phase (mercury-tin) happens, but it is quickly
converted into ε and η1 phases (copper-tin) on the second
stage. The second type of alloy is a single composition with all
particles having high copper content. On this case, there is no
formation of λ2 phase (. Fig. 11.2 ).
.Fig. 11.2 Dental amalgam crystallization reactions
Amalgam Restorations
11The compressive strength of λ phase (silver-tin) is
kg/cm2, while that of λ1 (silver-mercury) phase is kg/
cm2 . On the other hand, the compressive strength of λ2
phase is of only kg/cm2, and this way it is the most fragile
phase of the crystallized amalgam. It forms a continuous web
inside the material. This way, once the corrosion begins, it
continues through the whole restoration . On the conventional amalgam, there is selective corrosion on λ2 phase,
while on the high-copper-content amalgam, there is a selective corrosion on ε and η1 phases [ 9]. On the other hand, ε
and η1 crystals do not communicate with λ2 crystals, reducing the corrosion, which will happen only on the surface.
Therefore, the presence of λ2 phase must be avoided at all
costs, and it is recommended the use of high-copper-content
alloys. They show a higher corrosion resistance and compressive strength, a smaller marginal degradation, and a higher
surface gloss after polishing in relation to the conventional
ones . Both lowand high-copper-content alloys produce
corrosion products such as tin oxide (solid) and tin oxychloride (soluble) crystals. The solid corrosion products help to
seal the interface tooth restoration.
Zinc has been added to the alloys to act as a scavenger of
foreign substances, such as copper and tin oxides, during the
manufacturing process . However, when in contact with
water during the condensation into the cavity, the formation
of ZnO and hydrogen gas (H2) occurs, which may result in
the delayed expansion of the material and cause the fracture
of the remaining tooth structure . Clinically, it can be
observed that the material extrudes from the cavity, as can be
seen in . Fig. 11.3. It is considered acceptable a dimensional
change of approximately 20 μm/cm for the material after the
crystallization. However, on the case where the material
comes in contact with water, values up to μm/cm are
observed after 8 h [6, 9]. On those cases, it is common for the
patient to report a delayed dental sensitivity, 5–7 days after
receiving the restoration, due to the stress caused by the
restorative material on the preparation walls . The contact with water can also produce porosity on the surface .
For this reason, some alloys have no zinc on its composition. However, the zinc-free alloys present an inferior clinical per -
formance than zinc-containing ones, because it increases the
corrosion resistance in the oral cavity and reduces the mar -
ginal failures . This occurs due to the corrosion of the Zn
instead of the Cu-Sn phase . The oxide scavenger proper -
ties of Zn keep the amalgam with a light color during the
manufacturing process and throughout the clinical life of the
restoration . The zinc-free alloys used to be indicated on
pediatric dentistry, when the control of the moisture was
harder, mainly on deciduous teeth.
According to the method of production of amalgam alloy
particles, they may have different morphologies. The most
common type is called lathe-cut particles (. Fig. 11.4a ). They
are irregular particles obtained by melting the metals to make
an ingot, which is ground to produce “shavings” of metal that
are milled to reach the recommended particle sizes, which is
verified by passing it through sieves . Then, the particles
receive a thermal treatment to release the internal stress
induced by the grinding process. They can be classified
according to the particle size in regular cut, with larger par -
ticles, and fine cut, with smaller particles. The use of fine-cut
particles allows a better adaptation on the cavity angles than
the regular-cut ones and also a better surface smoothness
after polishing . They also mix faster with mercury and are
better handled by the dentist, have a more uniform setting
reaction, and produce a higher initial strength for the restoration . The lathe-cut particles have the advantage that,
during the condensation procedure, the particles come close
and interlock, maintaining its position. During this procedure, the total volume of the material is reduced by the elimination of the empty spaces and the excess of mercury.
Therefore, it can be considered that amalgam really becomes
more dense. The average particle size of modern alloys is up
to 20–25 μm.
Other distinct types of amalgam alloy particle are
obtained through atomizing the melted alloy, spraying
through a jet nozzle under high pressure, inside a cold atmosphere containing nitrogen gas, which protect the particles
from oxidation during the cooling period [9 ]. This procedure results in the formation of small spheres ( . Fig. 11.4b ).
Then, they are treated with acid and undergo a thermal
treatment. The spherical alloys have the advantage to form
amalgams that better adapt to the irregularities of the preparation, need smaller condensation pressure, and are easier to
carve, producing a better superficial smoothness of the restoration [9 , 16]. In addition, they need 10% less mercury for
amalgamation . However, this material cannot be condensed with small instruments, because the particles “slide”
on each other. The smaller condensation force applied makes
more difficult to obtain an adequate contact point with the
neighbor tooth [9 ].
To associate the positive properties of both types of par -
ticles, the admixed alloy was developed with both lathe-cut
and spherical particles ( . Fig. 11.4c ) . Also called dispersed phase alloy, it generally has 2/3 of spherical and 1/3 of
lathe-cut particles. Adjusting the ratio of the two particles,
the manufacturers were able to obtain the ideal material in
.Fig. 11.3 Delayed amalgam expansion due to moisture contamination at the moment of the amalgam insertion
C. R. G. Torres et al.
11
terms of physical properties and handling characteristics .
This material offers easy condensability, adequate adaptation
into the cavity irregularities, and good surface smoothness.
The selection of the alloy to be used must be performed considering the setting time, consistency, carvability, and surface
smoothness, inside the limits of the acceptable physical properties .
11.2 Instruments and Materials
To perform the restorative procedure using dental amalgam,
the instruments and materials necessary are described below.
A suggestion for organization of the instruments on a logical
sequence of use can be observed in . Fig. 11.5 .
5Amalgam alloy and mercury, preferably preproportioned capsules
5Dental tweezer 5Flat first surface clinical mirror
5Double exploratory probe
5Iris straight scissor
5Rubber dam frame
5Ainsworth or Ivory puncher
5Palmer clamp holder forceps
5Rubber sheet
5Clamps No. , , , , , and 14 A
5Dental floss
5Number 1 plastic filling instrument
5Amalgam carrier
5Amalgam well or a rubber dappen dish
5Tofflemire matrix retainer
5Matrix bands of two widths (5 and 7 mm)
5Dentin excavator spoon (No. 17 and No. 19)
5Alcohol lamp
5Low fusing compound
5Anatomic wooden wedge of several sizes
ab c
.Fig. 11.4 Types of amalgam alloys. a Lathe cut; b spherical; c admixed
.Fig. 11.5 Organization of the
clinical instruments for amalgam
restorative procedure
Amalgam Restorations
11 5Curved Halstead mosquito forceps
5Ward amalgam condensers (No. 00, No. 1, No. 2, and
No. 3)
5Hollenback carvers (No. 3 and No. 3S)
5Frahm carvers (No. 2, No.6, and No. 10)
5Shoshan-A carver
5Discoid-cleoid carver
5Interproximal carver (IPC I)
5Egg-shaped burnisher (No. 29)
5Bennett burnisher (No. 33)
5Hollenback burnisher (No. 6)
5Miller articulating paper forceps
5Thin double-color articulating paper (black and red)
11.3 Restorative Technique
When the tooth preparation is finished, the operating field
must be properly isolated, avoiding amalgam contamination
by moisture from saliva or crevicular fluid, which could
result in a delayed expansion, surface corrosion and tarnish
increasing, strength reduction, and premature failure of the
restoration. Preferably, rubber dam isolation should be made,
even though a well-performed and monitored cotton roll isolation on a patient with a low salivary flow can also be acceptable.
After that, the preparation cleaning is performed. On
shallow and medium-depth preparation, an anionic deter -
gent is applied, followed by washing with air/water spray and
drying with airstream. Then, a neutral 2% sodium fluoride
solution is applied for 2–4 min and dried with an airstream.
Another option is to rub for 30s onto the preparation walls a
dentin desensitizer, containing 5% glutaraldehyde and 35%
hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA), which reduces the dentin permeability by protein precipitation inside the tubules
. After that a gentle drying is performed, without desiccating the dentin. On deep and very deep preparations, the
need of a pulpal protection must be evaluated, with the application of a liner material, as described in 7 Chap. 9. A base
can be placed on the pulpal wall, to create a flat surface, or on
the surrounding walls to fill the undermined enamel areas,
creating the artificial dentin. The amalgam has a high ther -
mal conductivity. Therefore, it should not be placed near the
dental pulp without a liner or a base . It is important that
the liner or base material does not reach the cavosurface
angle, which must be in contact with amalgam.
> Amalgam has a high thermal conductivity and should
not be placed in direct contact with pulpal wall of deep
preparations without a liner or a base.
11.3.1 Class II Restorations (Site 2)
The following sentences describe the entire restorative technique for a Class II preparation, involving the proximal sur -
face (. Fig. 11.6a–m ′). Except the matrix and wedge application steps, the restorative technique for Class I preparations is exactly the same. Therefore, it will not be described
separately.
11.3.1.1 Application of the Matrix and Wedge
For amalgam to reach the required and physical properties
produce a long-lasting restoration, it needs to be strongly
condensed on a space with rigid walls . In case of Class II
preparations, a matrix and wedge system must be used,
according to what has been detailed in 7 Chap. 8. The type
most commonly used is the universal matrix, using a matrix
retainer. In case the tooth to be restored is the anchor tooth,
which will receive the retention clamp for the rubbed dam
isolation, a custom-made riveted, welded, or T matrix can be
chosen since the clamp interferes on the correct placement of
the matrix retainer [6, 13]. The same is valid when the proximal boxes are very large on the buccolingual direction or one
or more cusps were lost, which impair the proper contour of
the universal matrix.
First of all, a matrix band must be selected. The straight
or boomerang-shaped strip can be used. One of the two
occlusogingival widths (5 or 7 mm) is chosen. The correct
width is selected according to the occluso-gingival dimensions of the tooth to be restored. To the gingival direction,
the strip width must be enough to surpass more or less
1 mm of the gingival cavosurface angle of the preparation.
To the occlusal direction, the edge of the band must go
1 mm further than the marginal ridge of the adjacent tooth,
allowing the correct reconstruction of the proximal surface
[9, 10, 12, 16]. About 7 cm of strip is used for the premolars
and molars.
The thickness of the matrix band varies from 0.03 to
0.05 mm [6 , 9]. The thicker and thinner ones both have
inconvenients. The thinner ones are hard to pass through
the proximal contact area due to insufficient stiffness,
besides the fact that they can easily be deformed during
amalgam condensation, increasing the risks of overhangs
on the margins. The thicker ones remain more stable during
the condensation, but a proper wedging and burnishing of
the matrix are essential, to create an adequate proximal
contact.
After that, the matrix band can be assembled on the
retainer. If the Tofflemire type is selected, the model with
guide posts at a 90° angle is placed on the buccal side of the
tooth, while the model with the guide posts contra-angled is
placed on the lingual side, indicated when the preparation
extends to the buccal surface ( . Fig. 8.15a ) [6, 16, 20]. The
matrix retainer is placed with the slotted side of the head
directed gingivally to allow easy separation of the retainer
from the band occlusally [9 , 16]. In general, the long axis of
the instrument is placed on the mesiodistal direction [6 ].
The buccal or lingual placement is a matter of convenience
and amount of remaining tooth structure. However, on the
mandible, the lingual placement is, sometimes, more adequate due to the leaning of the buccal surface toward the
lingual side, providing better stability to the retainer [9 ].
C. R. G. Torres et al.
11
Tip
The buccal or lingual placement of the retainer is a mat -
ter of convenience and amount of remaining tooth struc -
ture. However, on the mandible, the lingual placement is
sometimes more adequate due to the leaning of buccal
surface toward the lingual side, providing better stability.
Then, the contour of the matrix band can be modified to
adapt the convex contour of the proximal surface of the posterior teeth. For that, it is analyzed which part of the matrix
will be responsible for the restoration of the proximal contour
and the contact point. Without removing the matrix from the
retainer, this section is placed over a paper mixing pad and
burnished with a No. 29 egg-shaped amalgam burnisher [10,
16]. It is rubbed perpendicularly to the long axis of the strip, as can be observed in . Fig. 11.6b . It can also be used for this
purpose a No. contouring plier. Care must be taken to
establish the contour in harmony with the tooth to be restored,
with a particular curvature for that contact area . Then,
the set is taken in position and the matrix is tightened. Care
on the assembling and the application of the matrix is more
important than tightening it. Tightening the matrix strongly
around the tooth does not necessarily mean that it will prevent overhangs or produce the desired contour . Instead,
this may result in an inadequate contour [6 ]. At this moment,
the selected matrix must be checked if it has the adequate
width, that is, if its margin is cervical to the gingival cavosur -
face angle and above the marginal ridge of the adjacent tooth.
The next step is the application of the wooden wedges
in the interproximal space, in a way to avoid the overflow
of amalgam to the cervical region, create a slight tooth displacement, and compensate the thickness of the matrix band
b
a
cd
.Fig. 11.6 MOD amalgam restoration. a Tooth preparation; b
burnishing of the matrix at the region of contact over the paper mixing
pad; c traction of the rubber sheet; d wedge application; e Test of
wedge retention; f checking the gingival margin matrix adaptation; g
burnishing of the matrix; h checking the positioned matrix and wedge
system; i application of amalgam; j, k condensation toward the internal
angles of the proximal box; l filled proximal boxes; m, n Filling and
condensation on the rest of the preparation; o condensations toward
the buccal restoration margin; p condensation toward the lingual
restoration margin; q pre-carve burnishing; r carving of the occlusal
embrasure in the marginal ridge; s carving of the cusps incline; t removal of the matrix retainer; u, v Removal of the matrix band; w
adjustments of the height of the marginal ridge; x removal of the
cervical excess; y , z, a′, b′ use of the No. 3S Hollenback, cleoid, discoid,
and No. 2 Frahm carvers, respectively; c ′, d′ Use of No. 6 and 10 Frahm
carver; e′ superficial smoothing with a small cotton ball; f ′ visualization
of the proximal contour and the contact point; g ′, j′ post-carve
burnishing with the exploratory probe and No. 6, No. 33, and No. 29
burnishers, respectively; k ′ Passing the dental floss through the
contact point touching the adjacent tooth; l ′ smoothing the cervical
region with the dental floss; m ′ final aspect of the burnished restoration
Amalgam Restorations
11
ef
gh
ij
kl
.Fig. 11.6 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres et al.
11
mn
op
qr
st
.Fig. 11.6 (continued)
Amalgam Restorations
11
uv
wx
yz
a’ b’
.Fig. 11.6 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres et al.
11
c’ d’
e’ f’
g’ h’
i’ j’
.Fig. 11.6 (continued)
Amalgam Restorations
11
[6, 12, 20]. They are applied through the larger embrasures
that in general are the lingual ones. There is an exception
between the first and the second maxillary molars, due to
the larger dimension of the lingual surface of the maxillary
first molar. However, on the cases of teeth that are rotated or
badly positioned somehow, the situation must be analyzed
to check which really the larger embrasure is. The wedges
are inserted with a curved mosquito-type forceps or with
specific forceps for this purpose to allow a better grasp .
Sometimes the rubber dam tends to loosen the wedge, due to
the fact that wedge application results in the stretching of the
rubber, which tends to go back to its original position, and
this pulls the wedge out of the interproximal space. To avoid
this situation, the rubber septum is stretched before and dur -
ing the application of the wedge, on the opposite direction
(. Fig. 11.6c, d ) . The wedge size is chosen according to
the size of the interproximal space. It is very important to
apply it between the teeth with some pressure; otherwise, it
will not work properly. When there is a MOD preparation
to be restored, the wedges are placed simultaneously on the
mesial and distal surfaces of the tooth. Amalgam overhangs
may happen as a result of the wedges loosening before the
condensation. To avoid this problem, it is important to check
if they are firmly settled in the interproximal space, trying
to pull it with a slight force using the tip of an exploratory
probe (. Fig. 11.6e ). A slightly force should not cause its
displacement .After that, the adaptation of the matrix on the cervical
region is checked with the tip of an exploratory probe, which
is pressed toward the cavosurface gingival angle ( . Fig. 11.6f )
. The dentist must press and drag the probe’s tip along the
margins, on both direction, which also contributes to displace any weakened and undermined enamel left. An air -
stream is then applied to clean all the fragments . If the
probe penetrates between the matrix and the cavosurface
angle, that indicates the possibility of amalgam overflow dur -
ing the condensation. On this case, the wedge must be
removed and replaced by another with larger dimensions,
repeating the checking process. The width of the wedge base
must be slightly larger than the space between the tooth to be
restored and the adjacent one, to separate them . It must
touch the external surface of the tooth cervically in relation
to the gingival wall of the preparation .
To guarantee the correct restoration of the proximal contact, an additional burnishing of the matrix band toward the
adjacent tooth is performed using the back of a dentin spoon
or a No. 6 Hollenback’s burnisher ( . Fig. 11.6g ) . It is
moved on the buccolingual direction. Then, the matrix is
checked to see if it is properly touching the adjacent tooth,
when observing it from the buccal or lingual direction, with
the aid of a clinical mirror ( . Fig. 11.6) . If there is still no
contact, the matrix retainer can be loosened slightly and the
matrix burnished once again. If the contact is still not established, then a custom-made matrix should be prepared .
k'
m'l'
.Fig. 11.6 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres et al.
11
11.3.1.2 Trituration and Condensation
When the operating field is isolated, the cavity is cleaned, and
the matrix and wedge system is in position, the trituration or
mixing of the amalgam can start to fill the preparation. The
aim of trituration is to remove the thin layer of oxide that
covers the particles and make them come in perfect contact
with mercury, allowing an adequate and homogeneous setting reaction . On the market amalgam alloy powder or
tablets and mercury can be found in bulk on separated bottles or in pre-proportioned capsules ( . Fig. 11.7a, b ).
The trituration of alloy in bulk can be performed manualy or through a mechanical device. For the manual trituration, the alloy:mercury ratio must be defined by weight,
through a Crandall’s scale, and the mixture performed with a
ground glass mortar and pestle. Depending on the alloy type,
this ratio may vary. In general, a 1:1 ratio is used. However,
the alloys with spherical particles may use a 4:5 ratio, resulting in 42–44.5% of mercury. However, the correct ratio will
depend on the material to be used, and the manufacturer’s
instructions must be followed. The amount of mercury
required is the one enough to cover the individual particles of
the alloy . The lesser mercury used, the faster the setting of
the material will be . In general, the smaller the size and
the more uniform the shape of the particles are, the lesser the
necessary amount of mercury will be. The spherical particles
have a smaller surface area in relation to weight, and that is
why they require less mercury to be wetted .
On . Fig. 11.8a–o , it is presented the sequence for
Crandall’s scale use and the hand trituration. First, the desired
amount of mercury is placed on the scale according to the
size of the preparation, which will cause the scale to lean to
one of the sides ( . Fig. 11.8a–c ). The weights are moved until
it is once again on the horizontal position ( . Fig. 11.8d ).
Then, mercury is transferred to the mortar, which will cause
the scale to lean to the other side ( . Fig. 11.8e, f ). If a 1:1 ratio is used, the scale is already set. If necessary, a crossmultiplication can be used to find the correct amount of alloy
will reach the manufacturer’s recommended ratio for that
amount of mercury. The scale is adjusted, and the alloy par -
ticles are placed on the scale until it is once again on the
horizontal position ( . Fig. 11.8g, h ). Then, it is transferred
into the mortar ( . Fig. 11.8i ). The pestle must be held on a
palm-and-thumb grasp and moved on a circular motion,
with a load of 1–2 kg, at – rpm ( . Fig. 11.8j ) . When
the mixture is correct, the amalgam begins to unstick of the
mortar walls ( . Fig. 11.8k ). This process takes about 1–2 min.
Then, the excess mercury that is present on the material can
be removed by squeezing it on a sheet of chamois leather and
twisting it with a tweezer ( . Fig. 11.8l–n ) . The content is
moved into a rubber dappen dish to homogenize the material, which is ready to be transferred into the cavity
(. Fig. 11.8o ). Hand trituration is no longer used nowadays.
Mechanical trituration of the alloy particles and mercury
may be performed with a device called amalgamator, as the
ones shown in . Fig. 11.9a, b . They have a compartment for
alloy and another one for mercury. There is the possibility to
adjust the ratio of each component and the time of the mixture. The mechanical trituration of the precapsulated amalgam
is also very simple ( . Fig. 11.9c, d ). The devices for this pur -
pose have a holder, where this capsule is connected, and the
only adjustment needed is the time for mixing the amalgam.
These amalgam capsules have the exact amount of mercury,
and they do not require to be squeezed through the chamois
leather . The amalgamator should have a mixing speed
above rpm . The material is then transferred to an
amalgam well and is ready to be placed into the preparation.
The correct trituration of the amalgam is very important
for the final quality of the restoration. When performed
properly, according to the manufacturer’s recommendations, the amalgam must be shiny and plastic. When a small
ab
.Fig. 11.7 a Mercury and amalgam alloy in bulk; b preproportioned capsules
Amalgam Restorations
11amount of a recently triturated amalgam is dropped onto a
hard surface, from 25 to 30 cm high, it will slightly flatten
but remains cohesive [9 , 16]. The underor overtrituration
of the material may seriously compromise the physical char -
acteristics of the crystallized amalgam. When it is undertriturated, the material looks crumbly or textured, without
plasticity and with an opaque appearance, reducing the final
strength of the restoration and increasing the expansion and
porosity, predisposing it to fractures, marginal degradation,
and corrosion of the surface [6 , 8, 9, 14, 20]. It can also be observed the increase of the setting expansion, leading to
undesired stress on the restoration. When the dropping test
is performed, the material will spread. In relation to over -
trituration, it can be observed that the resulting material is
very shiny but with low plasticity and some heated, increasing the creep and shrinkage and reducing the setting expansion [6 , 8, 9, 14, 20]. When the dropping test is performed,
the material does not change its shape. On . Fig. 11.10a–c , it
can be observed the characteristics of an amalgam with different degrees of trituration.
ab
c
d
e
f
g
h
.Fig. 11.8 Measurement of the alloy:mercury ratio and hand
trituration of the amalgam. a Scale on the horizontal position; b, c
mercury placed inside the dish of the scale; d adjust of the weight so
that it come back to the horizontal position; e mercury transferred to
the glass mortar; f the removal of mercury makes the scale lean to the weight side; g, h pouring of the alloy inside the scale until it is once
again on the horizontal position; i Alloy transferred into the mortar; j, k
trituration until the point where the material begins to loosen to the
mortar walls; l –n removal of the excess of mercury; o material
transferred into a rubber dappen dish
C. R. G. Torres et al.
11
ij
kl
mn
.Fig. 11.8 (continued)
Amalgam Restorations
11An enough amount of amalgam must be triturated to fill
the preparation. However, it is not recommended to triturate
more than two spills at a time so that the material can maintain the adequate plasticity for condensation. In large cavities, new spills should be triturated only when the previous
one has been completely condensed.
The next step is to start the condensation, which has the
purpose of adapting the material into the preparation. That
will bring the particles close to remove the excess mercury,
reducing porosities and producing a solid metal mass that
can be carved and polished . To take the material into the
cavity, amalgam carriers are used, as shown in . Fig. 4.50a .
The application and condensation of amalgam must start in
the proximal boxes, pressing the material toward the line and
point angles, retentions, and gingival wall ( . Fig. 11.6i–l ) [10,
16]. Several consecutive layers can be applied and correctly
condensed into the preparation until the complete filling
ab
c
d
.Fig. 11.9 Mechanical amalgamator devices. a Device for the alloy and mercury; b containers to place the materials; c device for pre-propor -
tioned capsules; d opened capsule showing the alloy and the pre-dosed mercury
o
.Fig. 11.8 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres et al.
11
with excess ( . Fig. 11.6m–p ). The condensation effectiveness
is related to the diameter of the instrument’s nib, the direction, and the amount of force applied .
> The purpose of condensation is to adapt the material
in the preparation, bring the particles close together to
remove the excess mercury, reduce the porosities, and
produce a solid metal mass that can be carved and
polished.
The amalgam condensation must be finished before the initial setting time, which is around 3 min . The amalgam
alloy can be classified on fast, regular, and extended setting
time. The setting time of the alloy can be adjusted by the
manufacturer through the thermal treatment of the alloy.
The fast-setting amalgam must be condensed in 2.5 min,
the regular in about 3.5 min, while the extended in about
5 min. The condensation of the material after this period
leads to a serious drop on the final strength of the restoration [6 ].
Tip
The condensation must be started in the proximal boxes,
pressing the material toward the line and point angles,
additional retentions, and gingival wall, being finished
before the setting time.
The condensation of the amalgam can be performed manually or using mechanical condensers. The mechanical condensers may work by impact or vibration . The ones that
work with impact, known as pneumatic condensers, are preferred because they produce an excellent condensation and
reduce the necessary load applied by the dentist to reach a
satisfactory result. However, they are applied only to ease the
dentist’s work because they do not produce better results
than the manual condensation [6, 20]. A disadvantage of the
mechanical condenser is the possibility of damage to enamel
margins of the preparation with the condenser’s nib, besides the patient complain related to the impact feeling
. On the other hand, condensation by vibration using
ultrasonic devices, even though produces good results, leads
to the formation of small mercury particles which spread in
the air and evaporate and may be inhaled by the patient or by
the dentist . For this reason, this technique is not recommended. When mechanical condensers are used, the same
rules applied for the manual condensation must be followed,
except by the fact that the manual load will be reduced and
compensated by the increase of the frequency produced by
the instrument .
In relation to the hand condensation, instruments with
flat nibs with several different diameters are used. There are
three most common sets of condensers, as can be observed in
. Fig. 4.47. The condensers created by Black have nibs with a
cylindrical shape with several sizes and shapes, and the set is
composed by seven instruments. The instruments created by
Höllenback present conical trunk-shaped nibs, and the set is
composed by five instruments. The Ward instruments have
inverted conical trunk-shaped nibs with the larger diameter
facing the end tip and a narrow shank ( . Fig. 11.11 ). The
advantage of this instrument is the fact that it simplifies the
removal of the superficial mercury-rich amalgam during the
condensation procedure, because the material flows over the
nib and can be gradually removed [9, 14].
To obtain a proper condensation, the material must
undergo the strongest load possible applied by the instrument nib. Although the ideal condensation load is about 6.8
kg, it is almost impossible to reach it clinically. Some authors
recommend a load of about 4.5 kg, although a load of 1.5–
2.5 kg is considered acceptable [8, 12, 19]. The condensation
load can be tested by pressuring the condenser instrument
toward the regular scale. For smaller condensers, the load
can be reduced. A relevant factor is the relation between the
diameter of the instrument’s nib and the final pressure
applied over the material. Considering the application of a
2 kg load in an instrument with a nib of 2 mm in diameter,
the resulting pressure will be 62 kg/cm2, while the same load
when applied in an instrument with a nib of 3.5 mm in
c ab
.Fig. 11.10 Aspects of amalgam with various degrees of trituration. a under triturated; b ideal trituration; c over triturated
Amalgam Restorations
11diameter will result in a pressure of only 20.8 kg/cm2. When
the diameter of the condenser is duplicated, it will be necessary 4 times more load to reach the same pressure per unit of
area [ 16]. On real life, the load applied must be higher as possible but keeping the comfort of the patient. It is known that
the greater the condensation load, the greater the final resistance of the restoration, because it decreases the total amount
of mercury and reduces λ2 phase, besides reducing the sur -
face porosity. Good condensations can almost double the
fracture resistance of the amalgam restoration.
The other factors that influence the condensation technique are the types of alloy. The amalgam prepared with
lathe-cut and admixed alloys is easier to condense, and a
sequence of condensers from the smaller to the larger must
be followed, although more load is required to obtain a
proper adaptation to the preparation angles and walls in
relation to the spherical alloys. However, amalgams prepared with purely spherical alloys are more difficult to condense. When the pressure is applied by the condenser nib,
the particles slide over each other, impairing the procedure, especially if small condensers are used, because they
tend to penetrate the material and do not produce enough
pressure to adapt the amalgam to the preparation . For
that kind of alloys the condensers with the largest diameter
capable to penetrate the preparation are used since the first
increment, because the material easily adapts to the walls
and angles [9 , 16, 19]. This characteristic of the material
can result in difficulty to obtain proximal contact points of
the restorations with the adjacent teeth. For this reason,
purely spherical alloys are scarcely found on the market
today.
The condensation of amalgam prepared with lathe-cut or
admixed alloys must begin with the smallest condensers,
which are able to reach the gingival wall and press the material toward the preparation angles ( . Fig. 11.6j, k ) . The
material is applied in small increments, of about 1–2 mm
thick, until the complete filling of the preparation. Each
increment should fill a maximum 1/3 or half of the prepara-tion depth. Each condensation mark over the amalgam over -
laps the anterior one, to assure that the entire material is well
condensed [9, 16]. The condenser nib must be directed
toward the cavity angles, avoiding the lack of adaptation at
those areas . During the condensation, the excess mer -
cury that occasionally may migrate to the surface, with a
shiny wet appearance, can be gradually removed, using a
dentin spoon or even the sides of the Ward-type condensers,
which is moved toward the surrounding walls of the preparation and pulled outward [6, 13]. The excess mercury on amalgam increases the marginal degradation, staining
susceptibility, corrosion, and general degradation, reducing
the compressive strength and resulting in premature failure
of the restoration . The residual mercury content of amalgam on different areas of the restauration was determined in
some studies, showing that the marginal areas and thin edges
have a larger amount than others, explaining its higher fracture rate, small tensile strength, and greater degradation .
For this reason, bevels must not be made on the occlusal cavosurface angles of the preparation . Each amalgam
layer must be very well condensed before another portion is
added . A mercury excess of only 1% in the amalgam
reduces its compressive strength in about 45–60 kg/cm2. The
removal of excess mercury improves the mechanical proper -
ties and decreases the corrosion and marginal degradation,
due to the reduction of the mercuroscopic expansion in the
final restoration .
During the preparation filling with amalgam, when it is
becoming full, the use of small condensers is hard because it
tends to penetrate into the material . Therefore, larger
condensers are used, until the preparation is overfilled. A
minimum amalgam excess of 1 mm is left over the cavosur -
face angles, allowing the carving procedure to remove the
mercury-rich superficial layer, resulting in a restoration sur -
face with better physical properties [6, 13, 16]. At this stage
the material must be condensed toward the margins, perpendicularly to the external surface of the enamel ( . Fig. 11.6o,
p), assuring a perfect adaptation of the restorative material,
producing a restoration without gaps and hollow spaces, and
reducing the microleakage [9, 16]. At the marginal ridge
region, the material should also be applied in excess, higher
than the height of the adjacent tooth’s marginal ridge.
If the preparation is very large, it is recommended to
triturate separated spills to allow proper condensation dur -
ing the setting time . In general, 4.5–5.5 g of the amalgam
can be condensed at this time period. This amount is enough
for a medium-sized occlusal preparation [6, 12]. Two or three
spills may fill a regular two-surface Class II preparation.
Some large restorations may require 10–12 spills. If the spill
is not condensed in 3 min, it must be discarded and another
one prepared . In each minute that passes further than
the ideal setting time, the remaining material that has not yet
been condensed presents a strength reduction of about 10%
. If a material on an advanced stage of crystallization is
.Fig. 11.11 Ward condensers set with different nibs’ diameter
C. R. G. Torres et al.
11
used, it will not bond chemically to the portion that has
already been condensed and will be difficult to be adapted to
the preparation walls and angles and reduce the final strength
of the restoration . At these conditions, the material has
reduced plasticity, adversely affecting the adaptations and
increasing the final mercury content . A defective condensation will reduce the strength and increase the creep, corrosion, and microleakage.
11.3.1.3 Pre-carve Burnishing
After the end of the condensation, the pre-carve burnishing,
which is a type of condensation, must be performed before
the carving procedure. For that, large instruments with
rounded edges are used, such as those shown in . Fig. 11.12a–
c. It is performed by moving the instrument from the restoration toward the margins, with a strong pressure, in a way that
eventually the instrument touches the incline of the cusp but
not the margins . The pressure applied is similar to the one
used during the condensation ( . Fig. 11.6q ) . The aim of
the pre-carve burnishing is to optimize the condensation,
making the excess mercury flow to the surface and be
removed during the carving, leaving a margin with a more
dense and strong amalgam . Furthermore, it also compacts the particles to reduce the porosity .
11.3.1.4 Carving
The carving can begin at the same moment that the amalgam
is hard enough to resist to a soft pressure of the instrument
[6, 12]. When carving, it is possible to hear a “squeaking”
sound . Most material can be carved up to 7–8 min after
the trituration although the same may vary from 4 to 13 min
. The main goal of this procedure is to restore the lost
shape and function. Therefore, a deep carving may result in
the weakening of the restoration margin, predisposing it to
chipping due to the small thickness of the restorative material on those areas, according to what has already been mentioned in 7 Chap. 6 [9, 13, 16, 20]. This way, the sculpture of
the complex small anatomic details is not as important as the
major ones which determine the tooth function .
Especially on cases of teeth with high cusps, where there is the tendency to produce very thin margins of restorative
material, which are prone to fractures, a shallow sculpture is
more adequate, reducing the probability of marginal chipping. On the other hand, the permanence of flashes of restor -
ative material further than the cavosurface angle, over the
tooth surface, is completely unacceptable because it will easily fracture, creating an area adequate for biofilm deposition
[9, 16]. The contour of the preparation and the location of the
occlusal contacts, before the restorative procedure, should be
kept as a mental image before the amalgam condensation, to
simplify the location of the margins during the carving process, avoiding amalgam flashes and helping the occlusal
adjustment .
For carving of the restoration, instruments with cutting
edges are used, as can be seen in . Fig. 11.13a–g , and they
must always be sharp . There are several types available
on the market, and the choice will be more related to a per -
sonal opinion. However, the Hollenback carvers No. 3 and
No. 3S are the most commonly used.
The remainings of the cusps and ridges and the adjacent
teeth are used as guides to shape the restoration anatomy .
The sculpture of a restoration that involves the proximal
surface must begin in the region of the marginal ridge, carving the occlusal embrasures . The exploratory probe is
positioned touching the matrix band, leaning at an angle of
about 45° in relation to the long axis of the tooth, and the
instrument moved in the buccolingual direction ( . Fig. 11.6r )
[9, 16, 19]. This procedure also removes the excess of amalgam in contact with the matrix, avoiding its fracture during
the band removal [13, 16]. The height of the ridge must be
similar to the one of the adjacent tooth.
Then, the carving of cuspal inclines is performed. For
that, the instrument is placed in a way that the cutting edge is
perpendicular to the preparation wall, touching the cavosur -
face angle and resting on the surface of the cuspal incline.
The tip is placed on the region of the planned central groove,
and it should be moved toward the mesiodistal direction,
parallel to the margins, with small strokes, initially on the
buccal cusps and then on the lingual ones or vice versa
(. Fig. 11.6s ) [6, 10, 16, 20]. This way, there is a possibility to
correctly define the other grooves and the triangular and
central fossae. During the carving, it is important to avoid
the displacement of the central groove toward buccal or lingual sides because it may weaken the restoration [9, 13]. A
rough carving can be performed quickly, and the band is
removed to allow a more precise sculpture of the occlusal
surface.
Another option is to use Frahm carver instrument set.
The No. 2 is used on a similar way to the Hollenback carver,
with the cutting edge resting on the remaining cuspal incline,
with mesiodistal movements, to create the central groove and
restore the lost portion of the cuspal inclines ( . Fig. 11.6b ′)
. The instruments No. 6 and No. 10 are moved on the
buccolingual direction to create the buccal and lingual
grooves ( . Fig. 11.6c, d ′). The discoid-cleoid carver may also
c ab
.Fig. 11.12 Amalgam burnishers. a No. 33 Bennett; b No. 29
egg-shaped; c No. 6 Hollenback
Amalgam Restorations
11
be used as observed in . Fig. 11.6z , a′. The discoid side is
used to start the sculpture on the region of the triangular
fossa, while the cleoid works similar to the Hollenback No. 3
carver [13, 16]. The Shoshan-A carver can be used like a
Hollenback carver.
The carving of the developmental grooves is essential to
recreate the anatomy of the occlusal surface. The carved restoration must work correctly and not cause discomfort to the
patient . After carving, the outline of the restoration mar -
gin must match the outline of the preparation cavosurface,
showing a regular contour with soft curvatures. A larger and
irregular outline of the amalgam restoration means undercarving and requires additional sculpture while the material
did not set, or finishing with rotary instrument after setting
. If the carving is performed quickly, the visualization of
anatomic details can be improved by rubbing a small cotton
ball over the restoration, showing those that need to be
improved ( . Fig. 11.5e ′). All amalgam residues are removed
with the aid of a powerful vacuum suction system or soaked
gauze .
It is important to remove the matrix band as soon as possible, to have enough time to remove excess material on areas
difficult to access, such as the proximal region, and to finish
the carving on the occlusal surface . For that, the pad of
the index finger is to be placed over the occlusal surface to
stabilize the band, while the matrix retainer is removed first,
reducing the probability of restoration marginal ridge fracture in relation to when the entire set is removed at once.
Otherwise, the rotation movement necessary to loosen the
vise locking screw of the matrix retainer may fracture the amalgam recently applied . The wedges are removed and
afterward the band, rising each side of the band at a time,
pulling it occlusally ( . Fig. 11.6t–v ) [6, 9]. The movement of
the matrix should primarily be toward the buccolingual
direction, while the matrix slides toward the occlusal surface
. Some authors recommend to cut the matrix next to the
tooth on the lingual side and then pull it toward the buccal
side to reduce the risk of fracture of the marginal ridge [10,
13, 16, 19]. When a custom-made matrix is used, it must be
cut with scissors to be removed . Some dentists prefer to
leave the wedge in position to maintain the tooth separation
while the matrix is removed . If the amalgam restoration
fracture during the matrix removal, the defective area needs
to be repaired as it was a small restoration, and the adequate
depth and retention will need to be prepared, sometimes
completely inside the amalgam restoration that already
exists. If necessary, another band is placed, and a new amalgam is condensed directly on the defects, bonding to the
existing material .
After the removal of the band, it is possible to improve the
carving once there will be a better access to every region. The
first step is to check the height of the marginal ridge, using a
carver placed on the horizontal direction, in a way the one
side is held over the intact ridge of the adjacent tooth. It is
moved in the buccolingual direction, making the marginal
ridge of the restored tooth to have the correct height
(. Fig. 11.6w ) . The excess on the proximal region, specially on the buccal or lingual margins, near the buccogingival and linguogingival line angles, can be removed with a
Hollenback carver instrument or an interproximal carver
ab cd ef g
.Fig. 11.13 Amalgam carvers. a, b No. 3S and No. 3 Hollenback; c –e No. 6, No. 2, and No. 10 Frahn; f cleoid; g IPC 1
C. R. G. Torres et al.
11
(DeMeo or IPC) ( . Fig. 11.6x ). Even if the wedge is correctly
applied, the gingival margin may require to be carved to
remove the excess [6, 10]. Overhangs may occur as small
portions of amalgam had been projected further than the
gingival margin. The wedge prevents the occurrence of large
excesses on the periodontal area, but it does not guarantee
% success on the formation of a smooth and exact restoration margin . The proximal area of the amalgam restoration should always be visually evaluated, directing the light to
the interproximal area, through a clinical mirror, observing it
from the opposite side, to check the contour and to confirm
the presence of proximal contact ( . Fig. 11.6f ′). It is known
that the contact is proper when no light is seen on the corresponding area.
11.3.1.5 Post-carve Burnishing
The next step is to burnish again the restoration after the
carving, which consists rubbing small burnishing instruments over the restoration surface with a gentle pressure,
avoiding deforming it, adapting the particles that were displaced during carving ( . Fig. 11.6g ′, j′) [8, 9, 14, 16]. The aim
of this procedure is to reduce the superficial porosities and
create a smoother surface, decrease the superficial corrosion,
improve the marginal adaptation and consequently reduce
the microleakage, and reduce the residual mercury content
on the margins, increasing the marginal integrity, besides
increasing the surface microhardness [2, 3, 9, 11]. The postcarve burnishing produces a surface with silky appearance,
reducing immediately the roughness from 4 to 5 μm on the
carved amalgam surface to less than 0.4 μm on the burnished
amalgam. The interproximal area can be properly burnished
by rubbing softly the surface with the side of an exploratory
probe or a No. 6 Hollenback burnisher ( . Fig. 11.5g ′) .
The occlusal surface should be thoroughly burnished, avoiding to change the carved morphology.
In addition, it is important to check and to smooth the
proximal surface with a dental floss ( . Fig. 11.5k ′, l′). It is
made carefully for not breaking the interproximal contact
that has recently been created, because amalgam is not completely crystallized. For that, the floss is taken to the contact
area, initially embracing the adjacent tooth and pressing this
tooth, instead of the restored one, while it is moved toward
the contact area. When the floss is in the interproximal space
close to the gingiva, it embraces around the restored tooth
and is moved in the occlusal and gingival direction, checking
if there is excess and smoothing the amalgam on the proximal
surface. If the excess exist and it is not removed by the floss,
the IPC can be used until a correct margin is obtained .
11.3.1.6 Occlusal Adjustment
The next step is to remove the isolation and perform the
occlusal contact adjustment, using a thin double-color articulating paper and Miller forceps [8, 10]. First, one of the colored sides, the red side for instance, is placed facing the
restored tooth, and the patient is asked to perform the protrusion and lateral movements, to mark the contacts during
the disocclusion guides. Then, the opposite side of the paper is placed facing the restored tooth, and the patient is asked to
close the mouth in the maximum intercuspation position
(MIP). The contacts in MIP and the ones that occasionally
happen during the protrusion and lateral movements are
analyzed and adjusted, removing any premature contacts
that may lead to discomfort and fracture of the restoration
. Contacts during excursive mandibular movements must
be removed, while the contacts on MIP can be preserved,
since they are not premature .
When anesthesia has been used, it is difficult for the
patient to know when the teeth are in contact and whether
there are premature contacts or not. Therefore, it is necessary
to use the marks left by the articulating paper to perform the
adjustment. It is important to evaluate if the contacts that
were occurring before the restoration are still happening or if
only the new restoration is contacting the opposite tooth,
which indicates a premature contact at this area . The
contact load is recognized by the intensity of the mark left
and by the fact that on the stronger ones the center has no
color. The strong contacts are reduced until all marks are
similar, and the contacts previously observed before the
preparation can be seen [16, 19]. The patient is instructed to
close the mouth slowly and to stop as soon as any contact is
noticed . Then, the contacts are evaluated and adjusted in
case they are producing interference. The articulating paper
use is repeated, and carving is performed until the patient is
able to properly close the mouth, without interference, with
the occlusion similar to the one before restoration. After the
adjustment, the surface must be burnished again . While
carving, stable contacts must be created on correct places.
These contacts should be perpendicular to the direction of
the occlusal loads wherever possible. If the contact is on an
inclined plane, and not perpendicular to the occlusal load,
the dentist should try, while removing the excess of the amalgam, to remove the undesired portion from the contact area,
on the incline, or carve a platform perpendicular to the load.
In addition, an over-carved restoration, without occlusal
contacts, may result in an undesired tooth extrusion .
If the amalgam already is on an advanced stage of crystallization, the adjustment must require the use of a finishing
bur . A rotary instrument may be used to finish the carving if the amalgam has already hardened in such a way, that
the necessary force to carve it with hand instruments may
fracture portions of the restoration. Roundor flame-shaped
burs may be used to recreate the tooth anatomy .
However, the ideal is that all immediate adjustments would
be performed with hand instruments. As the amalgam
strength 20 min after the sculpture is of only 6% of the final
one after 1 week, the restoration must not undergo immediate strong chewing loads, and the patient must be warned not
to chew over this tooth. After about 8 h, the material presents
70% of the final strengths, and the patient can already nor -
mally use the restored tooth. However, the polishing of the
restoration should only be performed after at least 24–48 h,
even though the best would be after several days [8, 10, 12,
13, 16]. In some cases, the maximum strength is only reached
30 days after finishing the restoration.
Amalgam Restorations
.3.2 Restoration of Compound Class I
Preparations
Due to the leaning of the buccal surfaces of the mandibular
molars and lingual surfaces of the maxillary molars, the use
of a universal matrix will not result in the correct adaptation
of these surfaces, making the restorative procedure more dif-ficult . On those cases, the matrix proposed by Barton
can be applied ( . Fig. 11.14a, u ) . First, the tooth is sur -
rounded by a universal matrix with a matrix retainer or a
custom-made spot-welded or riveted matrix. When a univer -
sal matrix is applied, the matrix retainer should be positioned
on the opposite surface to the one that will be restored. A
small piece of the metallic band must be cut, in a way that it
a
cb
d
e f
.Fig. 11.14 Preparation of Barton matrix. a Application of the
universal matrix; b cutting the Barton matrix; c, d placing of band; e
adaptation with the No. 6 Hollenback burnisher; f displacement with
the exploratory probe; g insertion of a wedge with melted compound;
h adaptation over the lingual surface; i checking the adaptation with an exploratory probe; j, k condensation of the amalgam; l burnishing;
m, n occlusal carving; o matrix removal; p carving of the lingual
surface; q carved restoration; r, s burnishing; t immediate aspect;
u result after the polishing
C. R. G. Torres et al.
11
gh
ij
kl
mn
.Fig. 11.14 (continued)
Amalgam Restorations
11
op
qr
s
ut
.Fig. 11.14 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres et al.
11
is slightly larger than the height of the clinical crown, going
beyond the gingival cavosurface angle ( . Fig. 11.14a ). The
corners that will be placed facing the gingiva are to be cut
avoiding injuries to the periodontal tissue ( . Fig. 11.14b ). It
is applied between the universal matrix and the tooth surface
(. Fig. 11.14c, d ). Then, a No. 6 Hollenback burnisher is used
to correctly adapt it to the surface ( . Fig. 11.14e ). A wooden
wedge with small dimensions or a piece of 1.3 cm of round
toothpick is selected, which must be covered with melted low
fusion compound, light-cured gingival barrier or PVS bite
registration material . The Barton matrix is displaced
with an exploratory probe, and the wedge is inserted into the
position, stabilizing the set ( . Fig. 11.14f–h ). If the wedge is
higher than the matrix, it must be cut, so it will not adversely
affect the next step. The adaptation of the matrix on the cavosurface angle is checked with the exploratory probe
(. Fig. 11.14i ), and then the amalgam is condensed with
excess (. Fig. 11.14j, k ). Then, the pre-carve burnishing is
performed ( . Fig. 11.14l ), and the carving of the region near
the matrix starts with an exploratory probe ( . Fig. 11.14m )
and the occlusal surface with a carver ( . Fig. 11.14n ). The
matrix is completely removed, and the carver is finished
(. Fig. 11.14o–q ). After that the post-carving burnishing is
performed ( . Fig. 11.14r–t ).
11.3.3 Restoration of Class V Preparations
(Site 3)
The amalgam restorations on Class V preparations are indicated on areas where esthetics is not a concern, the access
and the visibility are limited, and the moisture control is difficult . The cavosurface angles of the gingival wall in
Class V preparation are many times located inside the crevice, beyond the gingival margin. On those situations it may
require the displacement of the gingiva with a retraction cord
or a rubber dam isolation, associated with cervical retraction
clamps, to allow the access while controlling the crevice fluid
flow. For the rubber dam isolation, the Schultz or W8A clamp
may be used . Sometimes it is necessary that the surgical
displacement of the gingiva associated with relaxing incisions allows the access to those areas. The retraction cord
must be packed before the preparation to reduce the possibility of damage to the gingiva. In general, about 8–10 mm of
cord is used, and it must always be longer than the mesiodistal dimensions of the preparation. The cord thickeness must
be adequate to allow the packing into the crevice. It may be
used alone or impregnated by a homeostatic solution and
inserted into the sulcus with rounded tip of a retraction cord
packing instrument.
> The Class V amalgam restorations are only indicted on
areas where esthetics is not a concern, the access and
the visibility are limited, and the moisture control is
difficult.
Most Class V preparations may be restored without the use of
matrix. On this case, the amalgam is condensed first toward the retentions with a small condenser and then toward the
mesial and distal walls. After that, the central part is filled
. However, on the case of large preparation, the condensation becomes harder, because the amalgam tends to escape,
due to the fact that the applied portions are not held by the
surrounding walls or because the axial wall is convex . On
this case, a window matrix must be prepared, as proposed by
J. M. Prime ( . Fig. 11.5a–o ) [8, 16, 20]. To do that, a universal
matrix is placed around the tooth, with a matrix retainer
located on the opposite surface to the one that will be restored
(. Fig. 11.15b ). The position of the preparation is marked on
the band with an instrument with a sharp tip ( . Fig. 11.15c ).
It is then removed, and a “window” is opened with a cylinder
diamond point, with dimensions smaller than the preparation but large enough to allow the application of the restor -
ative material ( . Fig. 11.15d ). The matrix is once again placed
in position ( . Fig. 11.15e ). In case it is not stable enough,
wedges may be placed in the interproximal spaces on both
sides . Then, the application of the restorative material
into the preparation is started, condensing it toward the
mesial and distal walls, with a small diameter condenser,
until the preparation is completely filled ( . Fig. 11.15f–h ).
The condensation on the region of the window opening can
be performed with an instrument of a larger diameter
(. Fig. 11.15i ). The matrix is immediately removed, and the
restoration is burnished, following the carving of the surface
in two planes, according to the direction of the remaining
surface, reproducing the curvature of the region ( . Fig. 11.15k,
l). The under-contour will result in the trauma of the gingiva,
while the over-contour will result in the reduced gingival
stimulation and self-cleaning of the tooth surface during the
mastication . Then, the burnishing of the area is started
with the No. 6 Hollenback burnisher or No. 33 Bennett bur -
nisher (. Fig. 11.15m, n ). Eggor round-shaped burnisher
must not be used because they may deform the restoration
and result in a concave contour. The retraction cord interferes
on the carving of the gingival margin. On this case, first, a
rough carving must be performed, and then after the removal
of the cord, it can be improved .
Tip
During burnishing of Class V restorations, eggor
round-shaped burnisher should not be used, because
they may deform the restoration and result in a concave
contour.
11.3.4 Restoration of Horizontal Slot
Preparations
For restorations of the horizontal slot preparations with
amalgam, the S-shaped matrix is the most recomended
(. Fig. 11.16a–n ) . About 2.5 cm of matrix band is precontoured with the handle of a clinical mirror ( . Fig. 11.16b–
e). The band is contoured touching the surface opposite to
Amalgam Restorations
11
a b
c d
ef
gh
.Fig. 11.15 Restoration of a large Class V preparation with a
window matrix. a Tooth preparation; b application of the universal
matrix around the tooth; c marking the place of the preparation; d
opening of the “window” with the diamond point; e window matrix
positioned; f application of amalgam; g –h condensation of the amalgam in the areas covered by the matrix; i Condensation of the
amalgam after the entire filling of the preparation; j pre-carve
burnishing; k, l carving in two planes; m, n post-carve burnish; o
finished restoration after the polishing
C. R. G. Torres et al.
11
ij
kl
m
on
.Fig. 11.15 (continued)
Amalgam Restorations
11the preparation access, passing through the proximal surface
and curved over the smooth surface of the adjacent tooth
(. Fig. 11.16f ). It is placed in the interproximal space, and a
wedge is inserted through the opposite side of the preparation access, being stabilized with compound ( . Fig. 11.16g,
h). If the internal contour of the matrix is not correct, an
amalgam burnisher can be heated and placed inside the
preparation, rubbing it toward the matrix, softening the compound and allowing the correct contour to be obtained. It must be avoided the contact of heated instrument to the
preparation walls, as it could harm the pulp. The material is
condensed, and the carving can start with the exploratory
probe, toward the matrix band ( . Fig. 11.16j, k ). Then, the
Hollenback carver is used. The wedge and the band are
removed, and the carving is finished with an IPC or thin
exploratory probe ( . Fig. 11.16l ). The restoration is smoothened with a dental floss to produce a better cervical margin
(. Fig. 11.16m ).
ab
c
ed
f
.Fig. 11.16 Horizontal slot restoration with the S-shaped matrix. a
Tooth preparation; b, c first folding of the band; d, e second folding of
the band; f matrix in position; g, h Stabilization with compound; i finished matrix; j –l condensation and carving; m removal of excess
with dental floss; n polished restoration
C. R. G. Torres et al.
11
gh
ij
kl
mn
.Fig. 11.16 (continued)
Amalgam Restorations
.4 Finishing and Polishing
The instruments and materials necessary for performing finishing and polishing of amalgam restoration are described
here:
5Micromotor and contra-angle handpiece
5Clinical mirror
5Tweezers
5Double-ended No. 5 exploratory probe
5Miller articulating paper forceps
5Thin articulating paper (<10 μm)
5Rubber cup and cone
5Robinson brush
5Multibladed bur (12 or 30 blades)
5Abrasive rubber polishing instruments set for amalgam
5Stainless steel abrasive strip
5Polyester abrasive strip
5Pumice powder
5Zinc oxide or tin oxide
5Abrasive discs
The time necessary to finish and polish a restoration is
inversely proportional to its quality after the carving and bur -
nishing. Therefore, the finishing and polishing may not be
considered a substitute for the previous steps . The finishing procedure is the bigger removal of the material to
improve the contour and remove the excess on the margins,
adjust the occlusion, improve the carving, and produce a
fairly smooth surface . In general, when the finishing is
complete, a surface roughness of about 0.5–1 μm is obtained.
On the other hand, the polishing is the procedure of fine
removal of the restorative material, resulting in a very smooth
and glossy surface, without visible scratches, simulating the
dental tissues. That avoids irritation of the tongue or gingiva
and discomfort, reducing the intraoral corrosion and the
deposition of food residues, biofilm, and calculus.
It is considered that a surface is glossy when there is more
specular reflection of the ambient light than the diffuse
reflection. This is obtained when the surface roughness is
smaller than the average wavelength of visible light, which is
around 0.5 μm. On the other hand, the tongue can feel as
smooth when the surface scratches have a depth smaller than
2 μm and very rough when they are deeper than 20 μm. A
correctly polished amalgam restoration will resist more
staining, corrosion, and marginal degradation, will be easier
for the patient to clean, and will not contribute to the recur -
rence of caries [10, 16]. A study showed that even the wellcondensed restorations undergo corrosion if they are not
smooth and polished .
On the proximal areas, the restorative material copies the
smooth surface of the matrix band, and none additional polishing is necessary [8, 14]. However, if before the crystallization an overhang is detected and removed by carving, the
polishing of that region will be necessary. After the final
material setting, if an overhang is detected, abrasive steel
strips can be used to remove it, taking care to avoid the contact area. For short clinical crowns, to avoid wear of the con-tact point, it can be necessary to cut the strip to make it
narrower. The overhang must be completely removed. When
it is not possible, the entire amalgam from the proximal box
must be removed and the restoration replaced.
On the occlusal, buccal, and lingual surfaces, multibladed
burs are used with air and water spray . The regular burs
have 6 blades, while the multibladed ones can have 12–30
blades. The burs are placed parallel to the tooth surface on
the region of the margins, to prevent unnecessary removal of
amalgam [9, 16]. Any premature contacts on the recently
made restoration can be easily identified due to its shiny
aspect. They can be checked with articulating paper. Each
bur shape fits a specific surface, as can be observed in
. Fig. 11.17a–o . It is recommended that the rotary instruments are used with care and handled softly. It should spin
slowly and be used with movements similar to brush strokes
while touching the surface, avoiding creating undesired small
cavities and scratches . Care must be taken to avoid wear -
ing the enamel at the restoration margins. The large roundand pyriform-shaped instruments are applied over the cusp
inclines while the small round ones on the grooves and fossae
(. Fig. 11.17c–e ) . The developmental grooves between
the cusps, the buccal and lingual surfaces, and the embrasures are finished with flame-shaped instruments
(. Fig. 11.17f–h ) . The embrasures can also be finished
with abrasive discs. The contact of the instrument with the
surface must be intermittent, to avoid heating and damage to
the pulpal tissue, as well as the flux of mercury to the surface
of the restoration . After the finishing is completed, the
tip of an exploratory probe must touch the surface and be
moved through the restoration margin, from the tooth sur -
face to the restoration and vice versa, without getting stuck.
The restoration must have a smooth continuation with the
tooth surface contour, which is a requirement of all restorations . Much care must be taken not to over finish the
restoration, leaving a very thin margin which will be predisposed to fractures, as well as under finish, leaving excess of
amalgam (flash) over the enamel surface on the cusp incline,
which may also fracture. On cases of Class V preparations,
when finishing the gingival margin covered by the gingiva,
with rotary instruments, care must be taken to not remove
unnecessarily the cementum and produce a step on the root
surface, beyond the restoration margin ( Fig. 14.66a, b ) .
The polishing of restorations is based on the use of abrasive materials with decreasing particles size. This way the
thinnest abrasive particles remove the scratches produced by
the previous ones . Two techniques can be used for polishing amalgam restorations, and they are the abrasive rubbers rotary instruments and the abrasive pastes techniques.
Despite which one is chosen, care must be taken to not over -
heat the surface above 60 °C, because this can cause irreversible damage to the pulp, to the restoration, or both .
When overheated, the surface of amalgam looks cloudy, even
if highly polished, which indicates that mercury was brought
to the surface and will increase amalgam corrosion and
strength reduction . To avoid heating, well-lubricated
polishing agents should be used .
C. R. G. Torres et al.
11
b
c
e f
gh
da
.Fig. 11.17 Finishing and polishing with abrasive rubbers rotary
instruments. a Burnished restoration; b Multibladed bur set (12 blades);
c–h finishing procedure; i Abrasive of rubber rotary instruments set for polishing with points and cups with decreasing grit and different
colors; j–m polishing; n checking the margins; o finished restoration
Amalgam Restorations
11
i
k
m
oj
l
n
.Fig. 11.17 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres et al.
11
For the technique using the abrasive rubber instruments,
cone or cup shapes are available, impregnated with abrasive
particles of different grits, identified with distinct colors
(. Fig. 11.17i ). The cones are used on the occlusal surface, on
the inclines, and on the grooves, while the cups may be used
on the cusp inclines, marginal ridge, and embrasures.
Generally the decreasing grit size sequence is represented by
the colors brown, green, and blue ( . Fig. 11.17j–m ). They are
applied in low speed on an intermittent way, to reduce the
heating, preferably associated with airstream or a glycerinbased lubricating gel. Between the changes of abrasivity, the
surface should be washed to remove the remaining previous
abrasive particles. The cones should always have a sharp end,
which allows it to reach the bottom of the grooves . If the
tip is thick or worn out, it can be sharpened with a silicon
carbide disc ( . Fig. 11.18a–c ) or a diamond dresser ( . Fig.
4.29a –f) .
The abrasive pastes technique consists on starting using a
water-based pumice paste, applied with a Robinson brush
(. Fig. 11.19a–c ) . The brush must be kept impregnated
with the paste to avoid overheating and guarantee polishing
. A surface with homogeneous aspect must be obtained,
removing visible scratches. For that the procedure has to be
repeated as many times as necessary to obtain the desired
result. After that, the surface is washed with water, and a
paste prepared with zinc oxide or tin oxide and alcohol is
applied, using a soft and flexible rubber cup, producing a
glossy surface ( . Fig. 11.19d–f ) [10, 19, 20]. On the proximal
surface, in case it has been carved with hand instruments or
finished with a metal abrasive strip, a piece of dental floss
impregnated with the same pastes or polyester abrasive strips
can be used, moving it from buccal to lingual and from cervical to occlusal directions, below the contact point . To
simplify the procedure, a small amount of the pastes can be
taken to the embrasures while the floss or the strip is being
moved.
11.5 Durability of Amalgam Restorations
The durability of amalgam restorations is related to factors
associated with the restorative material, the dentist, and the
oral environment. In relation to the restorative material, the
type of the alloy used has a large influence. . Fig. 11.20 shows
the survival rate of amalgam restorations in a clinical study,
according to its composition. It can be observed that when
high-copper and zinc-containing alloys were used, more
than 80% of the restorations remain after 13 years. For the
high-copper and non-zinc alloys, as well for the low-copper
and zinc-containing alloys, more than 70% were in good
conditions after 13 years. On the other hand, for the lowcopper and non-zinc alloys, only 20% were in good conditions after 13 years. A good amalgam restoration can last
from 15 to 20 years or even more .
In relation to the patient, the composition of the saliva,
eating habits, and oral hygiene may determine the caries
recurrence on the region of the tooth-restoration interface, as well as the increase of the superficial corrosion . They
must be informed that the restorative treatment is not enough
to control the caries disease and recover patients’ health.
The dentist is the most important point on the determination of restoration quality and durability . The proper
tooth preparation, the correct handling of the material, and
the use of a careful restorative technique are paramount .
A clinical study evaluated the reasons of restoration failures
and showed that 56% of the cases were attributed to incorrect
tooth preparation, 40% to improper handling of the material,
a
b
c
.Fig. 11.18 a–c Sharpening the tip of the abrasive point over the
silicon carbide disc
Amalgam Restorations
11
and only 4% to periodontal disease, pulpal problems, and
others . A survival analysis on the insurance claims database reported that amalgam restorations are replaced seven
times more when patients go to another dentist than if they
continue to be treated by the same dentist . In addition, it
is more common for dentists to replace an amalgam restoration than to repair, even though there is a low incidence of
secondary caries over the time. That means patrictioners
have a lack of knowledge about the defined criteria related to
the need of replacement, resulting in excessive unnecessary
treatment.The most common reason to replace an amalgam restoration is the secondary caries. Several clinical studies have
shown that 50–60% of all replaced restorations have received
this diagnosis. However, the secondary caries term is not well
clinically defined. Many dentists consider that there is caries
lesion in any place where a probe gets stuck and where the
direct visual inspection is hard. Any gap, with or without car -
ies, would receive the diagnosis of secondary caries, even
though they may often be a result of the inadequate condensation. Other reasons that are commonly used for the restoration replacement are the fracture of the restorative material,
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 11.19 Polishing with abrasive pastes. a restoration after the finishing; b, c polishing with pumice using a brush with a conical and flat tip;
d, e polishing with zinc oxide/alcohol paste, using a rubber cup and cone; f polished restoration
C. R. G. Torres et al.
11
mostly at the isthmus, marginal degradation, and fracture of
the remaining tooth structure. The fracture of the isthmus is
generally due to the incorrect preparation, while the mar -
ginal degradation depends on the relation between the stress
and the corrosion, which may be decreased by using a good
restorative technique and an amalgam with high copper content .
When an old restoration is replaced by a new one, there
are great possibilities that the preparation size increases.
Therefore, the unnecessary replacements must be avoided.
The repair of the old restorations may be performed, since
the access and a proper inspection of the defective areas can
be done. The entire restoration must only be replaced if the
caries lesion has spread under the old restoration or if there
is fracture of the isthmus . An old restoration with a dark
and corroded surface does not necessarily require to be
changed. In many cases, a new finishing and polishing is
enough for making it in good conditions ( . Fig. 11.21a, b ).
The objective parameters for evaluating the restorations are
presented in 7 Chap. 1.
11.6 Controversy About the Use of Amalgam
Even though dental amalgam is a very effective restorative
material, the fact that there is mercury on its composition
makes it a potentially harmful material for human beings. One of the risks is the occurrence of an allergic reaction.
However, according to the American Dental Association, it
is very rare, and it is estimated that just 1 of , ,
patients suffers from it. Other concern is that the restorations would release mercury vapor that would cause intoxication to patients and deposition on the kidneys, liver, and
nervous centers. However, some studies have shown that
8–10 amalgam restorations in the patient’s mouth release
only 1.1–4.4 μ g/day. An acceptable and safe exposure, on
industry workers that handle mercury, is – μ g/day,
which indicates that the amount released by the restorations
is very low [1 ].
Mercury exists in three basic forms: (a) elemental, pure
mercury; (b) inorganic (HgS), found in the nature; and (c)
organic, especially dimethylmercury, used on agricultural
fungicide. The absorption by the human body may occur
through the skin, lungs, and gastrointestinal tract. It has
small particle size and is slowly absorbed by the skin in any
forms. Mercury on the elemental and inorganic forms is
promptly absorbed by the lung alveoli, but it is hardly
absorbed by the gastrointestinal tract. Organic mercury is
hardly absorbed by the lungs, but it is promptly absorbed by
the gastrointestinal tract. In other words, mercury from
amalgam restorations that is released into the air could be
inhaled and directly absorbed, but if it mostly mixes with
saliva and is swallowed, it will not be absorbed. On the other
hand, organic mercury used in pesticides that contaminates
%
23 45 67
Anos89 10 11 12 13HC/WZHC/WZ
LC/WZ
LC/NZ
.Fig. 11.20 Survival rate of amalgam restorations according to the alloy composition (HC/WZ – high copper with zinc; HC/NZ – high copper
and without zinc; LC/WZ – low copper with zinc; LC/NZ – low copper without zinc). (Based on R.W. Phillips)
Amalgam Restorations
11
almost all food is quickly absorbed. Everybody has some
mercury circulating in the body due to the food ingested.
However, due to the fact that mercury is actively excreted, no
symptom of toxicity is observed on the population. The halflife of mercury on the body is approximately 55 days.
Therefore, in approximately 2 months, mercury absorbed is
completely eliminated.
Mercury is released from the amalgam but in very small
amounts. For patients, the mastication over the amalgam
places over it a mechanical energy that is converted to sublimation energy, causing mercury to be released, even though in
extremely small amounts. When the person stops to chew, the
release also stops. However, the people only masticate 1% of
the time. Most of mercury is quickly mixed with saliva and is
swallowed, and not inhaled, keeping the real exposure at a
minimum. Other concern is that during corrosion, mercury is
released from the amalgam. However, this does not happen.
The corrosion of an amalgam with low or high copper content
is basically the same. For low-copper amalgam, the phase that
undergoes corrosion is Sn-Hg, where tin is converted into SnO
(insoluble) or SnOCl (soluble) and deposits inside the amalgam and on the margins. Hg of the original phase quickly
reacts with the Ag-Sn residual phase that exists on the amalgam. Therefore, mercury does not leave the alloy during corrosion. On the high-copper amalgams, the Cu-Sn phase
undergoes corrosion. However, Sn once again forms SnO or
SnOCl, and copper forms Cu-Cl, and it does not involve mer -
cury [1 , 16].It is claimed that the patients with amalgam restorations
presented toxic levels of mercury in the blood. Patients without amalgam restorations have a measured mean of 0.3 ng/
ml, while patients with restorations present 0.7 ng/ml.
However, the ingestion of a weekly meal with seafood results
in blood level of 2.3–5.1 ng/ml. Therefore, the presence of
amalgam restorations is not capable to cause acute or chronicle intoxication. A study of 2-year clinical trial promoted by
the National Institute of Health (NIH) from the United States
concluded that amalgam restorations are safe for human
beings [1, 14].
However, the unnecessary exposure to this metal must be
avoided, working on well-ventilated place and choosing preproportioned capsules as well as correctly storing the residues. The scraps of the amalgam must be stored in containers
with developer solution for radiographic film or at least
7–8 cm of water. Skin contact with amalgam must be avoided
since penetration is possible. The removal of the old amalgam should always be performed under rubber dam isolation
and with water spray irrigation and high-power suction [9,
16]. If there is an accidental spill of mercury on the floor, the
plumb from the radiographic film package can be used to
collect it, as well as amalgam alloy powder, sulfur, adhesive
tape, or a dental vacuum system. Vacuum cleaner must be
avoided because it vaporizes mercury. The ventilation of the
office must be constant to maintain a low concentration of
Hg in the air. The contaminated instruments must be carefully cleaned before sterilization, avoiding the vaporization of
ab
.Fig. 11.21 a, b Finishing and polishing of an old amalgam restoration
C. R. G. Torres et al.
11
mercury. Filters must be installed to prevent mercury from
being released into the environment through the sewage .
> Unnecessary exposure to mercury must be avoided –
working on a well-ventilated office, choosing
pre-proportioned capsules, and correctly storing the
residues.
Other caution in relation to the use of the amalgam is to
avoid its contact with a wound on the mucosa, as well never
hurt the mucosa during the application of the material. If the
amalgam comes in contact with the wounded tissue, it may
become encapsulated and result in a tattoo, as can be seen in
. Fig. 11.22 .
Conclusion
The use of dental amalgam can produce strong and longlasting restorations on the posterior teeth. The knowledge
about material properties and the restorative techniques
were presented. The details about the steps of matrix and
wedge placement, trituration of mercury and alloy, condensation, pre-carve burnishing, carving, and post-carve bur -
nishing are the essential information. The finishing and
polishing techniques were also described, being very impor -
tant on the restoration durability. The controversy about
amalgam use in relation to mercury toxicity was discussed,
showing that it is completely safe when correctly used.
However, its metallic color and lack of bonding to the tooth
structure have dramatically reduced its use worldwide.
Despite that, it is an excellent material and still an option for
areas where esthetics is not a concern.References
1. Anusavice KJ. Phillips science of dental materials. 11th ed. London:
Elsevier; .
2. Arcoria CJ, Kelly GT, Icenhower TJ, Wagner MJ. Microleakage in
amalgam restorations following burnishing, polishing, and timevaried thermocycling. Gen Dent. 40: –4.
3. Ben-Amar A, Serebro L, Gorfil C, Soroka E, Liberman R. The effect of
burnishing on the marginal leakage of high copper amalgam resto -
rations: an in vitro study. Dent Mater. Elsevier. ;3: –20.
https://doi.org/10. /S0109- (87) -8.
4. Bogacki RE, Hunt RJ, del Aguila M, Smith WR. Survival analysis of
posterior restorations using an insurance claims database. Oper
Dent. 27: –92.
5. Fichmann DM, Santos W. Restaurações à amálgama. São Paulo:
Savier; .
6. Gilmore HW, Lund MR. Operative dentistry, Saint Louis: Mosby;
.
7. Healey HJ, Phillips RW. A clinical study of amalgam failures. J Dent
Res. SAGE PublicationsSage CA: Los Angeles. CA. ;28: –46.
https://doi.org/10. / .
8. Hollenback GM. The economic value of amalgam in operative dentistry ant the technique of its use. J Am Dent Assoc. ;24: –
26.
9. Horsted-Bindslev P , Mjör IA. Dentística operatória moderna. São
Paulo: Santos; .
10. Howard WW. Atlas of operative dentistry. 2nd ed. St. Louis: Mosby;
.
11. Kato S, Okuse K, Fusayama T. The effect of burnishing on the mar -
ginal seal of amalgam restorations. J Prosthet Dent. Elsevier.
;19: –8. https://doi.org/10. / - (68) -5.
12. Markley MR. Restorations of silver amalgam. J Am Dent Assoc. Else -
vier. ;43: –46. https://doi.org/10. /JADA.ARCHIVE.
. .
13. Mondelli J, Franco EB, Pereira JC, Ishikiriama A, Francischone CE,
Mondelli RL, et al. Dentística: Procedimentos Pré - Clínicos. São
Paulo: Santos; .
14. Neto NG, Carvalho RC, Russo EM, Sobral MA, Luz MA. Dentística Restauradora: Restaurações diretas. São Paulo: Santos; .
15. Ring ME. História Ilustrada da Odontologia. São Paulo: Manole;
.
16. Roberson TM, Heymann H, Swift EJ. Sturdevant’s art and science of
operative dentistry. 5th ed. St. Louis: Mosby; .
17. Roggenkamp CL, Cochran MA, Lund MR. The facial slot preparation:
a nonocclusal option for Class 2 carious lesions. Oper Dent.
;7: –6.
18. Schoonover IC, Souder W. Corrosion of dental alloys. J Am Dent
Assoc. Elsevier. ;28: –91. https://doi.org/10. /jada.
archive. . .
19. Schwartz RS, Summitt JB, Robbins JW. Fundamentals of operative
dentistry. A contemporary approach. Chicago: Quintessence; .
20. Simon WJ. Clinical operative dentistry. Philadelphia: Saunders;
.
21. Swartz ML, Phillips RW. Residual mercury content of amalgam restorations and its influence on compressive strength. J Dent Res.
;35: –66. https://doi.org/10. / .
.Fig. 11.22 Amalgam tattoo
Amalgam Restorations
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG
C. R. G. Torres (ed.), Modern Operative Dentistry, Textbooks in Contemporary Dentistry,
https://doi.org/10. / -3- - -0_12411 12
Extensive Amalgam
Restorations
Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres, Shilpa Hanamaraddi Bhandi,
and João Cândido de Carvalho
12.1 Introduction –
12.2 List of Complementary Materials –
12.3 Cuspal-Coverage –
12.4 Restoration of Lost Cusps –
12.4.1 Natural Retentions –
12.4.2 Artificial Retentions –
12.5 Bonded Amalgam Restorations –
12.6 Restoration of Extensive Preparations –
References –
12Learning Objectives
The learning objectives of this chapter are related to the following topics:
5How to perform extensive preparations on posterior
teeth, improving the retention and resistance of the
amalgam restoration but also protecting the remaining
tooth structure
5Technique of cuspal-coverage of weakened cusps
5Preparation of natural retentions (vertical walls, axial
offset, locks, coves, dentin pins, slots, amalgapin, and
pulpal chamber retention)
5Preparation of artificial retentions (intradentinal pins and
endodontic posts)
5Technique for bonded amalgam restorations
5Restorative technique of extensive preparations with lost
cusps
12.1 Introduction
Due to its mechanical properties, amalgam restorations
should always be held and protected by the remaining tooth
structure. Amalgam has a high compressive strength but a
low tensile strength. Therefore, it is capable to resist heavy
occlusal loads, when the compressive stress is predominant,
but may fracture on cases of cusp restoration, when the tensile stress can be strong. According to Barrancos Mooney, a
restoration will be more fragile when a larger tooth surface
needs to be restored, considering the extensive amalgam restoration as a semipermanent procedure . In addition, on
large cavities, proper occlusal anatomy and contour are
sometimes hard to restore . Ideally, when a cuspal restoration is required, an indirect or semi-direct restorations
should be done, which may be produced with metal, ceramic,
or indirect composite . On the other hand, the economic
reasons many times determine the choice of the restorative
material to be used. Whenever it is not possible to perform
an indirect restoration, a very good option is the dental amalgam . When well-planned and done, an extensive amalgam restoration may show high durability . For this, some
procedures to promote resistance and retention can be per -
formed, according to what will be presented next.
The extensive amalgam restorations are indicated to young
patients, whose teeth have not completely erupted, when it is
not possible to perform a proper gingival displacement and
isolation of the operating field. In addition, elderly and/or
debilitated patients who would not bear a long treatment may
also have their teeth properly restored with amalgam .
They can also be performed when the permanent treatment
must be delayed, such as in cases where the patients have a
great difficulty to control the biofilm, until they will be completely trained and motivated to control the caries disease, or
on patients undergoing orthodontic treatment. The same way,
when there is the intention to delay the treatment with a prosthetic crown or in the case of teeth with a pulpal or doubtful
periodontal prognostic, the amalgam restorations are a very
good option. The extensive amalgam restorations used tempo-rarily may work as a core, during the tooth preparation for
indirect restorations, especially for the cast metal ones. On
those cases, the retentions prepared for the amalgam restorations must not be removed during the preparation for the
indirect restoration . There are some advantages of extensive amalgam restorations in relation to the indirect ones. The
preparation is generally more conservative, the treatment
requires a single dental appointment and is less expensive. In
some cases, when the patient cannot afford the cost of an indirect procedure, amalgam may be the only available alternative
to the extraction of severely damaged teeth .
The key to the success of the cuspal restorations is the
complete understanding of the mechanical principles to be
applied in the procedure. The preparations for amalgam restorations have traditionally been designed to obtain retention. The retention is defined as the prevention of restoration
displacement in the direction of the long axis of the tooth
when submitted to tensile forces. The resistance is defined as
to avoid the displacement or fractures caused by oblique or
compressive loads . Although the retention form is
important on the extensive amalgam restoration, an emphasis must be given to the resistance of the restoration and the
remaining tooth structure .
The general principles of tooth preparation applied on an
extensive amalgam restoration are basically the same of the
regular-sized ones. The walls must be flat, uniform, and
smooth, and the vertical surrounding walls must be parallel or
convergent toward the occlusal surface, while the internal and
gingival walls are parallel to the occlusal surface . The line
and point angles are round to dissipate the stress and improve
the adaptation of the restorative material. However, to improve
the resistance and retention, some changes are required. When
the amalgam cannot be held and surrounded by healthy
remaining tooth walls, its total volume must be increased, creating enough thickness to resist the occlusal loads [9 ]. There
are two situations that the extensive amalgam restorations are
indicated: the situations when the cusps are still present but
are fragile and prone to fracture and the cases when the cusps
have already been lost. Both situations are presented next.
> When the amalgam cannot be held and surrounded by
healthy remaining tooth walls, its total volume must
be increased, creating enough thickness to resist the
occlusal loadsResistance is defined as to avoid the displacement or
fractures of the restoration caused by oblique or
compressive loads.
Retention is defined as the prevention of restoration
displacement in the direction of the long axis of the
tooth, when submitted to tensile forces.
C. R. G. Torres et al.
12
12.2 List of Complementary Materials
In addition to the materials and instruments indicated for
regular-sized amalgam restoration, the following items are
required for extensive restorations:
5No. or No. bur
5No. 1⁄4 round bur
5Self-threading pins and corresponding burs
5Instrument to fold the pin
5No. riveting plier
5Periodontal probe
12.3 Cuspal-Coverage
As it has already been mentioned on 7 Chap. 6, when the
amount of the lost tooth structure is more than 2/3 of the
distance between the central groove and the tip of the cusp,
its upper part should be removed and covered with the
restorative material ( . Fig. 6.25a , b) . Amalgam restorations with cuspal-coverage or cuspal-capping significantly
increase the fracture resistance of weakened teeth when compared with the amalgam restorations without coverage . The coverage of the weakened cusps reduces its risk of
remaining tooth fracture and extends its clinical life. When
this procedure is not performed, sometimes complex factures of the cusp can occur, invading the biological width and
requiring periodontal surgery. Amalgam restorations with
one or more covered cusps have a longevity increased up to
72%, after 15 years, and they do not show differences in relation to the smaller-sized restorations without the covering
(. Fig. 12.1a –i) .
Tip
When the amount of the lost tooth structure is more
than 2/3 of the distance between the central groove
and the tip of the cusp, its upper part should be
removed and covered with the restorative material.
If the tooth is correctly positioned, the supporting cusps are
reduced in approximately 2 mm, while the nonsupporting
cusps are reduced in about 1.5 mm. After analyzing the
occlusal interrelationship, if there is enough space between
the tooth to be restored and the opposing tooth, the reducab
cd
.Fig. 12.1 Preparation with cuspal-coverage. a Tooth with defective
restorations and recurrent caries; b removal of the caries tissue; c filling
with GIC. It can be observed that the mesiobuccal cusp is fragile; d
evaluation of the height of the cusps; e Determination of the amount of the reduction; f evaluating the depth determined; g reduction of
the marked depth; h finished preparation involving the buccal surface;
i finished restorationExtensive Amalgam Restorations
12
tion may be smaller . A useful procedure is to evaluate
the height of the cusp and the location of its tips, in a way that
it can be later carved to its original height. For that, a periodontal probe can be placed along the mesiodistal cusp
ridges of the cusps to be covered, touching the tips of the
cusps of the adjacent teeth and memorizing or registering in
a paper the relation of the cusps with the probe ( . Fig. 12.1d )
. If there is no adjacent tooth, the gingival margin can be
used as reference.
The determination of the amount of the reduction may be
obtained with a relative precision by using rotary instruments with known dimensions. It is known that the heads of No. diamond point and No. bur are 3 mm long,
while the No. 1090A diamond point is 4 mm long. Initially,
depth cuts are made to delimitate the reduction, with the
instrument perpendicular to the long axis of the teeth
(. Fig. 12.1e ). Then, the instrument is positioned parallel to
the long axis of the teeth to verify the amount of reduction,
depending on the type of cusp to be covered ( . Fig. 11.1f ).
After that, the instrument is once again placed perpendicular
to the long axis of the tooth, and the depth cuts are connected
(. Fig. 12.1g ). The cut surface must be as flat as possible and
parallel to the occlusal plane, to produce a good stress distribution. The cusp reduction may be sometimes made at the
gh
i
ef
.Fig. 12.1 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres et al.
12
beginning of the preparation because it improves the access
and visibility for the next steps . Any sharp angle formed
during the preparation is rounded to reduce the stress concentration in the amalgam, to increase the fracture resistance
of the restoration and tooth, preventing the fracture of the
remaining tooth structure.
12.4 Restoration of Lost Cusps
To restore teeth with lost cusps, the first step is to adapt the
remaining tooth structure to the basic principles of dental
amalgam preparations. First, the outline form of the preparation is defined, creating flat margins and walls, especially the
gingival wall, which extend from the proximal surface region
toward the buccal or lingual surfaces, helping to distribute
the stress generated on the occlusal loads. On the areas where
the remaining structures are more preserved, the general
characteristics of the amalgam preparations are followed,
considering the buccolingual dimensions when choosing the
direction of the vertical surrounding walls, convergent to the
occlusal surface or parallel to each other, according to what
has been described on 7 Chaps. 6 and 10.
On the other hand, the main challenge of the extensive
amalgam restorations is to obtain a satisfactory retention.
Due to the lack of natural adhesion of this material, the restoration retention must be mechanically obtained. However,
some micromechanical retention can also be obtained with
the bonding amalgam technique, which will be discussed
further on. The amount of required retentions will depend on
the amount of the remaining tooth structure of the tooth to
be restored. When more structure has been lost, more auxiliary retentions are required.
The mechanical retentions can be classified into natural
and artificial. The natural retentions are the ones obtained
through the specific characteristics of the preparation made
on the remaining tooth structure. The artificial retentions are the ones obtained using artificial materials, such as metallic
pins, which are anchored in the dentin or inside the root
canal. The retention characteristics must be distributed in all
areas of the preparation and not concentrate in only one. It is
known that more load is necessary to cause the displacement
and the fracture of the restorations when the characteristics of
the retentions are opposed to the direction of the loads .
12.4.1 Natural Retentions
12.4.1.1 Direction of the Vertical Walls
The easiest way to obtain retentions for a restoration is to prepare the surrounding vertical walls convergent toward the
occlusal surface, despite the depth of the preparation, or par -
allel to each other if it is deeper than wide.
12.4.1.2 Axial Offset
A method that may promote retention is the preparation of
axial offset, according to what is shown in . Fig. 12.2a [17,
18]. This produces retentions by the presence of opposing
axial walls, which hinders the rotation of the restoration. A
study showed that axial offset may allow an effective retention even with a small depth, such as 0.75 mm . The
peripheral axial offset can also be used, which will also hinder the rotation of the restoration ( . Fig. 11.2b ) .
12.4.1.3 Retentive Locks and Coves
Another possibility to obtain retention is the preparation of
undercuts in the walls, such as locks and coves. Locks are
prepared in a vertical plane and coves are prepared in the
horizontal plane. The locks are prepared using rotary coneshaped instruments in the line angle between the vertical
surrounding wall and the axial wall ( . Fig. 12.5j , k, o). The
coves are prepared in the line angle between the vertical sur -
rounding walls and the pulpal wall, at the region under the
cusps because this area has a larger volume of dentin
a b
.Fig. 12.2 a Axial offset; b peripheral axial offsetExtensive Amalgam Restorations
12(. Fig. 12.5l –o) . Rotary short inverted cone or round
instruments can be used, according to what was described on
7 Chap. 6 (. Fig. 6.44a , b).
Tip
Locks are prepared in the line angle between the vertical
surrounding wall and the axial wall, while coves are
prepared in the line angle between the vertical
surrounding walls and the pulpal wall, at the region under
the cusps, because this area has a larger volume of dentin.
12.4.1.4 Dentin Pins
When the tooth presents carious lesions shallow in dentin,
with fracture of the enamel on the tip of the cusps, the socalled dentin pins can be prepared . To choose this retention method, a minimum of 2 mm of space must exist
between the dentin wall and the opposite tooth, allowing the
necessary thickness of restorative material. If this space does
not exist, the surface must be cut with a cylinder-shaped
rotary instrument. After that, the region around the tip of the
cusp is cut, resulting in a pin shape, according to what is
shown in . Fig. 12.3. Additional retention coves can be prepared on the bases of the pins, using short inverted cone
rotary instrument.
12.4.1.5 Slots
The retentive slots for amalgam restorations were proposed
by Outhwaite et al. and are prepared in dentin, with its larger dimensions on the horizontal plane ( . Fig. 12.4).
They are indicated on teeth with short clinical crowns and
on cusps that have been reduced for capping with the restoration . It can be made on the gingival walls of the preparations using short inverted cone rotary instruments, such
as the No. ⁄2 or No.34 burs or the diamond point.
They can be continuous or segmented, depending on the
amount of lost tooth structure . It must be approximately 0.5 mm wide in the entrance, according to the rotary
instruments used, and 0.6 mm wide on the base, with a
depth between 0.5 and 1 mm [7 , 18]. Generally they are
between 2 and 4 mm long, depending on the distance
between the vertical surrounding walls, especially when the
gingival wall is long. It must always be made in dentin, at
least 1 mm away the DEJ. Some authors prefer to start the
preparation with a conical bur, finishing it later to
ensure the convergence of the slot walls, using an inverted
cone instrument such as the No. ⁄2 bur. They consider that
this technique allows a better control during the preparation, due to the fact that the No. bur has a smaller cutting end than the No. ⁄2 one.
As the retention will be produced by a projection of the
amalgam restoration inside the dentin, its resistance is related
to the setting of the restorative material, which is completed
at least only 24 h later. Therefore, extreme care must be taken
at the moment of removing the matrix band, because an
abrupt movement may lead to a fracture of the amalgam on
the entrance of the slot .
12.4.1.6 Channels for Amalgapin
The preparation of a channel, in which the amalgam is
condensed, creating a retentive amalgapin, was proposed
by Shavell ( . Fig. 12.5a –i). It is indicated when the
.Fig. 12.3 Dentin pins
.Fig. 12.4 Preparation of slots on gingival walls
C. R. G. Torres et al.
12
gingival walls are small or when the maximum preservation of the remaining tooth structure is desired. They
should be preferably made with a long inverted cone bur
No. or No. or with a No. diamond point. A
channel of 1.5–2 mm depth and 0.8–1 mm diameter must
be prepared [7 , 19]. The same way as the slots, the channels
are made in dentin at least 1 mm away from the DEJ. One
channel per lost cusp can be prepared, preferably on the
region near the axial angles to avoid perforation on the
furcation region. They have the advantage to require less
removal of tooth structure than the slots, even though they
also require careful removal of the matrix band to avoid
amalgapin fracture. To avoid the pulpal or periodontal
perforation during the channel preparation, it is impor -
tant that the long axis of the rotary instrument is placed
parallel to the nearest external surface of the tooth on that
area. The place where the channel is going to be prepared
can be initially marked with an indentation or starting
point, using a No. round diamond point or No. 1⁄2 or
No. 1⁄4 burs.
If the extenal surface of the tooth close to the area
where the retention will be prepared is exposed above the gingival margin, the alignment of bur is easier. However,
in most cases, the soft tissue avoids the visualization of
the tooth surface adjacent to the area of the channel location. To place the rotary instrument in the correct alignment, it is inserted inside the gingival sulcus, in a way
that it only touches the gingival cavosurface angle of the
preparation ( . Fig. 12.5c ). Then, the bur is rotated in a
way that it is separated from the margin, indicating that
only the tip is touching the external tooth surface ( . Fig.
15.5d ). Then, it is rotated back slowly until it touches
once again the preparation margin, giving certainty that it
is parallel to the external surface of the tooth ( . Fig. 12.5e ).
This alignment must be memorized and kept. The instrument is then placed into the starting point, maintaining
the correct alignment ( . Fig. 12.5f ). The bur must come
in and out turning, avoiding fracture inside the channel
. The channel is prepared with the depth corresponding to the length of the rotary instrument head that is
2 mm long ( . Fig. 12.5g ). To finish the preparation, a
bevel is performed at the entrance of the channel, increasing the thickness of the material at this area, reducing the
stress concentration on the base of the pin [17, 19]. The
a
cd
b
.Fig. 12.5 Preparation of amalgapin channel and other retentions
on a preparation with lost cusps. a Basic preparation finished; b No.
bur and No. diamond point; c –e adjusting of the bur
direction; f, g preparation of the channel; h bevel at the channel entrance; i finished channel; j preparation of the retentive lock on the
mesiofacial line angle; k retentive lock on the buccoaxial line angle;
l-o preparation of coves under the cuspsExtensive Amalgam Restorations
12
gh
ij
k l
ef
.Fig. 12.5 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres et al.
12
No. or No. diamond point or the No. 1 or 2
burs can be used, depending on the channel diameter. On
those channels, the amalgam condensation must be per -
formed with a thin amalgam condenser, such as the No.
00 from Ward set, taking care at the moment of the matrix
band removal to avoid the pin fracture [7 ]. In . Fig. 12.6a ,
b, some clinical examples of the amalgapin preparation
are presented.Tip
As the retention provided by slots and amalgapins will be
produced by the amalgam condensed inside some very
small cavities, its resistance is related to the setting of the
restorative material, which is completed at least only 24 h
later. Therefore, extreme care must be taken when removing
the matrix band, because an abrupt movement may lead to
a fracture of the amalgam and total loss of retention.
ab
.Fig. 12.6 a, b Channels for the amalgapin
mn
o
.Fig. 12.5 (continued)Extensive Amalgam Restorations
.4.1.7 Pulpal Chamber Retention
On the cases of pulpless teeth, after endodontic treatment, the
pulpal chamber can be used to obtain retention for the restoration, and the amalgam is condensed inside it. This technique can be recommended when the dimensions of the
pulpal chamber are adequate, allowing proper volume for
mechanical retention of the amalgam. In addition, the thickness of the remaining dentin around the chamber must be
sufficient to give the necessary fracture resistance to the tooth.
A pulp chamber with a height of 4–6 mm is enough to allow
satisfactory retention for a direct amalgam restoration
(. Fig. 12.7a ) . If it is necessary to increase the retention,
coves can be prepared in the chamber walls, using a short
inverted cone rotary instrument. However, when the pulpal
chamber height is less than 2 mm, the use or artificial retention should be considered. Before condensing the amalgam, it
is convenient to apply a thin layer of GIC over the obturation
of the root canals, to simplify a future access in case an endodontic retreatment is required. Another option is to completely fill up the pulpal chamber with GIC, building a kind of
core, and then to prepare slots or amalgapin channels inside it
(. Fig. 12.7b , c). This way, the GIC will chemically bond to the tooth, while the amalgam will be mechanically retained in
the cement. This last technique has the advantage to simplify
the access to the root canal, in case a retreatment is required.
12.4.2 Artificial Retentions
There are basically two types of artificial retention methods
that can be associated with amalgam restorations, the intradentinal pins and the endodontic posts, which will be
described next.
12.4.2.1 Intradentinal Pins
They are metallic pins which are fixed in the dentin and capable to anchor the restoration. They can be made of stainless
steel, silver, platinum-iridium alloy, titanium, or gold. The
main requirement is that they must be resistant to oxidation.
The contact of the stainless steel with the amalgam generally
results in its corrosion. For this reason, some stainless steel
pins are coated with titanium oxide or gold . They can be
cemented, friction-locked, or self-threaded. They are gener -
ally indicated on the cases that there is little or no vertical
ab
c
.Fig. 12.7 a Application of the amalgam inside the pulpal chamber on a transversal section; b , c filling of the pulpal chamber with GIC
associated with mechanical retentions
C. R. G. Torres et al.
12
wall and when there is space for the pin . The pin channel
is prepared with a special twist drill, which cuts only on the
tip, different from a regular dental bur which cuts on the
sides too.
Although the intradentinal pins were first described in
the nineteenth century, it was Markley on the 1950s who
popularized the concept of the cemented stainless steel pins
on his lectures and articles [8, 10]. For its application, a channel slightly larger than the pin is to be prepared, of about
0. mm, with a depth of 3–4 mm . Then, the cement is
applied into the channel with a lentulo spiral filler and the
pin is inserted. The friction-locked pins were proposed by
Goldstein and require the preparation of a slightly under -
sized channel, of about 0. mm, with a depth of 2–4 mm.
When pressed into the channel, due to the elasticity (resiliency) of the dentin, it penetrates under pressure. The
frictionlocked pins produce 2–3 times more retention than
the cemented ones ( . Fig. 12.8a ) .
The self-threading pins also use the elasticity of the dentin for its retentions since the drill used for the channel preparation is 0. –0.1 mm smaller than the pin ( . Fig. 12.8b )
. The diameter of the pin in relation to the diameter of the
channel must be in a way that, the deformation produced at
the moment in which it is threaded, stay inside the elastic
limit of dentin . The use of this pin for amalgam restoration was first described on a scientific publication by Going,
in . They are the only ones that are still used
(. Fig. 12.10a –l) . The channel depth must be around
1.5–2 mm. The thread is created when the pin is threaded
into the dentin. A larger retention may be attained increasing
the channel depth .
On a comparative retention analysis, a study showed that
the self-threading pin is 5–6 times more retentive than the
cemented ones and 2–3 times more retentive than the
frictionlocked. Therefore, to obtain the same retention
offered by 1 mm depth of the self-threading pin, it would be necessary to have a 2–3 mm depth for the friction-locked and
5–6 mm depth for the cemented . Although the thicker
pins produce more retention, they also create more stress.
For this reason, the pins with smaller diameter are chosen,
such as 0.48 and 0.61 mm. The pins with 0.48 mm of diameter are generally used because they are safer. However, the
pins with 0.61 mm of diameter are maintained as backup in
case the channel is over-enlarged or the thread was stripped
during the application of a thinner pin ( . Fig. 12.8b ). Vertical
and horizontal stress can be generated in the dentin when a
self-threading pin is inserted. However, cracks on the dentin
may be related to the diameter of the pin. The thicker it is, the
more cracks it causes, although they are more retentive than
the thinner ones . Those cracks happen mostly if they are
incorrectly applied, which can predispose the remaining
tooth structure to fractures. Those stress and cracks can have
small or no clinical significance on most cases or may be
important when little dentin is available . The main
requirement to avoid those problems is the preparation of the
channel in a region not closer than 0.5–1 mm of the DEJ or
not closer than 1–1.5 mm of the cavosurface angle in case of
no enamel in the margin. Other disadvantage of the pins is
the fact that they make the restoration more fragile, because
they are composed of a material with different physical char -
acteristics from the amalgam [7, 18].
To apply the intradentinal pin, a preoperative radiography must be obtained, in such a way to analyze the tooth
position and any leaning, the preparation depth, and the
extension of the pulpal chamber [7, 18]. The gingival sulcus
must be evaluated with a periodontal probe, determining if
there is some abnormal contour of the tooth structure, which
may predispose the tooth to an external perforation .
Then, the number and location of the pins are planned,
choosing the smaller number as possible, being usually recommended only one pin per lost cusp. However, the number
of pins may vary according to the diameter of the pin, the
a b
.Fig. 12.8 Intradentinal pins. a Friction-locked; b self-threading (1 and 2, hand wrench and standard pins with different sizes; 3, 4, and 5,
self-shearing pins with different diameters attached to the chuck; 6 pin hand wrench connected to the chuck)Extensive Amalgam Restorations
12amount of remaining tooth structure, and the use of other
retention forms, besides the functional requirements of the
restoration. In relation to the location, a distance of at least
3 mm must be kept among them. The larger this distance, the
smallest the stress level in the dentin .
There are certain locations more indicated to insert a pin,
while others must be avoided, as it can be seen in . Fig. 12.9.
In general, the preferred pin location must be on the regions
near the axial angles, due to the larger amount of the dentin
between the external surface and the pulpal chamber,
decreasing the risk of perforation [18, 19]. This risk is larger
on the region of root furcation. On the mandibular molars,
the regions between the mesiobuccal and mesiolingual roots
as well as between the mesial and distal roots must be
avoided, because a pin placed at this area may reach the fur -
cation region. On the same way, the middle of the distal root
should be avoided due to its concavity, which may also result
in perforation. On the maxillary molars, the pin channel
preparation on the region between the buccal roots and
between the buccal and lingual one must also be avoided. The
region of the middle of the lingual root, due to its concavity,
may also be potentially dangerous. On the first maxillary premolars, the channel preparation between the buccal and lingual roots can also result in perforation .
Ideally, a previous rubber dam isolation should be per -
formed, eliminating the possibility of the patient to swallow
or aspirate the pin, besides avoiding pulp contamination in
case of perforation . In case it is not possible, a piece of
gauze is placed covering the tongue and most of the throat,
and the pin hand wrenches is tied to a 30–35 cm piece of dental floss. Those precautions reduces the chances of the patient
to swallow or aspirate the pin . On the selected locations,
before using the twist drill for channel preparation, an inden-tation or starting point with 0.5 mm depth must be prepared,
using a No. 1⁄2 or No. 1⁄4 round bur ( . Fig. 12.10c ) . This
will avoid the drill used on the channel preparation to move
around at the beginning of the procedure [7, 19]. This type of
drill generally presents a stop to limit the adequate depth of
the finished channel, being called depth-limiting drill. On
this case, the wall which will receive the channel must be flat
and form a right angle in relation to the direction of the drill
insertion. The two cutting blades of the drill tip are sloped so
that they will cut only when the drill is turning in a clockwise
direction . It has flutes with spiral patterns to remove the
dentin chips from the channel ( . Fig. 12.10d ) . It is impor -
tant to preserve a space between the pin and the axial walls of
the preparation, because this can hinder the bur to reach the
adequate depth and also adversely affect the correct condensation of the amalgam between the pin and the axial wall [18,
19]. If necessary, the axial wall can be slightly cut to create
space . There must be a minimum of 0.5 mm of space
around the pin to allow the condensation of the amalgam on
its entire surrounding surface. The drill will enter and withdraw from the channel spinning continuously. If it stops
inside the channel and a lateral load is applied, it may break.
The channel must be prepared parallel to the nearest
external surface of the tooth, avoiding to be directed to the
periodontal ligament, causing a constant inflammation and
bone resorption, or toward the pulpal chamber, causing
pulpal exposure [7, 18]. The dentist needs to be sure that the
bur is correctly positioned, with its long axis parallel to the
external surface of the tooth. The technique for the correct
placement of the bur is the same as the one previously
described for the preparation of the channel for amalgapin
(. Fig. 12.5c –g). During the channel preparation, it is advisable to withdraw the drill from the channel at least once, halfway the total extension of the head, to allow the dentinal
cuttings to be cleared from the flutes of the drill, for a better
efficient preparation and less heat production . Then it is
penetrated again until it reaches the stop and is completely
removed. That means the channel is finished with only two
consecutive penetrations. Care must be taken to avoid the
over-enlargement of the channel, with multiple entries and
withdrawals, due to the unavoidable small leaning of the bur
by the dentist hands .
Then, the pin is threaded with a small pin wrench or a
latch-type contra-angle low-speed handpiece [18, 19]. Some
self-shearing pins have a weak point between it and the chuck
in which they are attached. When they completely seat at the
end of the channel, they break at this area, disengaging from
shank and remaining in position ( . Fig. 12.10g , arrow). The
standard pins do not have this weak point and will require
the use of a wrench ( . Fig. 12.8b , 1 and 2). This type allows
the dentist to feel the insertion by tactile sense, and after fully
seated, which can be reverted one quarter turn, reducing the
stress on the dentin created at the apical end of the channel
[7, 18, 19]. Those pins also have the advantage to unscrew in
case it is required. In case the standard pin is still handthreaded after reaching the bottom of the channel, it may
break or strip the threads in the dentin .
.Fig. 12.9 Locations for the pin insertion on upper premolar, upper
molar and lower molar (green, preferred locations; yellow, caution
location; red, locations with higher risk of perforation)
C. R. G. Torres et al.
12
The fastest method to insert a pin is through the use of a
contra-angle, simplifying the procedure. In situations of difficult access, even the pins intended for being threaded with a
contra-angle may also be hand-threaded using a proper
wrench that comes with the set ( . Fig. 12.8b ). Preferably, the
gear reduction contra-angle handpiece (10:1) should be used,
which increases the tactile sense of the operator and reduces
the risk of stripping the threads . To reduce the stress production when the pin tip reaches the bottom of the channel,
some manufacturers produced pins with a shoulder stop .After the pin insertion, besides the pin tip penetrating
1.5–2 mm inside the dentin, the other side remains in preparation. A space of 2mm should be left between the top of the
pin and the surface of the restoration, so that it can be covered with the restorative material and the final restoration
can be resistant enough [7, 18, 19]. If the pin is too long and
must be shortened, it can be cut with a cylinder or conical
bur, placed perpendicular to the pin, avoiding it to be
unscrewed with the rotation of the bur. To avoid heating, this
must be performed with a proper airstream cooling . If
ab
cd
e f
.Fig. 12.10 Technique for the use of the intradentinal pins. a Caries
lesions with loss of the distolingual cusp and cavitation under the
mesial marginal ridge; b tooth preparation and filling with GIC; c
marking the channel location with the No. 1⁄4 round bur; d helicoidal drills with different diameters; e , f preparation of the channel; g , h pin
being threaded (arrow – self-shearing weak area); i, j, k pin being
bended; l pin in positionExtensive Amalgam Restorations
12
the bur cannot be positioned perpendicular to the pin, it
must be stabilized with a hemostatic forceps or cotton tweezer without using a lever, avoiding it to unscrew the pin from
the dentin .
The preparation and the pin must be inspected, predicting the final contour of the restoration, analyzing if the pin
will not touch or be too close to the matrix band, adversely
affecting the condensation, and leaving little restorative
material covering the pin. At least there must remain 1 mm
of amalgam around the pin, between it and the external sur -
face of the restoration. If necessary, it can be bended. Amalgam condensers and dentin spoons should not be used
to bend the pin, because the fulcrum of rotation would be at
the entrance of the channel, which could cause cracks or
fractures on the dentin, besides producing an abrupt bend
that increases the fracture risk of the pin [2 , 18]. To perform
that, a fork-shaped bending tool must be used, which is connected to the pin and rotated until the desired bending is
obtained ( . Fig. 12.10i –k). This tool places the fulcrum of
rotation in another location of the exposed pin, increasing
the control of the pressure applied. If the amalgam restoration will be eventually used as a core, the pins must be folded
gh
ij
k l
.Fig. 12.10 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres et al.
12
correctly toward the center of the tooth, in a way they are
not exposed during the axial reduction during the full crown
preparation. If a drill or a pin fractures, its removal is difficult, if not impossible, and usually should not be attempted.
The best solution for this problem is prevention. An alternative position for another pin must be chosen and the new
pin inserted [2 , 18]. If the channel is too wide and the pin
cannot be threaded, a drill and the pin with a larger diameter are used. However, if this does not work, another option
is to perform the cementation of the pin, retaining it by
cement .
The penetration of the drill into the pulpal chamber is
noticed by bleeding through the pin channel, besides feeling
of sudden loss of bur resistance to hand pressure. The perforation can be also noticed when the pin goes further than the
depth of the channel when being threaded. The penetration
can also be noticed on radiography. However, the overlapping of the images of the pin over the pulp chamber may
happen, resulting on a false idea of penetration. If the pulp
penetration happens, the pin must be removed and the bleeding controlled, washing the preparation with saline solution
or a calcium hydroxide solution and then drying with a small
sterile cotton ball. Then, the pure calcium hydroxide powder
is applied inside the channel, which must be covered with
calcium hydroxide cement, as is performed with any accidental pulpal exposure during tooth preparation . A perforation of the external tooth surface, until the periodontal tissue,
may be suspected when the patient experiences symptoms
during the preparation of the channel on a non-vital tooth.
The perforation may be above or below the gingival margin.
On the first case, the excess of the pin must be cut off, or it
may be removed and the region restored with amalgam .
If it happened below the gingival margin, trans-surgical restorations, gingivectomy, or a surgery of crown lengthening
may be required. Despite the type of problem that may have
occurred, the patient must be informed of the proposed
treatment.
When the tooth to be restored lost both adjacent cusps,
such as the loss of both supporting cusps preserving the balancing cusps or both balancing cusps preserving the
supporting cusps, the use of one pin per cusp will not produce a satisfactory result, due to the lack of distribution of
resistance and resistance features. During mastication,
there will be nothing to attach the remaining cusps to the
restoration. Therefore, an oblique load over the restored
cusps will produce the rotation of the restoration, causing
fracture on the remaining tooth structure on the region
where the pins were inserted. On those cases, horizontal
pins inserted on the remaining cusps will reduce the likelihood of fracture ( . Fig. 12.11a , b) [18, 19]. In case it is not
possible due to the fragility of the remaining cusps, complementary vertical pins may be an option on the gingival
walls, corresponding to the region of the marginal ridges,
as closest as possible to the remaining cusps, considering
that there is enough dentin between the gingival wall and
the furcation .
In a comparative analysis between the use of slots and the
amalgapin channels with the intradentinal pins, the first ones
are easier and faster to be performed, do not induce stress on
the dentin, and do not reduce the resistance of the restoration. In addition, they do not present any cost and may be
indicated to teeth with short clinical crown or small cuspalcapping . Some studies suggest that they are as retentive
as the intradentinal pins [1, 17–19]. As a disadvantage, the
natural retentions made directly with the amalgam require a
greater removal of the tooth structure and a more critical
restorative technique, especially at the moment of the matrix
removal [7, 18].
12.4.2.2 Endodontic Posts
If the pulpal chamber height is smaller than 2 mm, only the
condensation of the restorative material on its interior is not
enough to give the necessary retention for the amalgam restoration. To obtain additional retention in cases of severely
destroyed and pulpless teeth, metallic posts can be used,
which are cemented into the roots after its preparations. The
amalgam is condensed over the posts, which create retention
for the restoration ( . Fig. 12.12 ).
ab
.Fig. 12.11 Options to avoid the restoration rotation. a Additional orizontal pins; b multiple vertical pinsExtensive Amalgam Restorations
.5 Bonded Amalgam Restorations
The dental adhesives may be associated to amalgam restorations just with the aim to seal the dentin tubules and promote
the pulpal protection; or with the aim of bonding the amalgam to the tooth structure. If after the tooth preparation an
adhesive system is applied on the preparation and lightcured, and the amalgam is condensed afterward, it will not
bond to the tooth structure. The adhesive layer will be
already polymerized/hard and will only act as a pulpal protection. On this case, the adhesive can be applied before the
placement of the matrix band .
To promote the adhesion of the amalgam to the tooth
structure, there are two possibilities. The first one is to use a
dual-cure adhesive system, while the second one is to associate a light-cure adhesive system to a dual-cure resinous
cement. Even though the bonding mechanism between the
adhesive and amalgam is not completely understood, it may
be due to a micromechanical interlocking of the non-cured
adhesive with the non-crystallized amalgam during condensation.
First, the rubber dam isolation and then the matrix band
and wedges are applied to the tooth. However, some kind of
isolating coat must be applied to the band; otherwise the
adhesive will bond to it and to the amalgam. In that case, dur -
ing the matrix removal a portion of the amalgam will be
pulled out from the restoration, since the material has not yet
reached the final strength. For that, casting wax or wax pencils can be used to isolate the matrix, rubbing the wax over
the band [ 18]. If a dual-cure adhesive system is selected, it
must be applied, and, before its chemical curing, the amalgam must be fastly condensed . Little adhesive must be
applied to reduce its overflow, since it is difficult to remove without damaging the condensed amalgam . The excess
must be removed with a dry applicator but never with air -
stream. This way, the amalgam particles will mechanically
interlock on the uncured adhesive layer while it is still fluid,
which after the polymerization will produce the retention.
If a light-cure adhesive is chosen, it must be applied
according to the manufacturer’s recommendations and lightcured. Then, a thin layer of dual-cure resinous cement is
applied. Before its self-curing, the amalgam must be fastly
condensed, promoting an interlock of the amalgam with the
resinous cement. In . Fig. 12.13a –i, an example of the bonded
amalgam technique is presented.
The bonding strength obtained may depend on the type
of amalgam used. The spherical amalgam results in higher
bond strength than the admixed or lathe cut. Some studies
have shown that some adhesives are very effective, resulting
on initial bonding strength values of 10–14 MPa [5, 16].
However, the characteristics of primary retention form
related to the preparation shape are still recommended when
an adhesive system is used, because it is not clear if the initial
adhesion may be kept on adequate levels with the years. The
bonded amalgam technique may reduce the marginal microleakage and the postoperative sensitivity and improve the
fracture resistance of the remaining tooth structure [14, 21].
The fracture resistance of the teeth with MOD-bonded amalgam restorations is two times higher than the regular ones
. However, the obtained retention is not high enough and
cannot replace the conventional retention and resistance
forms [ 3, 18]. According to Sturdevant , the use of adhesion, besides to increase the costs, the time spent, and the
complexity of the procedure, has not been proved beneficial
on the clinical studies throughout time, so it is not defended
as a routine procedure.
12.6 Restoration of Extensive Preparations
When using a universal matrix retainer in cases of loss of
three or more cusps, a gap of the matrix band at the region of
the U-shaped guide posts will face the preparation, allowing
the penetration of amalgam and impairing the restoration.
To obtain a proper contact of the band around the entire
preparation contour, a small complementary matrix strip can
be applied on the region of the gap as it can be observed in
. Fig. 12.14a , b .
On the other hand, on most large preparations, when it is
necessary to restore a lost cusp, the use of a universal matrix
does not allow the desired contour ( . Fig. 12.15b ). Due to
the need to stabilize the band screwing the spindle of the
matrix retainer, reducing the band diameter, it tends to
deform on the region of the lost cusp and penetrate into the
preparation. To solve this problem, the operator can use riveted (. Fig. 12.15a –o), spot-welded ( . Fig. 8.33), or T-band
(. Fig. 8.34) custom-made matrices or even retainer less
circumferential matrices, with aluminum built-in tensioning ring (TDV) or AutoMatrix (Dentsply) ( . Figs. 8.4a–d
and 8.5a, b).
.Fig. 12.12 Use of endodontic posts
C. R. G. Torres et al.
12
Tip
On large preparations with one or more lost cusps, the use
of a universal matrix may not allow the desired contour. In
those cases, riveted, spot-welded, or T-band custom-made
matrices or even retainer less circumferential matrices
with aluminum built-in tensioning ring (TDV) or
AutoMatrix (Dentsply) are more indicated.To prepare a riveted matrix ( . Fig. 12.15a –o), using a
stainless steel matrix band with a width slightly higher than
the tooth to be restored, the operator measures the diameter
of the tooth and cuts the band with 1 cm of excess, so it can
be held tightly. In general, it is necessary about 5 cm of the
matrix band . The band is placed and adjusted around
the tooth, and the dentist folds it with a flat nose plier or a
curved-end mosquito forceps, creating the correct diameter
(. Fig. 12.15a –d). The band is removed from the tooth, and
a b
c d
e f
.Fig. 12.13 Restoration technique with bonded amalgam. a Large
caries lesion which led to the complete undermining of the distolingual cusp; b preparation finished; c pulpal protection with the calcium
hydroxide cement; d the GIC artificial dentin was applied under the
mesiolingual cusp and riveted matrix surrounded by low fusing compound wall was placed; e acid-etching; f dual-cure adhesive
system application; g amalgam condensation over the uncured
adhesive; h initial result; i restoration after the polishingExtensive Amalgam Restorations
12
gh
i
.Fig. 12.13 (continued)
ab
.Fig. 12.14 a, b Use of the complementary strip in preparation with the loss of several cusps, on the region of the gap of the matrix retainer
the place marked with the fold is riveted one or two times
with a riveting plier No. . The initial perforation is made,
and then the band is inverted, repeating the procedure and
creating the rivets ( . Fig. 12.15e –i). If the dentist has a spotwelding device available, instead of riveting, the band can be
welded in an adequate diameter ( . Fig. 8.33). After that the matrix is placed in position on the tooth, and the operator
evaluates its adaptation and folds the ends of the band over
the external surface of the tooth ( . Fig. 12.15j ). The matrix is
removed from the tooth and burnished on a paper mixing
pad, to create an adequate contour for the proximal surface
of the restoration ( . Fig. 12.15k ).
C. R. G. Torres et al.
12
After that, the matrix is taken in position, and wooden
wedges are inserted on the mesial and distal interproximal
spaces, using a mosquito forceps with a curved end. It is
important to evaluate if the matrix is touching the adjacent
tooth, in a way to allow the correct restoration of the contact
point. The matrix is burnishing toward the adjacent tooth
using the back of a dentin spoon or a Hollenback No. 6 bur -
nisher (. Fig. 12.15l ). Special attention must be kept to the
contour of the matrix on the region of the axial angles. If nec-essary, this area must be burnished until it reaches the correct
contour.
The matrix and wedge system can be additionally stabilized using heated low fusing compound, which is compressed over the buccal and lingual embrasure, taking care
for the compound to not enter the tooth preparation
(. Fig. 12.15m , n). Besides to help on the stabilization of the
matrix, the compound hinders the overflow of the amalgam
on the buccal and lingual surfaces or the proximal surface
ab
c d
ef
.Fig. 12.15 Riveted custom-made matrix. a Preparation finished; b
universal matrix applied resulted in deformation on the region of the
distolingual cusps; c , d adjusting the matrix diameter; e –h riveting procedure; i finished rivet; j bending the matrix end; k burnishing the
contact point area; l burnishing toward the adjacent tooth; m ,
n stabilization with compound; o restoration concludedExtensive Amalgam Restorations
12
g h
i j
k l
mn
.Fig. 12.15 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres et al.
12
when there is no adjacent tooth . The compound adhesion characteristics are useful because it bonds to the matrix
and tooth at a low temperature, which will not cause damage
to the soft tissues and teeth.
When handled according to the correct technique, the
use of low fusing compound is simple, easing significantly
the restorative procedure ( . Fig. 12.16a –i). Its correct use
just requires some training. For that, approximately 2.5 cm of
the tip of a compound rod is positioned over the flame of an
alcohol lamp. The rod is moved forward and backward while
it is turned between the fingers. After 5–10 s it is removed
from the contact with the flame so that the heat may diffuse
into the center. It is noticed that the rod end begins to bend,
indicating that it is soft ( . Fig. 12.16b ). The softened compound is shortly immersed in a vial with water, preferably
warm, to create a non-sticky surface. The operator wets the
fingers and holds a small portion of softened non-sticky
compound, preparing a small sphere ( . Fig. 12.16c ). He
keeps the compound between his thumb, index, and middle
finger of one hand and passes it quickly over the flame, creating a sticky surface ( . Fig. 12.16f , g). Then, he bonds this
surface to the index finger of the other hand and passes the
compound quickly over the flame, making this surface sticky
again (. Fig. 12.16h , i).
The compound is then immediately applied over the
matrix and the wedge ( . Fig. 12.15m , n). The cold air of a
syringe is directed over the compound to speed the solidification and stabilize the set. If excess of compound overflows
over the matrix or inside the preparation, it can be easily
removed with cutting instruments. The compound must never be heated on the flame and directly applied over the
tooth. This may cause damage to the pulp due to the prolonged application of heat .
If the matrix is slightly displaced from the contact or ideal
contour due to the compound application, the back of a
heated dentin spoon may be used, burnishing the matrix
toward the adjacent tooth, softening the godiva, and readapting the contour of the matrix. If the compound is applied
both at the buccal and lingual sides and it is necessary to stabilize the set, a staple can be prepared using an orthodontic
wire or paper clip giving it a U shape. It is then heated and
inserted in the compound, connecting both sides. The compound may be removed with a Hollenback carving and the
staple with a heated tweezer. The heat will diffuse through the
metal and melt the compound, allowing its removal .
For large restorations, it must preferably choose the amalgam of extended setting time, giving more time for carving
and adjusting of the restoration. Also, for increasing the
working time for carving due to the large preparation size,
the amalgam may be taken into the preparation in large
amounts. For that, instead of using the amalgam carrier, the
portion of the triturated amalgam may be divided into two
parts and taken into the cavity with a tweezer . The condensation must start in the prepared natural or artificial
retentions . The carving of the occlusal area must be fast,
even if coarse, allowing the prompt matrix removal and carving of the more difficult areas, such as the gingival and inter -
proximal margins, removing any excess.
Conclusion
This chapter describes the technique for extensive amalgam
restorations. The details of tooth preparations for improving
the retention and resistance were presented. The technique
of cuspal-coverage of weakened cusps can avoid aggressive
fractures of the remaining cusps, preserving the tooth struc -
ture. The different preparation techniques of natural (vertical
walls, axial offset, locks, coves, dentin pins, slots, amalgapin,
and pulpal chamber retention) and artificial retentions (intradentinal pins and endodontic posts) can prevent the restoration dislodging due to interarch teeth contact and chewing
forces. The association of adhesive systems with amalgam
can also be an alternative to improve the resistance of the
remaining structure, besides helping its retention. The amalgam can be an effective and a low-cost alternative of severely
damaged teeth, being an important part of the practitioner’s
dental knowledge.
o
.Fig. 12.15 (continued)Extensive Amalgam Restorations
12
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 12.16 Technique of low fusing compound handling. a , b
Softening of the compound over the flame; c , d superficial cooling of
the compound and wetting of the finger; e , f removal of a portion and preparation of a small ball; g superficial heating of the ball recovering
its bonding capacity; h sticking the ball at the tip of the finger; i
superficial heating of the small compound ball
C. R. G. Torres et al.
12
gh
i
.Fig. 12.16 (continued)
References
1. Bailey JH. Retention design for amalgam restorations: pins versus
slots. J Prosthet Dent. ;65:71–4. https://doi.org/10. / (91) -X.
2. Baum L, Phillips RW, Lund MR. Textbook of operative dentistry. 3rd
ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; .
3. Dias de Souza GM, Pereira GD, Dias CT, Paulillo LA. Fracture resistance of teeth restored with the bonded amalgam technique. Oper
Dent. ;26: –5.
4. Eakle WS, Staninec M, Lacy AM. Effect of bonded amalgam on the
fracture resistance of teeth. J Prosthet Dent. ;68: –60.
https://doi.org/10. / - (92) -5.
5. Eakle WS, Staninec M, Yip RL, Chavez MA. Mechanical retention
versus bonding of amalgam and gallium alloy restorations. J
Prosthet Dent. ;72: –4. https://doi.org/10. / (94) -5.
6. Gilmore HW, Lund MR. Operative dentistry. Saint Louis: Mosby;
.
7. Horsted-Bindslev P , Mjör IA. Dentística operatória moderna. São
Paulo: Santos; .
8. How WS. Bright metal screw posts and copper amalgam. Dent
Cosm. ;31: .
9. Howard WW. Atlas of Operative Dentistry. 2nd ed. St. Louis: Mosby;
.
10. Markley MR. Restorations of silver amalgam. J Am Dent Assoc.
;43: –46. https://doi.org/10. /JADA.ARCHIVE. . . 11. Mondelli J, Ishikiriama A, Galan JJ, Navarro MF. Dentística Oper -
atória. São Paulo: Sarvier; .
12. Mondelli RF, Barbosa WF, Mondelli J, Franco EB, Carvalho RM. Frac -
ture strength of weakened human premolars restored with amalgam with and without cusp coverage. Am J Dent. ;11:
–4.
13. Mooney B. Operatoria dental. Buenos Aires: Panamericana; .
14. Neto NG, Carvalho RC, Russo EM, Sobral MA, Luz MA. Dentística Restauradora: Restaurações diretas. São Paulo: Santos; .
15. Outhwaite WC, Garman TA, Pashley DH. Pin vs. slot retention in
extensive amalgam restorations. J Prosthet Dent. ;41: – .
https://doi.org/10. / - (79) -2.
16. Perdigão J, Lopes M. Dentin bonding--questions for the new millennium. J Adhes Dent. ;1: – .
17. Plasmans PJ, Kusters ST, de Jonge BA, van’t Hof MA, Vrijhoef MM. In
vitro resistance of extensive amalgam restorations using various
retention methods. J Prosthet Dent. ;57:16–20. https://doi.
org/10. / - (87) -9.
18. Roberson TM, Heymann H, Swift EJ. Sturdevant’s art and science of
operative dentistry. 5th ed. St. Louis: Mosby; .
19. Schwartz RS, Summitt JB, Robbins JW. Fundamentals of operative
dentistry. A contemporary approach. Chicago: Quintessence; .
20. Shavell HM. The amalgapin technique for complex amalgam resto -
rations. J Calif Dent Assoc. ;8:48–55.
21. Torii Y, Staninec M, Kawakami M, Imazato S, Torii M, Tsuchitani
Y. Inhibition in vitro of caries around amalgam restorations by
bonding amalgam to tooth structure. Oper Dent. ;14: –8.Extensive Amalgam Restorations
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG
C. R. G. Torres (ed.), Modern Operative Dentistry, Textbooks in Contemporary Dentistry,
https://doi.org/10. / -3- - -0_13435 13
Light-Curing Units
Nicola Scotti, Andrea Baldi, Edoardo Alberto Vergano, Claudio Hideki Kubo,
and Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres
13.1 Introduction –
13.2 Fundamentals of Light –
13.3 Curing of Composite Resins –
13.3.1 Activation Systems of Curing Reactions –
13.3.2 Chemically Activated Materials –
13.3.3 Light-Activated Materials –
13.3.4 Polymerization Kinetics –
13.4 Polymerization Shrinkage –
13.4.1 The Material, in Terms of Volumetric Shrinkage and Elastic
Modulus –
13.4.2 The Geometrical Configuration of the Preparation or “C-Factor” –
13.4.3 The Speed of Curing and Shrinkage Direction –
13.4.4 The Substrate and Its Elastic Modulus –
13.4.5 The Layering Technique Employed –
13.5 Oxygen-Inhibited Layer –
13.6 Thermal Effects of Polymerization on Pulp –
13.7 Light-Curing Units –
13.7.1 Quartz-Tungsten-Halogen Unit –
13.7.2 Plasma Arch Unit –
13.7.3 Argon-Ion Laser Unit –
13.7.4 Light-Emitting Diode Unit –
13.8 Monitoring of the Light Output –
13.9 Curing Protocols –
13.9.1 Conventional Protocol –
13.9.2 Gradual Curing Protocols –
13.10 Polymerization of Indirect Restorations –
13.11 Fiber Post Cementation –
13.12 Ocular Hazards of Curing Lights –
References –
13Learning Objectives
The reader will be given the opportunity to understand and
learn:
5Fundamentals of light and polymerization in dentistry
5Shrinkage stress: the problem and its management
5Effects on dental pulp
5Light-curing units and their maintenance
5Clinical protocols in different situations
5Ocular hazard and its management
13.1 Introduction
On the ’s decade, the use of light to promote the curing
of a restorative material began to be used, pushing the developments of several light-activated materials and the lightcuring units. Those began to be used on several dental
specialties, turning the use of the light something almost
indispensable for many clinical procedures. Therefore, the
understanding of the concepts about the light activation process, the physical properties of the light and chemical process
of curing, as well the basic understanding of the light-curing
devices became an essential knowledge for the dentist.
However, a study showed that more than 37% of the composite restorations are unsatisfactorily light cured showing
that the theoretical knowledge and the quality of the dentist’s
work, when the light curing is involved, are far from the necessary. Thus, a correct curing protocol is fundamental in
order to achieve good mechanical and aesthetical proprieties
with resin composite . Although many different articles
are talking about this topic, a recent review showed that there
is not really accordance between the studies about the best
protocol available .
13.2 Fundamentals of Light
Light is electromagnetic radiation, i.e., energy in movement
that propagates through waves, and it is capable to cause a
visual sensation on an observer. This light wave behavior is
explained by the theory of electrodynamics. Depending on
the wavelength (distance between two successive peaks of a
wave), the light radiation will have distinct characteristics
and effects when interacting with the matter.
. Figure 13.1 shows the electromagnetic spectrum, on which
the waves vary according to the wavelength. The shorter it is,
the more energy the wave has, and more deeply is capable to
penetrate on the matter that receives the radiation. Gamma
and X-rays, examples of high energy waves, are capable to cause the ionization of the molecules. Ultraviolet (UV) waves
are slightly longer and have the potential to cause damage on
the cell DNA and produce skin cancer. Above the ultraviolet wavelength, there is the visible light, which is on an inter -
val between and nm, and is capable to stimulate the
photoreceptor cells in the eyes and be perceived by the
human beings. The variation of the wavelength in this inter -
val determines its color. The white light is a mixture of several
wavelengths. The waves with a slightly longer wavelength
than the visible light correspond to the infrared, which is
capable to promote the heating of the matter it interacts and
are known as thermal waves.
13.3 Curing of Composite Resins
The composite resins are basically composed of some main
ingredients, which are methacrylate monomers (organic
matrix); filler particles (inorganic matrix); coupling agent
(organosilane) that bond the organic matrix to the filler par -
ticles; activator-initiator system of the polymerization reaction; inhibitors to prevent the spontaneous polymerization of
monomers; and optical modifiers to give coloration and
opacity to the material.
The polymerization process consists of the conversion of
monomers to polymers, initiated by the formation of a free
radical with an unpaired electron, which reacts with one of
the electrons of the unsaturated group (double bond) in the
monomer molecule, leaving the other electron in an unsaturated state. Thus, this monomer becomes to act as a free
radical bonding to another monomer, which also becomes a
free radical, adding successively to a large number of mole-Light is electromagnetic radiation, i.e., energy in move -
ment that propagates through waves, and it is capable
to cause a visual sensation on an observer.
Radio
Micr owaves
Invisible
thermal
wave s
Invisible
ionizing
wave sVisible102
10–10 10– –1
InfraredRed770 nm
nm
nm
nm
nm
nm
nm
nmOrange
Yellow
Gree n
Blue
Indigo
VioletVisible ligh t
Gamma ra ysX-raysUltraviolet10–2
10–5
10–6
10–8
.Fig. 13.1 Electromagnetic spectrum
N. Scotti et al.
13
cules so that the polymerization process continues through
the propagation of the reactive center.
13.3.1 Activation Systems of Curing
Reactions
The monomers polymerization may occur by two mechanisms, called condensation and addition. On the condensation reaction, during the polymer formation, a by-product is
created, which in generally lost to the environment by volatilization. However, in the addition reaction, all monomers will
be part of the polymeric chain, and no by-product is formed.
The restorative composites polymerize by an addition reaction.
Even though condensation process is faster and less
expensive in terms of material used, the reaction incorporates disadvantages related to the presence of the by-product.
The loss of reaction product could create voids in the chemical structure of the polymer, leading to weaker zones and a
more evident shrinkage during the reaction. On the other
hand, addition-based reactions are more difficult to take
place as they require the presence of a catalyst and initiator.
Polymers obtained with such a process however are more
stable and precise.
The free radicals may be generated in four different ways:
1. Chemically, by the interaction between the initiator and
activator substances on a two-paste material when it is
mixed
2. By specific light wavelengths
3. By heating
4. By a combination of activation systems (light + chemical
reagents)
13.3.2 Chemically Activated Materials
The chemically activated restorative materials, also known
as self-cure composites, are supplied as two-paste systems
either in jars or syringes (base and catalyst), which are mixed
before the use. The free radicals are generated by the chemical reaction between the benzoyl peroxide (initiator) on the
catalyst paste with the tertiary amine (activator) on the base
paste, which will begin the curing of the methacrylate
groups [3 , 16]. The degradation of residual amines in the
composition on those materials contribute for the discolor -
ation observed after 3–5 years of intraoral service. The selfcured composites have mainly aromatic tertiary amines,
while the light-cured ones generally have aliphatic amines.
Therefore, light-cured composites are expected to have more
color stability, since the amines in the composition are less
susceptible to oxidation. On the self-cured composite, the
need to mix pastes results in the formation of internal air
bubbles, that can contribute to the creation of internal
porosity and therefore an early staining. Furthermore, the
working time is limited due to the speed of the curing process, taking more time to finish and polish the restoration, because only a limited contour may be performed before the
curing is complete .
13.3.3 Light-Activated Materials
On the light-activated composites, the curing process starts
by the absorptions of the visible light on a specific wavelength. The first light-activated composites used the ultraviolet light, with wavelength from to nm. They
revolutionized the market and gained immediate acceptance
due to its inherent advantages. However, the harm caused by
the ultraviolet on the eyes and the limited depth of cure led
to its replacement by the visible light systems . Most of
the current materials have as a photoinitiator α -diketone
molecules, generally camphorquinone, which is excited by
the light and interacts with a reducing agent, known as the
activator, to produce free radicals, which start the curing
process. The activator is a tertiary amine, and its concentration on the light-activated composites is much smaller than
the one used on the chemically activated materials, which
significantly decreases the possibility of staining or discolor -
ation [87, ].
The light absorption range of the camphorquinone is in
between and nm, that is, in blue region of the visible
light spectrum, with a maximum peak on nm [17, 70].
The camphorquinone presents, as its main disadvantage, a
yellow color, which adversely affects the production of composites with lighter colors . After curing it becomes
whiter, resulting in a color difference between the material
before and after polymerization ( . Fig. 14.21 ). The decomposition of the photoinitiators may result in the material darkening with time, when exposed to the environmental light,
causing esthetic problems ( . Fig. 13.2). In attempt to solve
this problem, other photoinitiators were developed and tested,
such as the Ivocerin and PPD (phenyl-propanedione). The latter has a maximum absorption peak close to nm and does
not have the characteristic yellow color of camphorquinone.
However, not all light-curing units emit a light spectrum capa-
.Fig. 13.2 Color alteration of light-cured composite restorations
due to changes of reacted camphorquinone by the exposure to the
environmental light
Light-Curing Units
13ble to stimulate it, because its absorption range is different
from the camphorquinone [91, ]. Other photoinitiator
used as an alternative for camphorquinone is the Lucirin TPO,
which is becoming more popular by the fact it turns completely clear when the activation reaction ends. . Figure 13.3
shows the spectral absorption profiles of the most used photoinitiators. The light-activated materials have a longer working
time, which results in less need of finishing the restoration.
They have more color stability and less internal porosity .
13.3.4 Polymerization Kinetics
During the curing reaction, the composite resins transform
from a plastic viscous material through a rubbery viscoelastic
into an elastic glassy stage, passing through three phases
identified as pre-gel, gel point, and post-gel phase .
> During the curing reaction, the composite resins
transform from a plastic viscous material through a
rubbery viscoelastic into an elastic glassy stage,
passing through three phases identified as pre-gel, gel
point, and post-gel phase.
At the beginning of the polymerization, only some monomers are chemically bonded, and the system is still mainly a
viscous liquid. During the conversion of monomers to polymer, the formation of new monomer to monomer bonds
causes shrinkage, reducing the total volume. At this phase,
there is a predominance of linear polymer chains, which are
not well connected to each other, and the material may flow
and undergo molecular rearrangement. The system is in a
flow state, creating little stress on the adhesive interface. This
stage is known as the pre-gel phase.
When the degree of conversion reaches 10–20%, the
polymer chains are long enough to create a gel, and the
molecular movement of the organic matrix is reduced by the
formation of cross-linked bonds. The material stops to
behave as a liquid, which may flow, and begins to behave as a
solid, with physical and mechanical properties being modified . This moment is known as the gel point. Further than this point, the polymerization shrinkage creates stress
on the polymer chain, and the reduced mobility of the chains
hinders the stress to be accommodated internally by the
resin. This stress is transmitted to the tooth-restoration inter -
face and tooth structure and may promote the breaking of
the adhesive bond, cuspal deflection, or enamel microcracks
[87, 88, ]. This stage is known as the post-gel phase. The
growing conversion until its final level at the glassy stage
increases the elastic modulus. Therefore, the degree of conversion has a substantial effect on finally obtained mechanical properties.
13.4 Polymerization Shrinkage
During the polymerization reaction, the intermolecular distance is reduced due to the formation of covalent bonds, thus
reducing the final volume [3, 42]. According to a recent
review, the shrinkage range is quite variable, and the final
volumetric contraction could reach 7%, with an average of
2–3% . Moreover, during the first 24 h after the light cur -
ing, this polymerization reaction continues, as well the
shrinkage, developing forces within the preparation walls
that could led to microcracks or interfacial opening, during
the first hours of clinical function . This phenomenon is
usually named post-polymerization, post-cure polymerization, or dark polymerization and is shown in . Fig. 13.4 .
Following the vitrification of the material (post-gel
phase), all the free radicals and molecules containing double
bonds that have not reacted remain entrapped in the matrix,
without the ability to flow. Moreover, it has been observed
that, owing to photoactivation, once the composite material
has reached its vitreous form, some “free spaces” remain.
After the exothermic polymerization reaction, the composite
temperature is reduced to that of the oral cavity. A relaxation 460Absorbance (AU)Camphorquinone
Phenyl-propanedion e
Lucirin TPO
Wavelength (nm)
.Fig. 13.3 Spectral absorption profiles of the camphorquinone,
phenyl-propanedione, and Lucirin TPO photoinitiator
Post-polymerizatio n
01 23 4 0.5 1.5 2.5 3.5 4. .10.30.40.50.6
0.2
Time [s] ́ 104Degr ee of polymerization
.Fig. 13.4 Increase on the degree of polymerization after the end of
light-curing procedure, namely post-polymerization or dark polymer -
ization
N. Scotti et al.
13
process follows, which is necessary for the structure to reach
a more stable crystalline form, and this is associated with a
partial reduction of the “free spaces” present within the polymer network. This physical phenomenon is responsible for
the spontaneous approach of free radicals to the residual
double bonds. These may react, allowing the composite
material to further increase the conversion degree .
The volumetric shrinkage during polymerization produces stress on the tooth/restoration bonded interface, and is
transmitted to the remaining tooth structure. The shrinkage
stress can be thought as a negative pressure applied on cavity
walls. The shrinkage stress may lead to interfacial gap formation, because the vectors occur toward the center of its mass.
As the restorative material has been bonded to one or more
preparation walls, the stress generated will be affected by the
restriction’s conditions imposed by the bonded walls of the
preparation, and all the stress will be directed toward the
bonded surfaces. In vitro studies have shown that a continuous increase of shrinkage stress occurs for different periods
of time after the photoactivation process . The increase of
stress following light exposure is associated with the addition
polymerization and with the occurrence of thermal shrinkage in the restorative composite [4, 32]. The volumetric
shrinkage may cause stress levels of 4–8 MPa or even more
on the tooth-restoration interface. This depends on several
factors, as described in the following sentences.
> The internal stress created inside the composite during
polymerization is described as “shrinkage stress. ” It is
transferred through the interface to the cavity walls,
leading to interfacial gap formation and cuspal
deflection.
13.4.1 The Material, in Terms of Volumetric
Shrinkage and Elastic Modulus
There are some very important factors which affect the total
volumetric shrinkage of composite materials . The first
one is the organic matrix. It is composed of a monomers mixture which is converted from a group of free-floating molecules into a rigid cross-linked polymeric chain and is
responsible for the volumetric shrinkage during the polymerization [3, 10]. Therefore, the larger the percentage of the
organic matrix of a material, the larger is the polymerization
shrinkage.
Other important factor is the amount of filler particles in
the formulation. The higher is the filler content of a composite, the smaller is its organic content and, therefore, its volumetric shrinkage. However, the increase of the filler content
also influences the elastic modulus of the material . Some
studies analyzed the polymerization shrinkage of several
composites and observed that the higher the filler ratio, the
greater is the elastic modulus and the stiffer the composite is,
producing a higher shrinkage stress [88, 95]. According to
Hooke’s law, stress is a product of the stiffness of the material
(elastic modulus) by a given strain (volumetric shrinkage). Therefore, the shrinkage stress will be higher if the elastic
modulus and/or the volumetric shrinkage are also high.
However, the shrinkage stress of a composite is more related
to the stiffness of the material, which is proportional to the
content of inorganic fillers, than to the percentage of volumetric polymerization shrinkage [21, 42].
> Some studies analyzed the polymerization shrinkage
of several composites and observed that the higher
the filler ratio, the greater is the elastic modulus and
the stiffer the composite is, producing a higher
shrinkage stress.
13.4.2 The Geometrical Configuration
of the Preparation or “C-Factor”
The cavity configuration factor or C-factor was proposed by
Feilzer et al. , in , and is the ratio of the bonded
surface area (B) in preparation for composite restoration to
the unbonded (U) surface area, expressed by the eq.
C-factor = B/U . In . Fig. 13.5 are shown situations
with different C-factor values. The situation when the
C-factor is higher is on box-shaped preparation, with four
surrounding walls and an internal wall, such as on Class I
preparation. On this case, if the composite is applied in a
bulk increment, it will bond simultaneously to five walls
(buccal, lingual, mesial, distal, and pulpal), and only the
occlusal surface will remain unbonded. Therefore, the
C-factor will be equals five. On Class II simple proximal
box preparation (vertical slot preparation), the buccal, lingual, axial, and gingival walls will be bonded, while the sur -
faces facing the occlusal and proximal areas will remain
unbonded, resulting on a C-factor equals 2. The case with
smaller C-factor occurs on restorations of fractured anterior teeth, with only one bonded surface and five unbonded
ones, and a C-factor equals 0.2. In this case, the risk of
adverse effects due to polymerization shrinkage will be very
low . Therefore, the C-factor varies according to the
shape and location of the preparation.
> The situation when the C-factor is higher is on
box-shaped preparation, with four surrounding walls
and an internal wall, such as on Class I preparation. On
this situation, if the composite is applied in a bulk
increment, it will bond simultaneously to five walls,
and only the occlusal surface will remain unbonded.The cavity configuration factor or C-factor is the ratio of
the bonded surface area in preparation for composite
restoration to the unbonded surface area. It determines
the magnitude of the generated stress on the
tooth-restoration interface and may cause the rupture of
the adhesive interface or the cusp deflection.
Light-Curing Units
13 Tip
The C-factor must be kept as lower as possible, which
can be obtained by the application of oblique composite
increments, connecting a maximum of two walls
simultaneously, leaving the larger number of free
surfaces as possible, and creating conditions to relieve
the stress.
When a composite is bonded to more than one preparation
wall, the remaining tooth structure to where it is bonded,
because of being rigid, will withstand the movement of the
shrinking material, producing stress. The unbonded surfaces
will deform whatever possible to reduce the stress. Since the
composite flow is more likely to occur from the free surfaces,
a higher proportion of free composite surface would represent a smaller restriction to shrinkage, therefore reducing the
stress. Therefore, the cavity configuration determines the
magnitude of the generated stress on the tooth-restoration
interface, which may cause the rupture of the adhesive inter -
face or the cusp deflection . The greater the C-factor, the
greater the potential of rupture of the adhesive interface due
to the polymerization effects. To avoid this inconvenient, the
C-factor must be kept as lower as possible, preferably close to
0.5, which can be obtained by the application of oblique composite increments, connecting a maximum of two walls simultaneously, leaving the larger amount of free surfaces as
possible, and creating conditions to relieve the stress . In
addition, if the material is cured in small amounts, less
shrinkage stress will occur. The volumetric shrinkage of an
increment is compensated by the next layer applied. However, as the C-factor consists of the ratio of the bonded sur -
face area to the unbonded free surface area, when comparing
two Class I preparations, with five bonded and one free wall,
with different depths but other dimensions the same, the
deeper preparation will have a greater C-factor than the shallower one . Despite the size of the preparation, each
increment applied must be small, with a maximum thickness
of 2 mm, as will be discussed later.
13.4.3 The Speed of Curing and Shrinkage
Direction
The unbonded composite presents isotropic shrinkage,
which means that shrinkage vectors are directed to center of
the mass [ 31]. On the 1980s, it was believed that only the
chemically cured composites presented this property. In
relation to the light-activated ones, it was supposed that the
polymerization shrinkage was directed toward of the light
source . Due to this fact, Lutz et al. described a technique for restorations of proximal preparations using clear
and reflective wedges that they had developed, associated
a
b
1/5 = 0.2 3/3 = 1 4/2 = 2 5/1 = 50,2 0,5 1,0 2,0 5,0
.Fig. 13.5 a Schematic drawing of the C-factor. (Adapted from Feilzer et al. ). b Pictures of actual cavities with different C-factor
N. Scotti et al.
13
with clear matrix bands. The light was first applied on the
buccal/lingual surface, over the wedge, which conducted the
light toward the gingival region. The authors believed that
the good results obtained with this technique, in relation to
the marginal integrity of the restorations, were due to the use
of reflective wedges, which directed the shrinkage, bringing
the resin toward the gingival wall, reducing the marginal
gaps. However, Lösche demonstrated that the use of
reflective wedges only reduced the transmitted light, delaying the gel point and thus improving the marginal adaptation. Versluis et al. , using the finite element method,
demonstrated that the composites do not shrink toward the
light source but toward the bonded walls, and the shrinkage
vectors are mostly determined by the cavity configuration
[60, ]
The chemically activated composites have slower cur -
ing reaction than the light-activated ones (more than 3
min). This gives the material a longer pre-gel phase, allowing more flowing of the linear polymer chains recently created, relieving the stress, and resulting in less failures on
the toothrestoration interface [25, 52, 87]. On the lightactivated composites, shrinkage stress created on the tooth
structure is greater than on the chemically activated ones,
because the curing reaction happens faster. That significantly reduces the time for the polymer chains flowing dur -
ing the pre-gel phase and the stress relieving . A way to
control the stress is changing the curing mode (gradual
curing/soft start), creating a slower start with less light
irradiation, in order to prolong the pre-gel phase. Those
techniques will be better explained at the end of this
chapter [ 8, 81].
Tip
On regions of hot weather, the composites are generally
kept inside a refrigerator, at about 5 °C, to increase its
shelf life. However, before the use, it must be left to reach
the room temperature, once the low temperature
adversely affects the curing reactions.
13.4.4 The Substrate and Its Elastic Modulus
The substrate could also play a role in the shrinkage stress.
More elastic substrates, such as dentin, could better tolerate a
volumetric variation, while rigid substrates, such as enamel,
don’t have this advantage. Following this reasoning, the use
of a liner layer between the adhesive and the restorative composite, using a material with low elastic modulus such as
flowable composites, has been proposed, but its real effectiveness is still controversial .
Dealing with natural tooth structure, we have to consider that adhesion to dentin is less effective than to enamel,
which can result on interfacial debonding and gap formation, rather than a deformation of the substrate during
polymerization.13.4.5 The Layering Technique Employed
Layering technique is a fundamental factor, which is closely
related to the “C-factor. ” It has been shown that horizontal
layers create significantly higher stress than oblique layers,
since the bonded/unbonded ratio is clearly different [23, 50].
The thickness of each layer should be maximum 2 mm, to
reduce the total stress and allow a proper curing on the bottom of the composite layer [53, 55]. It has also been shown,
in vitro with SEM and in vivo with sensitivity test, that bulk
techniques have inferior performances than incremental
ones .
13.5 Oxygen-Inhibited Layer
Light-cured resins leave behind a soft and sticky superficial
layer after polymerization. This layer is commonly referred to
as an oxygen-inhibited layer (OIL) because of its origin, and
it is always produced when a resin composite or dental adhesive is cured in contact with air . Oxygen reacts with
carbon-based polymerizing free radicals in a diffusioncontrolled manner to form peroxy radicals. These peroxy
radicals preferentially react with oxygen, which significantly
retards the polymerization reaction . They also quench
the excited triplet states of photoinitiators, such as camphorquinone, thereby limiting the initiation stage of polymerization . The OIL is primarily composed of unreacted
resin monomers and oligomers, and it possesses a gel-like
consistency. Previous studies have found that the OIL thickness of adhesives and resin composites ranges from 4 to 40
μm [35, 90, 98]. The thickness and characteristics of the OIL
in resin-based materials depend on several factors, including
monomer chemistry, filler morphology, radical concentration, and the rate of oxygen consumption. Therefore, the
characteristics of OIL of dental adhesives might differ
depending on the types of adhesive systems.
A simple way to deal with OIL is to perform, once the
last composite layer is completed and cured, an extra curing
step after covering the restoration with a transparent glycerin
layer (. Fig. 15.6z , a ́). This procedure avoids the contact
with oxygen and thus strongly reduces the OIL.
13.6 Thermal Effects of Polymerization
on Pulp
Curing times suggested by manufacturers are generally evaluated in vitro under optimal conditions, which could be
totally different from the real clinical condition, leading to
an inadequate polymerization of the restoration . This
might lead to negative mechanical properties and lower biocompatibility of the composite material. The simplest way a
practitioner can overcome this issue is by extending the cur -
ing time beyond manufacturer recommendations. This
approach has been shown to improve the degree of conver -
Light-Curing Units
13sion and microhardness at the bottom of the composite
layer, while also reducing the amount of elutable species
. However, curing with high emittance units for extended
time raises concerns regarding possible overheating of the
dental pulp . The in vivo effects of pulp heating and its
biological consequences were studied since by Zach
and Cohen . In their study, a 5.5 °C pulp temperature
variation was simulated in rhesus monkeys, through application of a hot metal source to the facial enamel surface. This
led to necrosis in 15% of evaluated pulps. After their study
all in vitro and in vivo studies addressing the effects of LCU
light on pulp temperature assumed 42.5 °C as a cutoff temperature.
On the other hand, in contrast with previous in vitro
results, Schneider et al. reported that long exposure periods
(60 seconds) were clinically necessary to cause a pulp temperature variation higher than 5.5 °C, when using a polymer -
ization device on intact premolars (radiant emittance values
of approximately mW/cm2) .
When blue light strikes the enamel surface, part of the
light energy is reflected and a part is converted into thermal
energy, while the remaining portion passes through the
substrates below . When blue light reaches the pulp tissue, photons are strongly absorbed by the blood chromophores to be partly converted into thermal energy ,
resulting in a slower pulp temperature increase in vivo than
the one observed in vitro. Because of the constant blood flow,
the warmed chromophores from absorbed photons are
quickly replaced by other, cooler ones, so most of the heat
generated in this tissue is dissipated.
In general, most of the temperature rise occurred within
5–10 s after the start of light curing. Extending the curing
time to 30 s resulted in a minor additional increase. However,
a possible way to prevent overheating of the pulp seems to be
the contextual use of an air blowing directly toward the tooth
while performing photopolymerization.
13.7 Light-Curing Units
The light-curing unit is a device capable to emit visible blue
light required to activate the photoinitiators and start the
polymerization. The spectral power or output (radiant power
per wavelength) may vary among the devices but must be as
close as possible to the absorption range of the photoinitiator
within the composite. They can be classified according to the
type of emitted light and the range of the wavelength spectrum emission in two types, called narrow and broad spectrum.
The first broad-spectrum units generate white light that,
when passing through band-pass filters, emits blue in the
– nm range . As examples, there were the conventional devices with quartz-tungsten-halogen lamps and the
xenon plasma arc curing lamps. As disadvantages, they produce heating and waste electric energy, but as advantage, they
have the capacity to activate other photoinitiators besides
camphorquinone [ 91].The narrow-spectrum units emit light on a relatively nar -
row range such as the argon-ion lasers and light-emitting
diodes . Those devices emit light mainly on absorption
range of the camphorquinone, the photoinitiator used by
most of the composite manufacturers. However, when using
narrow-spectrum devices, knowledge and attention from the
operator are required to properly select the restorative materials, to avoid those which do not contain camphorquinone
. The general technical details of the different devices are
presented next.
13.7.1 Quartz-Tungsten-Halogen Unit
The quartz-tungsten-halogen (QTH) light-curing units were
the first visible light-curing devices created and were considered the standard curing units for several years. They have as
basic components the light emission source (light bulb and
reflector), UV and infrared band-pass filters, light guide,
cooling fan, and a circuit board as it can be seen in
. Fig. 13.6a–e .
13.7.1.1 Light-Emitting Source
The light sources on the conventional devices are incandescent light bulbs. They have a quartz bulb, because this material is much more resistant to the heating than the regular
glass, allowing smaller light bulbs to be manufactured. They
have a tungsten filament, surrounded by a halogen gas on its
interior to preserve the heated filament. They generally have
a power between 50 and watts, so they can emit light with
the necessary radiant emittance . Light is generated when
the filament is heated and starts to glow due to the passage of
the electrical current, which is called incandescence
(. Fig. 13.7). It emits a great variety of wavelengths, especially infrared, as it can be observed in . Fig. 13.8. Only 0.5%
of the emitted energy corresponds to the blue light, useful on
the light-curing process, representing only 1% of the electric
energy consumed, showing inefficient conversion of the elecab c
de
.Fig. 13.6 Internal components of a QTH light-curing unit. a Light
guide; b shield for protection of the operator’s eyes; c band-pass filters;
d QTH light bulb and reflector; e location of the cooling fan
N. Scotti et al.
13
tricity on light [87, 91, ]. The emission spectrum of the
QTH devices coincides with the absorption range of the most
used photoinitiators, such as the camphorquinone and
phenylpropanedione ( . Fig. 13.9 ).
The reflector is an element that comes attached to the light
bulb, which reflects the light generated by the source toward
the exit of the light ( . Fig. 13.7). It has a parabolic shape, and
it is covered by a highly reflective film, called dichroic. The
dichroic reflectors allow the light with wavelengths longer
than nanometers to pass through, reflecting and selecting
only the visible portion of the light, reducing the heat emission . Due to the heating and cooling cycles that occurs
during the use, there may happen condensation of vapors
over its surface, dulling or clouding the reflector, and decreasing its ability to reflect light. It can be cleaned with alcohol
and cotton swabs to renew the its reflexivity .The light output of a QTH bulb reduces during the use,
and the speed of its degradation will depend on the time that
it is used and the number of times it turns on or off during a
given period of time . Therefore, the light output must be
frequently evaluated (3–6 months according to the manufacturer) with devices called radiometers. When there is a
reduction in the output, the bulb replacement must be per -
formed. The QTH bulbs are rated for a lifespan of 80– h,
corresponding to about 2.5 years of clinical service, but may
last three times more under ideal conditions .
There are three main causes for the bulb degradation,
which may decrease the light output of the device, but that
may not be noticed by visual inspection:
1. Blackening of the bulb that covers the tungsten filament
due to the breaking of the halogen cycle, promoting the
reduction of the light output up to 70% .
2. Bulb opacification or “frosting” is characterized by the
white opaque color of the bulb due to devitrification. It
happens because of the crystallization of impurities of
the bulb glass, which blocks the passage of light gener -
ated by the filament, because the penetration of air in the
bulb or by the evaporation of the cement that attach the
bulb to the reflector. This problem may cause a drop of
50% of the light output .
3. Degradation of the reflector, characterized by the loss of
the dichroic reflective film or a white or yellow coating
of oxides developed over the reflector surface. The
degradation of the reflector may promote the reduction
of the light output up to 60% .
13.7.1.2 Band-Pass Filters
They are placed between the bulb and the light pipe. As the
light source of QTH devices produces white light and infrared, two types of band-pass filters are used to make the
device emits blue light with reduced heat, eliminating a significant amount of unnecessary light. The UV band-pass
filter helps to exclude the luminous energy with a wavelength smaller than nm, on the ultraviolet range, which
.Fig. 13.7 QTH incandescent lamp attached to the reflector
Infrared UV Visible
Wavelength (nm) 2500Radiant flux (μW/nm)
.Fig. 13.8 Total emission spectrum of a QTH lamp (black line). The
blue area corresponds to the emission spectrum of the light-curing
unit after passing through the band-pass filters400 460Absorbance (AU)
RadiantfluxCamphorquinon e
Phen yl-propanedion e
Lucirin TPO
Wavelength (nm)
.Fig. 13.9 Emission spectrum of a QTH light-curing unit (blue area)
in relation to the spectral absorption profiles of the more commonly
used photoinitiators (lines)
Light-Curing Units
13
does not contribute on the polymerization of the resinous
materials and may damage the eyes. The infrared band-pass
filter blocks the infrared radiation, above nm, gener -
ated by the halogen bulb. It also does not contribute on the
polymerization and may generate heating of the tooth
structure, promoting irreversible damage to the pulp and
soft tissues which are being irradiated . The filters must
be cleaned on regular bases to remove any deposited residues that may reduce the passage of the light. On those
cases, a cotton swab soaked on a camera lens cleaning solution may be used . In . Fig. 13.10a, b , new and the
degraded band-pass filters are shown, after a great number
of heating and cooling cycles . The filters degradation
blocks the passage of light, resulting on an inefficient light
curing.
13.7.1.3 Light Guide
The light guide, also called light pipe or tip, delivers the filtered light energy to the area of application, inside the oral
cavity [ 16]. It is basically a fiber optical bundle that varies in
size, shape, and diameter according to manufacture of lightcuring unit and can be a flexible cable or a hard tip .The early QTH light-curing units, namely countertop
units, contain all the functional parts, such as the light source,
filters, and fan in one box located far from the hand of the
operator. The light was conducted through a flexible cord with
an optical fiber bundle or a conductive fluid. The great advantage of those devices was that the noise of the fan and the heat
produced by the light source were located far from the operating field . However, more than 20% of the optical fibers
would break due to folding or acute curvature of the cable
during the use and due to the extreme optical fibers fragility,
which generally have to be replaced due to the loss of the light
output [ 16]. They are no longer used in the current devices.
The light-curing units with a hard light guide or pistol
shaped are the most commonly used nowadays . On this
model, the light bulb, filters, and light guide are held by the
operator during the use. The light guide is an optical fiber
bundle sheathed by an amber glass or metal coat with a
length between 38 and 85 mm ( . Fig. 13.11a–e ) . The
thin coating of amber-colored glass has a refractive index
that the light trying to escape is reflected internally back,
reducing the loss of light intensity through the sides of the
guide. The diameter of the guide on the tip may vary between
a
b .Fig. 13.10 The UV and
infrared band-pass filters. a New;
b damaged
N. Scotti et al.
13
2 and 13 mm, depending on the of application place and the
access . Generally, the diameter is around 7–8 mm .
The varieties of the interchangeable light guide shapes allow
a more ergonomic use in several clinical situations.
Some manufacturers produce a turbo light guide, which
increases the light output in up to 52%, by decreasing the
diameter of the exit in relation to the entrance of light
(. Fig. 13.11c ) [15, 16, 41, 87]. Recently, to reduce the cost of
the devices, the manufactures started to produce light guides
made with polymers, which are intended to be disposable
. This type of guide must not be touched on the sides
during the light curing, avoiding that part of the light transmitted would be lost ( . Fig. 13.11d ) .
The light transmitted through the light guide tip tends to
be concentrated in the center of the optical fiber bundle, with
a significant reduction on the periphery. That inhomogeneous emittance distribution across the light tips may cause a
nonuniform curing of the composite increment which
receives the light, being greater on the central area
(. Fig. 13.12 ). To evaluate the existence of large discrepancy
on this distribution, a piece of cardboard or thick paper can
be placed on the tip of the guide and then turning the light on
and observing if it is or not evenly distributed .
The optical fiber guide is composed by several fibers
grouped. To evaluate the quality of the guide, it can be
removed from the device and placed over the pages of a book
and observe the image formed. On the good quality guides,
the environmental light enters the optical fibers and reaches
the paper, being reflected back and forming a clear image on
the tip of the guide. On low-quality guides, the formed image
is not clear ( . Fig. 13.13a, b ).
An important aspect on the maintenance of the optical
fibers is to avoid its contacts with the uncured composite,
because it will stick to the tip of the guide and adversely affect
the passage of light ( . Fig. 13.14a, b ). For this reason, it must
be covered by a clear PVC cling film sheet before the use,
which will not block the passage of the light.13.7.1.4 Cooling fan
This component promotes the air circulation around the
light bulb, avoiding the overheating of the internal components of the light-curing unit, and it must be kept working the entire time of light production and for a certain time
after the end . The cooling fan is responsible for the char -
acteristic noise of the QTH unit, which must never be used if
the fan is not working, because this would result in the over -
heating and burning out of the incandescent tungsten filament [41, 87].
13.7.1.5 Voltage Regulator
It allows maintaining a constant emission of light, without
having interferences of the electrical oscillations of the power
supply [ 41]. According to Fan et al., line voltage oscillation of
just 10 volts may result in up to 30% reduction of the composite’s depth of cure . The unit which does not have this
integrated component must be connected to an external
regulator.
13.7.2 Plasma Arch Unit
On the plasma arch curing units (PAC), the source of light
emission is a bulb with xenon gas and two electrodes, separated by a small space. A very high electric current is used to
produce an electric arch between the electrodes, creating
light through the ionization of the xenon gas surrounding it,
forming plasma by the disintegration of the atoms of the gas
[11, 87]. The plasma is a highly energized and ionized glowing environment, with very high temperature, that produces
ab cd e
.Fig. 13.11 Light guides. a Metal sheathed guide; b glass sheathed
guide; c turbo guide; d acrylic guide; e light guide of small diameter for
areas of difficult access
.Fig. 13.12 Image of the beam profile in a two-dimensional
representation of the emittance distribution. An inhomogeneous distribution across the light tip can be observed. The red area represents a
greater emittance
Light-Curing Units
13
a radiant white light. That is filtered to remove the ultraviolet
and infrared heating radiation, making the device to emitt
blue light [3, 87, 91].
Of all the produced energy, only 0.2% is used for the light
activation. The radiant emittance may reach mW/cm2,
emitting light with an emission spectrum between and
nm, working with all photoinitiators ( . Fig. 13.15 ). Their higher emittence was claimed to substantially reduce the cur -
ing time. Some manufacturers claimed that a curing for only
3 s with PAC would produce similar material properties,
compared to 40 s of curing with QTH devices [47, 87, 91].
The lifespan of these units is greater than the ones of the
QTH and may vary from to h . It presents a
flexible cord with a conductive fluid, eliminating the fracture
ab
.Fig. 13.13 Light guides of different qualities placed over the same printed word. a In a good-quality light guide is possible to clearly see the
word; b in a budget poor quality light guide, the image suffers distortion
ab .Fig. 13.14 a Unprotected
light guide with composite
residues bonded to the surface; b
light guide correctly protected
by clear PVC cling film
N. Scotti et al.
13
problem commonly found on optical fibers’ bundle cords
(. Fig. 13.16 ). The cost of the equipment and its maintenance
is higher in relation to the QTH devices . The PAC units
showed negative effects on the marginal integrity of the restoration. That was due to the polymerization stress, related to
the higher radiant emittance and reduced pre-gel phase.
Besides, the raising of temperature turned its safety questionable .
13.7.3 Argon-Ion Laser Unit
The word LASER is an acronym for light amplification by
stimulated emission of radiation. For the light production,
the device has the ionized argon as the active medium, inside
an optical resonator cavity. It produces laser light by a quantum process known as stimulated emission of radiation. The
argon-ion laser units (AL) have been used for curing of resinous materials, emitting monochromatic blue light in a very
narrow emission spectrum, from to nm, coincident
with the absorption spectrum of the camphorquinone. The
peak of emission occurs in nm, without production of
infrared or ultraviolet ( . Fig. 13.17 ) .
The light beam produced by the laser is coherent, with all
photons with same frequency and polarization, besides
being collimated, with photons in the same direction of
motion and minimum divergence. These characteristics
result on a large amount of energy concentrated on a small
irradiation area. In addition, there is no significant loss of
energy reaching the material when the distance between the
tip of the light guide and the composite is increased, differ -
ent of what is observed with the other kinds of curing units
[36, 91, ]. The radiant emittance varies from to 1.
mW/cm2. However, due to the typical photons concentration of the laser devices, the risk of damage to the retina is
increased, and there is the need to use safety glasses, for the
dentist and patient, to avoid the contact with the light on a
direct and/or reflected way [36, 43]. The AL units have as
disadvantages the high cost and the non-polymerization of
Wavelength (nm)Absorbance (AU)
Radiant fluxCamphorquinon e
Phen yl-propanedion e
Lucirin TPO
.Fig. 13.15 Emission spectrum of a PAC curing unit (Sapphire –
DenMat) (blue area) in relation to the spectral absorption profiles of
the more commonly used photoinitiators (lines)
.Fig. 13.16 Plasma arch curing unit (Sapphire – DenMat)Camphorquinon e
Phenyl-propanedione
Lucirin TPO
Radiant fluxAbsorbance (AU)
20 80
Wavelength (nm)
.Fig. 13.17 Emission spectrum of an argon-ion laser curing unit
(AccuCure – Laser Med) (blue area) in relation to the spectral absorp -
tion profiles of the more commonly used photoinitiators (lines)
Light-Curing Units
13the composites with photoinitiators other than camphorquinone [ 69]. In addition, the emittance is also very high, which
reduces the curing time but also the pre-gel phase, increasing the shrinkage stress. An example of an AL device is presented in . Fig. 13.18 .
13.7.4 Light-Emitting Diode Unit
The light-emitting diodes, or LED units replaced the QTH
devices for light-activation of the composites . The LED
technology was originally developed by NASA to stimulate
the growing of plants in space, and it is frequently used on
electronic devices and computers . The light is produced
through a quantum process of luminous radiation emission
called electroluminescence, using junctions of doped semiconductors (p-n junctions) for the generation of light .
Under this situation, holes and electrons recombine at the
LED junction creating light that is focused by a small lens.
The composition of the semiconductor materials is the factor
which determines the wavelength and color of the light produced, without infrared emission. Therefore, it does not
require band-pass filters. On the case of the blue wavelength
LED, the semiconductors are composed of indium gallium
nitride (InGaN) with an emission spectrum between and
nm and a peak at nm, producing an almost ideal
bandwidth of the light, corresponding to the absorption
range of camphorquinone ( . Fig. 13.19 ) .
> The LED produces light through a quantum process of
luminous radiation emission called electroluminescence. Only blue light is created, without infrared
emission.
The LED lifespan is about 10, h, in comparison with the
80– h of the QTH lamps . LEDs consume less electric
energy than QTHs and generally do not require external
cooling. The low heat emission, an important aspect in rela-tion to the pulpal tissue damage risk, is one of the great
advantages of those devices . However, light-activated
materials which do not use camphorquinone as the photoinitiators may not be properly cured by devices emitting only
blue light.
Chronologically, the LED units may be classified into
first, second, and third generations. The first light-curing
units produced, classified as the first generation, presented a
simple design, consisting of an array of several relatively lowpowered LED chips assembled together, resulting on devices
with radiant emittance smaller than mW/cm2
(. Fig. 13.22a ) . They showed poor curing performance
compared with conventional QTH lights, requiring much
longer exposure times to provide a similar level of curing.
The second-generation devices are characterized by having a single high-power LED chip, of much higher surface
area and radiant emittance than the first-generation ones
(> mW/cm2) (. Fig. 13.22b ). The devices of this generations have an improved design; are more ergonomic and por -
table, with or without batteries ( . Fig. 13.20a, b ) .
The third-generation devices contain, in addition to the
blue wavelength emission LED ( – nm), others that
emit light on the violet wavelength (around nm). They
are called polywave or broad-spectrum light-curing LED
units . As examples on the market are Valo (Ultradent)
and Bluephase (Ivoclair/Vivadent) units, allowing the light
curing of resinous materials with photoinitiators different
from camphorquinone ( . Fig. 13.21 ). The Valo unit has an
emission spectrum between and nm, having LEDs
with three different emission peaks, which are nm (1
LED), nm (1 LED), and nm (2 LEDs) ( . Fig. 13.22c ).
The radiant emittance can be adjusted to mW/cm2,
mW/cm2, and mW/cm2. The Bluephase device has
two LEDs, which emit blue light with a peak at nm, and
one LED with peak at nm. It has programs which allow
adjusting the radiant emittance on , , and mW/
cm2. The programs for large irradiance are indicated for
cementation of indirect ceramic restorations and bonding of
.Fig. 13.18 Argon-ion laser curing unit (AccuCure – Laser Med)Camphorquinone
Phenyl-propanedione
Lucirin TPO
Radiant fluxAbsorbance (AU)
Wavelength (nm )
.Fig. 13.19 Emission spectrum of a narrow-spectrum blue LED
curing unit (blue area) in relation to the spectral absorption profiles of
the more commonly used photoinitiators (lines)
N. Scotti et al.
13
orthodontic brackets. The main advantage of polywave LED
units is that all composites could be properly polymerized
with them.
In terms of composite wear resistance and curing effectiveness, there is no consensus in literature whether
monowave are better or worse than polywave units. Minor
differences in both directions have been reported from different studies [1, 40, 63, 71, 93]. A study reported that polywave curing units could provide a higher conversion degree
from Bis-GMA/TEGDMA mixture when compared to
monowave, regardless of initiator type . However, it was
highlighted that the homogeneity of the radiation beam,
related to an accurate collimation of the different lightemitting diodes, is crucial. Price et al. commented that the
not uniform spectral distribution in polywave curing lights
tips could affect the resulting properties of some light-curing
resins and their potential long-term success . Several authors, through imaging capture of the beam profile, concluded that, regarding emittance uniformity, thirdgeneration
units have hot spots of high emittance related to the location
of the LED chips and thus a nonuniform emittance output [ 99]. . Figure 13.23 shows the lack of emittance unifor -
mity of different polywave light-curing units.
However, it can be clinically appreciated that, depending
on the light-curing unit orientation, different parts of the
composite resin restoration in a MOD cavity would receive
very different wavelengths and energies. The wide range of
spectral radiant energy emitted on the surface consequently
result in a nonhomogeneous curing of the restoration . It
could be suggested to move the polywave lamp by only few
millimeters when light curing a resin-based restoration.
However, the results of beam inhomogeneity may not be so
clinically evident .
> The polywave curing units have lack of emittance
uniformity for the light produced by the different LEDs,
creating hot spots of high emittance related to the
location of the LED chips. The not uniform spectral
distribution in curing lights tips could affect the
resulting properties of the composites, by a
nonhomogeneous curing of the restoration, impairing
their potential long-term success.
13.8 Monitoring of the Light Output
For the proper curing of a composite, it is necessary a light
source with correct emission spectrum and enough light
intensity. A very important point, when performing the light
curing of a restorative material, is the fact that the dentist is
not capable to distinguish between a correctly and insufficiently cured composite, due to the fact that an improper
ab .Fig. 13.20 Second-generation narrow-spectrum LED curing
units. a Free Light Elipar 2 (3 M);
b Radii-cal (SDI)
Camphorquinone
Phenyl-propanedion e
Lucirin TPO
Radiant fluxAbsorbance (AU)
20
Wavelength (nm)405nm445nm465nm
.Fig. 13.21 Emission spectrum of a polywave third-generation LED
light-curing unit base (Valo – Ultradent) in relation to the spectral
absorption profiles of the more commonly used photoinitiators (lines)
Light-Curing Units
13
light-curing device is capable to polymerize the surface of a
composite layer as good as a proper one .
Different from the chemically activated composites,
which cure on a uniform manner if the mixing of the two
pastes was effective, the light-activated materials polymerize
only where the light is capable to reach, since it is attenuated
during the passage through the material . Frequent evaluation should be performed to ensure that the device is emitting the required minimum amount of light. Despite what
may be thought, the bare eye is not sensible enough to detect
any change on the light-curing unit emittance, being required
the use of electronic sensors .
The radiant emittance, radiant exitance, or just emittance of a light-curing unit is the radiant power (flux) emitted by a surface per unit area. It is measured when the light
tip is in direct contact with the light detector. The SI unit for it is the milliwatt per square centimeter (mW/cm2) [3,
16, 87]. The most precise and recognized method for radiant emittance evaluation is the integration sphere, being
considered the gold standard. However, it is very expensive
and not adequate for the dental office use. The radiometer
is a less expensive device developed for this purpose .
On the other hand, it cannot be calibrated and provide
only approximate values, being adequate just for relative
evaluation. It should be frequently used by the dentist to
follow the emittance of his device, detecting any significant
changes that could impair the proper curing procedure.
Due to its clinical importance, some companies provide
curing-light charging stations with an integrated radiometer (. Fig. 13.24 ).
For the QTH units, the radiometer measures the wavelength range from to nm ( . Fig. 13.24a ). In this
ab
c
.Fig. 13.22 LED chips of different generations of light-curing units.
a First generation, array of several relatively low-powered LED chips
assembled together; b second generation, a single high-power LED chip (Radii-cal – SDI); c third generation, group of high-power LEDs
with different emission spectrum (Valo – Ultradent)
N. Scotti et al.
13
range is the maximum spectral absorption of camphorquinone, the most common photoinitiator of the resinous materials [ 16, 87]. Due to the fact that on the regular LED units
the emission spectrum is narrower, on the range from to
nm, specific radiometers have been developed for them
(. Fig. 13.24c ). Therefore, to measure the irradiance using a
radiometer, it is important to take into account the type of
light-curing device which is being evaluated (QTH, PAC, AL,
or LED) and the spectral measurement range of the radiometer. The radiometer with a broad wavelength measurement
range will measure every light produced by a LED unit, but a
dedicated LED radiometer, with a narrower measurement range, will not measure the entire energy emitted by a QTH
or PAC. Most regular radiometers are also not adequate for
measuring the radiant emittance of polywave thirdgeneration LED units, although some manufactures have
developed more advanced radiometers for those devices,
such as the Bluephase Meter II (Ivoclar Vivadent).
Since to the distance between the light tip and the target
can vary, the amount of energy measured when the light tip
touches the detector of a measuring device (radiant emittance) does not represent the actual amount of light that will
reach the material to be light cured. The radiant power incident on a known surface area is called irradiance (incident
a b
c d
e
.Fig. 13.23 Images of the beam profile of different thirdgeneration
polywave LED units a –d, showing nonuniform emittance outputs, in
comparison to the homogeneous beam profile of a QTH unit (E). Hot spots of high emittance are related to the location of the LED chips. a
Translux (Kulzer), b Valo (Ultradent); c Bluephase (Ivoclar Vivadent); d
Demi Ultra LED (Kerr); e Swiss Master Light (EMS)
Light-Curing Units
13irradiance). At 0 mm of distance between the light source
and the surface of the light detector, the radiant emittance
and the incident irradiance will be the same.
According to the total energy concept, a proper curing of
the composite depends on the amount of energy absorbed by
the material and can be summarized by the multiplication of
irradiance by the time of exposure. The more recent studies
showed that an energy density of 16 J/cm2 (16, mWs/cm2)
is the necessary energy dose to properly cure a 2 mm increment of the composite. The curing time necessary to reach this
energy dose will depend on the final irradiance by the lightcuring device. Considering a composite in direct contact with
the light source (emittance = irradiance), for a curing unit
with radiant emittance of mW/cm2, an exposure time of
40 s would be necessary (40 s × mW/cm2 = 16, mWs/
cm2 or 16 J/cm2), while for a curing unit with radiant emittance of mW/cm2, an exposure time of just 20 s would be
enough (20 s × mW/cm2 = 16, mWs/cm2 or 16 J/cm2).
Besides to control the visible light emission, the curing
units that generate infrared radiation, such as the QTH and
PAC, must be evaluated using a heat/glare radiometer
(. Fig. 13.24b ). They measure the emittance in the wavelength spectrum between and nm. The infrared
emittance higher than 50 mW/cm2 will result on an intense
overheating of the tooth structure and damage to the pulpal
tissue. According to Zack and Cohen, on a study applying
heat on monkey’s teeth, an increase of the pulpal temperature
greater than 5.5 °C leads to pulpal necrosis in 15% of the
cases . If the dentist does not have this type of device,
the pinky finger can be placed over the tip of the light guide
and the device activated for 3 consecutive min. If there is the
sensation of unbearable heat, the infrared band-pass filter
has a defect .High-powered LED units, such as the secondand thirdgeneration ones, can also produce potentially high thermal
emissions and damages to the pulpal tissue. Despite the
absence of infrared emission, the high emittance levels can
increase the chip temperature. Therefore, those devices need
a way to dissipate the internal heat, using thermal conductive
materials in the structure or cooling fans.
The evaluation of a new light-curing unit with a radiometer should be performed to detect any manufacturing
defect, and the baseline radiant emittance be recorder for
relative further comparisons. When measuring the emittance, the same light guide must be used every time the test
is performed, removing any cross-infection control barriers
from the tip. The surface of the light guide tip must be positioned parallel to the surface of the radiometer port. The
test must be repeated periodically, and if any reduction in
the light output is noticed, the components of the device
must be evaluated [16, 87]. An insufficient polymerization
reduces the strength of the material, increasing the wear,
solubility, and water sorption, making it more susceptible
to staining It also increases the potential of pulpal irritation,
due to the leaching of unpolymerized free residual monomers .
Tip
The evaluation of a new light-curing unit with a radiometer should be performed, and the baseline radiant emit -
tance be recorded for relative further comparisons. The
unit must be frequently checked to ensure the use of the
adequate amount of energy necessary for the selected
curing time.
ab c
.Fig. 13.24 a Radiometer for QTH curing units (3 K, Spirith Health); b heat/glare radiometer (Demetron); c radiometer for narrowspectrum LED
devices (Kondortech)
N. Scotti et al.
13
Moreover, the autoclave sterilization promotes the clouding of the optical fibers on the light guide tip after several
cycles, reducing the passage of light. Therefore, if there are
residues deposited on the light guide, or after 50 cycles of ster -
ilization, the surface must be polished with fine grains polishing discs or rubbers points, recovering the free passage of
the light. Between each patient, the external surface of the
light curing must be disinfected, and the light guide must be
disinfected or sterilized in autoclave. Then, the light guide
must be covered with clear PVC cling film sheet, as an infection control surface barrier, as well as the area where the dentist holds the device.
13.9 Curing Protocols
The knowledge about the kinetics of the composite polymer -
ization, the cavity configuration factor, and shrinkage vectors
direction allowed the development of special clinical procedures to reduce the negative effects of the polymerization
shrinkage. Among them are the incremental layering technique, as described on the following chapters, and the differ -
ent curing protocols [3, 87]. The light-curing protocols may
be divided in conventional, where the irradiance is maintained in the full power during the curing time, and gradual,
where the irradiance changes during the cycle.
13.9.1 Conventional Protocol
As known as uniform and continuous or full-power curing
cycle, the maximum power output is applied from the beginning to the end of the cycle, and it is maintained constant. In
order to obtain an ideal polymerization, it is important to
guarantee that the restorative material will receive the necessary energy density [3 , 80, 92]. Some studies evaluating the
radiant emittance of light-curing devices in use on dental
clinics have shown that 60% of the analyzed devices had an
emittance smaller than mW/cm2, which is the minimum
acceptable level for the 40s of exposure and a 2 mm increment . Therefore, even using the exposure time recommended by the manufacturer, the composite will not reach
good mechanical properties due to the low emittance .
Other important aspect is that the light must be maintained
steady over the surface of the restoration, during the entire
irradiation time of the cycle. For that, the diameter of the
light guide must cover the entire area to be cured. If the diameter is smaller than the preparation, the curing must be per -
formed in areas, and the cycle must be repeated on each one.
If there are two preparations, the curing of the first one must
be concluded, with the light being applied during the total
required time for the first preparation. After that, the procedure is repeated on the second preparation. That is, the light
must never be moved from one preparation to another dur -
ing the irradiation, trying to accelerate the process, because
none of them will receive the required light energy dose.Tip
If there are two preparations, the curing on the first one
must be concluded before starting on the second.
Therefore, the light must never be moved from one
preparation to another during the irradiation, trying to
accelerate the process, because none of them will
receive the required light energy dose
Another point to be considered is that, with exception to
AL, the curing-light beam has no collimation and the light
beam spreads in a certain angle. When the distance between
the light guide tip and the composite is increased, the light
spread is higher, reducing the amount of incident irradiance. Therefore, distance from the light guide tip to the
material to be cured should be as close as possible, generally
1–2 mm. The incident irradiance striking the material is
inversely proportional to the distance, due to the divergence
of the light beam and the light scattering by the molecules in
the air on the path to the restoration, reducing the amount
of photons that may reach the surface of the composite [80,
88]. However, the ideal distance may not always be possible
on several dental procedures, due to the anatomy of the
tooth or the distance from the occlusal surface to some
walls, such as the gingival walls on Class II preparations.
Therefore, distances from 5 to 6 mm are frequently found
due to the depth of the preparation ( . Fig. 13.25 ) . In
general, the light dissipates proportional to the square of the
distance. That is, if the distance between the material and
the light is doubled, the incident irradiance will be reduced
to 1/4 of the initial one .
.Fig. 13.25 Real curing distance on the proximal box of posterior
teeth when the composite is applied on the gingival wall
Light-Curing Units
13Tip
When the distance between the light tip and the
composite is increased, the light spread is higher,
reducing the amount of incident irradiance. Therefore,
distance from the light guide tip to the material to be
cured should be as close as possible, generally 1–2 mm.
. Figure 13.26 shows data of the relation between the distance of the light guide tip to the composite surface and the
incident irradiance reaching on the surface, using different
QTH and LED light-curing units. It can be observed that
when the distance was between 5 and 8 mm, every unit
tested, despite the radiant emittance measured on the direct
contact with the tip of the light guide, reached the critical
level of incident irradiance below mW/cm2 on the material surface, showing the importance to maintain the light
guide tip as close as possible to the material to be cured.
It is also observed that irradiance reduction increasing
the distance was greater for some devices than others, indi-01
Distanc e (mm)
Optilux Emitter A RadiiCalmW/cm2
.Fig. 13.26 Relation between the distance of the light guide tip to
the composite layer surface and the actual irradiance measured on the
surface, using three different light-curing units, QTH – Optilux/
Demetron; LED – Emitter A/Schuster; LED – Radii-cal/SDI)
ab
cd
.Fig. 13.27 Angle of beam spread of different light-curing units. a Optical fiber light guide (CLK – Kondortech); b optical fiber light guide
(Free Light Elipar 2, 3 M/Espe); c light guide free curing unit (Radii-cal, SDI); d light guide free curing unit (Valo, Ultradent)
N. Scotti et al.
13
cating that the angle of beam spread varies from device to
device (. Fig. 13.27 ). Trying to increase the irradiance, some
manufacturers produced tapered light guides with the tip of
smaller diameter than the entrance of light, called turbo light
guides (. Fig. 13.11c ). Even though this characteristic may
concentrate the light on a smaller area on the tip of the light
guide, increasing the irradiance when on direct contact with
the material, it has an adverse effect on the angle of beam
spread, scattering the light even more. The higher is the angle
of beam spread, the smaller is the incident irradiance over
the material to be cured when the distance is increased. The
parallel-walled (standard) light guides present smaller angle
of beam spread ( . Fig. 13.27a–d ).
The average adult male open the mouth around 43 mm
from upper to lower incisor edges, with a maximum of
55 mm . This represents a very small space, especially
when working on the posterior region. Most of the lightcuring units on the market have a bended light guide to
access the posterior teeth. However, in most of the cases, it is
hard to place the tip of light guide perpendicular to the
occlusal surface of the tooth to be restorated, making the
light to strike the restoration at an angle, called incident beam angle, generally close to 40° ( . Fig. 13.28a, b ). Another
location where the access is also hindered is on the buccal
surface of the posterior teeth, because the cheeks adversely
affect the proper position of the light guide tip. To overcome
this problem, some manufacturers developed light guide free
curing units. On the unit shown in . Fig. 13.28c , even though
the LED chip is on the tip and it has no light guide, the handpiece has an angle bend which adversely affects to place the
tip at 90° in relation to the occlusal surface. On the wandstyle design unit shown in . Fig. 13.28d , there are no angles
on the handpiece, and the LED is placed perpendicular to the
long axis of the device. That simplifies the access to difficult
locations, even on patients with small mouth opening, allowing the light to be applied in right angle in relation to the
surface to be restored.
When the incident beam angle exceeds 30°, a large
amount of light energy reflects off the surface and is not
absorbed by the composite ( . Fig. 13.29 ). This results in a
critical loss of power, adversely affecting the polymerization.
On hard-to-reach restoration locations, the incident beam
angle is increased, reducing the incident irradiance and the
curing effectiveness, increasing the failures possibility.
ab
cd
.Fig. 13.28 Position of the light guide tip in relation to the occlusal
surface inside the simulated oral cavity, with a mouth opening of
43 mm. Depending on the bend of the light guide, the incident beam
angle in relation to the occlusal surface may vary. a , b Light-curing units with optical fibers light guide; c light guide free curing unit with
LED chip on the tip but with a bend on the handpiece (Radii-cal, SDI); d
light guide free curing unit with LED chip on the tip, with a
straight handpiece (Valo, Ultradent)
Light-Curing Units
13 > In some areas it is very hard to place the tip of light
guide perpendicular to the restoration surface, making
the light to strike the restoration at an angle, called
incident beam angle. The higher is that angle, the
smaller will be the incident irradiance and the light
curing.
Another point to be analyzed is that when the curing light
penetrates the composite layer, due to its absorption and
scattering, the amount of energy that reaches the bottom area
is smaller than the one that strikes the surface, reducing the
curing efficacy in this region . Therefore, the depth of
cure consists on the maximum thickness that each composite
layer may be applied to reach a good conversion degree of the
monomers on its bottom . According to Rueggeberg
et al. , increments of 2 mm thick are considered acceptable, since the irradiance and the time of exposure allow the
total energy density required . It is recommended that
the microhardness, on the bottom of the composite layer,
should reach at least 80% of the value on the surface for a
material to be considered properly cured .
Besides irradiance, other factors which can interfere on the
depth of cure are the shade and translucency of the restor -
ative material. The darker and less translucent the composite,
the larger is the addition of pigments and opacifying agents
on the formulation; this makes necessary an increase of exposure time or the use of thinner increments (1mm) in order to
obtain the same depth of cure and degree of conversion [13, 87, 88]. The kind and size of filler particles on the composition may also interfere on the depth of cure by changing the
light scattering. The closer the filler particle size to the wavelength of the curing light, the higher will be the scattering and
smaller the light transmission through the composite. The
microfilled composites have a significant level of scattering
and reduced depth of cure due to this filler characteristic .
For the new bulk fill composites, its higher translucency
allows a proper curing of increment up to 4–5 mm.
Due to all the difficulties to obtain an adequate polymer -
ization on the intraoral environment, the curing time should
be increase at least in 50% from the recommended by the
composite manufacturer, since this time is calculated on
ideal conditions . The time recommended by the manufacturer is the minimum necessary, assuming that all other
variables are not interfering. There is no damage for the restoration when receiving more light than the necessary,
although the opposite is not true .
Tip
Due to all the difficulties to obtain an adequate polymerization on the intraoral environment, the curing time
should be increased at least in 50% from the recommended by the composite manufacturer, since this time
is calculated on ideal conditions. There is no damage for
the restoration when receiving more light than the nec -
essary, although the opposite is not true.
13.9.2 Gradual Curing Protocols
On this technique, the curing speed is diminished through
the reduction of irradiance on the beginning of the cycle,
prolonging the pre-gel phase . It may be performed on
different ways, such as the pulse delay or soft start in ramp
and step. Several studies have shown the capacity of these
protocols on reduction of the shrinkage stress and improvement of marginal integrity of the restoration.
13.9.2.1 Pulse-Delay Protocol
It is performed only on the last composite increment of the
restoration, which is responsible for the sealing of the restoration margins . The preparation must be filled with
composite increments of a maximum thickness of 2 mm;
each one is light-cured using a curing unit with a minimum
radiant emittance of mW/cm2 for 40s. The last increment is light cured for only 3 s with low incident irradiance,
for example, mW/cm2 in devices where the emittance
can be adjusted, or moving away the light guide tip from the
surface. Then the occlusal adjustment and finishing of the
restoration are performed, postponing the final curing,
increasing the pre-gel phase. After that, the final light curing
is performed with the maximum irradiance, during the cor -
responding exposure time to reach the total energy density
of 16 J/cm2 .The depth of cure consists on the maximum thickness
that each composite layer may be applied to reach a
good conversion degree of the monomers on its
bottom.01 53 04 56
600700Irradiance (mW/cm2)
Incident beam angle0%4.1%
29.9%
70.0%
80.1%
.Fig. 13.29 Effect on incident beam angle in relation to the tooth
surface and the incident irradiance. At the top of each column, the
percentage of the irradiance reduction is presented. The higher is the
angle, the smaller is the irradiance
N. Scotti et al.
13
13.9.2.2 Soft Start Protocols
With these techniques, the exposures to the light are per -
formed continuously, using light-curing units that have this
program on the software, or by hand using conventional
units and moving away the light guide tip from the surface
. Two methods can be used, which are the ramp and step.
Ramp Cycle
The ramp cycle may be performed automatically with lightcuring units that already have this curing mode ( . Fig. 13.30a )
or by hand bringing the light guide close to the restoration
(. Fig. 13.30b ) . When performed automatically, the irradiance starts low (generally close to mW/cm2) and
increases linearly during around 10s until the maximum output, remaining that way during the rest of the cycle. On the
hand method, the light guide tip is maintained for 20 s at a
distance of more or less 2–3 cm from the tooth surface, resulting on an irradiance of approximately ± mW/cm2, depending on the maximum emittance of the curing unit . The
greater the maximum irradiance, the greater the distance must
be . Then, the light guide is gradually brought closer during
10 s up to 1 mm from the surface and kept for 40 s more .
Step Cycle
On this protocol, the polymerization process is started with a
relatively low and constant irradiance, which is maintained
for some seconds. Consecutively, the light unit automatically
increases the power output to a much higher power (usually
the maximum of light) for the rest of the cycle. This method
can be performed with units that have an automatic program
or through a hand technique. On the curing units where
emittance may be adjusted or have this curing mode, the
restorative material is exposed to the light with low irradiance ( mW/cm2) for 5–10 s, and the polymerization is
completed on the maximum output for the rest of the time.
On the hand technique, the light guide tip is maintained at a
distance of ±1 cm from the surface ( mW/cm2) during 10
s. After 5 s, the guide is brought closer to the surface, and the curing is completed with maximum power for 40 s [87, ]
(. Fig. 13.31a, b ).
13.9.2.3 Indirect Curing Technique
In order to either reduce the curing light irradiance or control the shrinkage, an indirect curing technique could be per -
formed. In some clinical conditions, when remaining cavity
walls are thin, light cure through the access of the cavity
using a high emittance light-curing unit can led to high
deflection of the remaining tooth structure, in consequence
of the shrinkage stress at the adhesive interface. Sometimes,
an immediate crack propagation could be observed on the
remaining cavity wall, leading to postoperative sensitivity
and risks of fracture in the immediate future ( . Fig. 13.22 ).
In such conditions, Dietschi and Spreafico suggested to
perform an indirect curing technique: The curing tip is positioned in contact of the residual wall, and the composite layer
is cured through the enamel and dentin ( . Fig. 15.6l and o).
The final irradiance on the composite in contact to the preparation wall is reduced, due to the light-scattering effect of
enamel and dentin tissues, which will increase the pre-gel
phase and reduce the shrinkage stress.
13.10 Polymerization of Indirect
Restorations
The light absorption of indirect restorative materials
depends on their composition, thickness, shade, and opacity. The Beer–Lambert law relates the attenuation of light to
the properties of the material through which the light is
travelling. Lambert’s law stated that absorbance of a material sample is directly proportional to its thickness (path
length). Much later, August Beer discovered another attenuation relation in . Beer’s law stated that absorbance is
proportional to the concentrations of the attenuating species in the material sample. The modern derivation of the
Beer–Lambert law combines the two laws and correlates the Time Time
mW/cm2mW/cm2ab
.Fig. 13.30 Graphic representation of the ramp curing protocol. a Automatic; b by hand
Light-Curing Units
13
absorbance to both the concentrations of the attenuating
species and the thickness of the material sample. Thus,
when curing an indirect restoration, light is attenuated by
the indirect materials employed, which are commonly composite resins, glass, and polycrystalline (or zirconia) ceramics, and presents different optical and light absorption
properties that influence light attenuation during light activation of an underlying resin cement ( . Fig. 13.33 ) [74,
]. To overcome the effects of curing-light attenuation,
dual-cured cementing systems were developed, having both
light and chemically activation mechanisms. Some of them
are used in combination with adhesive systems containing
co-initiators, such as sulfinic acid salts, that produce free
radicals and contribute to the polymerization reaction of
the resin cements [5 , 14]. As indirect restoration can
decrease the degree of conversion promoted by light polymerization of resin cementing systems, increasing the curing
time until 60 seconds can be recommended to compensate
the light attenuation [56, 65]. Some authors suggested to
lute indirect adhesive partial restoration with preheated
light-curing restorative composites instead of dual-curing
resin cements. Clinically, the use of a composite as luting agent could give some advantages, such as easy excess
removal and better biomechanics at the adhesive interface.
To limit the difficulties in reaching high degree of conver -
sion, a preheating until 55 °C is suggested in order to
obtain a greater mobility of monomer molecules within the
resin matrix and enhances free radical formation, which
results in a higher degree of conversion and shorten curing
time [2 , 19]. The increased mobility of monomers at elevated temperature can lead to delayed auto deceleration
stage of the polymerization reaction, thus contributing to
increased monomer conversion .
13.11 Fiber Post Cementation
Fiber posts are nowadays widely used to restore endodontically treated teeth. They bond well to the tooth structure,
which increases retention of the post, reinforces root structure internally, and improves resistance to tooth fracture.
However, adhesion inside the root canal can be impaired by
several factors, such as the adverse geometric feature of the
root canal , the peculiar characteristics of the post space
ab
.Fig. 13.32 a Large cavity on lingual and proximal surfaces of a lateral incisor; b after composite restoration, an immediate crack propagation
was observed on the labial surface due to the shrinkage stressTime TimemW/cm2mW/cm2ab
.Fig. 13.31 Graphic representation of the step curing protocol. a Automatic; b by hand
N. Scotti et al.
13
, and possible incompatibilities between simplified adhesives and dual-cure resin-based cements
One of the most important aspect in luting of a fiber post
into the root canal is reaching an adequate degree of cure, at
deeper areas, of either the adhesive system or the luting
cement . Although self-curing resins exhibit uniform
polymerization, the application of this type of resin into the
canal followed by the post positioning must be performed
very quickly, because polymerization starts after the two
pastes are mixed [34, ]. However, the use of purely lightcured cements is not indicated, because the polymerization is
also limited at depths beyond 2 mm, because the influence of
reduced irradiance produced by the shadowing of the tooth
structure, and the light scattering and attenuation within the
resin cement and the post [30, ]. Therefore, dual-cure
cements are the best choice in the fiber posts luting [38, 75].
They have a chemical-curing system that can achieve a more
extensive polymerization in dark locations , while also
providing a light-curing mechanism that allows a rapid initial hardening of the resin cement to stabilize the restoration
. Both the lightand chemical-curing mechanisms are
complementary but independent .Although chemical curing is responsible for polymerization at sites not reached by light, the chemical polymerization component in some dual-cure resin composites has
been described as slower, less effective [12, 79], or virtually
ineffective [6, 26]. Therefore, translucent fiber posts were
introduced to overcome the problem of lack of curing in
deep locations with limited penetration of light . The efficacy of these light-transmitting posts has been supported by
several studies [75, 89]. However, some in vitro studies stated
that widely used translucent posts have been shown to ineffectively transmit light to the apical region . In fact, even
being translucent, fiber posts will limit light transmission to
values lower than 40% of incident light, and may not guarantee an adequate degree of conversion of the resin especially at
the tip end ( . Fig. 13.34 ) .
Thus, in order to reach the maximum degree of conver -
sion possible, besides using a dual-cure resin cement, the
increase of curing time is recommended. Clinically, an
extended time up to 60 seconds is suggested to obtain the
maximum mechanical properties of the luting cements,
which are directly related to the clinical performance and
outcome of fiber-supported restorations.
ab
cd
.Fig. 13.33 a Replacement of a defective indirect restoration on
upper molar; b tooth preparation; c luting of a new indirect restoration
using dual-cure resin cement. The small penetration of light through
the restorative material does not allow a proper photopolymerization of the resin cement on deep areas of the preparation, requiring the
self-curing mechanism for adequate degree of conversion and
bonding; d Final restoration
Light-Curing Units
.12 Ocular Hazards of Curing Lights
The light is a kind of radiant energy, and according to its
wavelength, the amount of energy carried and its effects can
vary. Its interaction with the matter will also depend on the
chemical and physical characteristics of the irradiated tissue.
Due to the intensity of emitted light, the light-curing units
are capable to cause ocular damage to the patient, dentist,
and dental assistant.
The environmental light enters the eyes through the cor -
nea, located in front of the anterior chamber filled with the
aqueous humor ( . Fig. 13.35 ). Then, the beam of light pass
through the iris, a type of adjustable diaphragm, and then
reach the crystalline, a type of lens capable to focus the light
on the retina. It is surrounded by a circular muscle that allows
the constant modification of the focal distance of the eye.
After passing through the crystalline, the light beam crosses
the vitreous humor, hitting the retina. It is formed by a layer
of light sensible cells, which are concentrated on the area
called fovea centralis. This small area of the retina is the main
responsible for the vision .
The human eye is capable to respond only the electromagnetic radiation at the wavelength range between and
nm, and the brain is able to interpret it as color. However,
when considering the harmful effects of the light on the eyes,
it is necessary to analyze the invisible wavelength near the
visible spectrum, that is, the ultraviolet (< nm) and the
infrared waves (> nm). The different parts of the eye act
as filters for the different wavelengths. In . Fig. 13.35 , it is
shown the components of the human eye and its interaction
with the several wavelengths. The cornea is first irradiated
and filters the electromagnetic waves with wavelengths
smaller than nm, which reduces the amount of UV that
enters the aqueous humor. The crystalline absorbs the waves with wavelength between and nm, basically avoiding that the UV radiation hits the retina. The visible light
freely goes through the cornea and the crystalline, hitting
the retina .
The excessive exposure and the absorption of the UV
radiation by the cornea lead to cellular damage due to the
nuclear fragmentation of the corneal epithelium. The loss of
the cohesion between the epithelium and the stroma also
happens on the crystalline and may cause a progressive loss
of transparency, called cataract, due to a cumulative photochemical damage over the lens proteins [ , ]. For this
reason, the UV light-curing units were totally removed from
the market.
In relation to the damage produced by the visible light
and infrared to the retina, Ham et al. described three types of
aggressions . The first is the mechanical breaking of the
retinal structure, resulting from high-power shock waves,
using short radiation pulses absorbed by the retinal pigment
epithelium. The second is a thermal damage in the retina,
which results from the absorption of enough energy to
increase the retinal temperature in at least 10 °C above the
body temperature. The third is an actinic damage. It is called
actinic, the capability of light to produce chemical changes
on determined substance. The actinic effect, also called photochemical, is a result from prolonged exposure to short
wavelengths of visible light ( – nm), on irradiance too
low to increase the temperature in more than some degrees
above the body temperature.
The parameters which determine the type of damage to
the retina are the light intensity, duration of exposure, and
the wavelength (color). The intensity that enters in the eye
and the duration of the exposure determine if the damage is
mechanical or thermal. The thermomechanical damage
caused by visible light is intensified by greater irradiance and
small wavelength, such as the blue light, which carries more
energy and may cause true retinal burn [45, 49]. The greater
risks are attributed to the absorption of the focused light on
the retina by the melanin granules in the retinal pigment epiRetina
Vitreous humor
CrystallineAqueous humorCorneaInfr aredVisibleUVIris
.Fig. 13.35 Cross section of the human eye illustrating the path of
light and its interaction with the different wavelengths (UV, visible
light, and infrared)
.Fig. 13.34 Transmission of light through a glass fiber post. The
resin cement was applied to the post, on the part intended to be
inserted into the canal (on the left of the image), and the light guide
was placed on the post tip (on the right side of the image). It is possible
to see that the light transmission is reduced during its penetration
through the post (red arrow), and no light reaches the resin cement
after a certain distance from the light source (asterisk on the dark area)
N. Scotti et al.
13
thelium, which can produce a significant heating. This can
lead to the disruption of the photoreceptor’s outer segment,
in relation with the duration of the exposure. Ham et al.
showed that the intense blue light, especially on the range of
– nm, caused burn on the retina of monkeys, even on
short exposures, smaller than a second. The burns became
more serious with the increase of the exposure time, with a
mean healing time of 20–30 days. The healed areas became a
permanent degenerative tissue, histologically similar to the
age-related macular degeneration, which means that the light
exposure quickly ages the retinal visual cells and it is an irreversible phenomenon.
Using low irradiance and longer exposure time, there is a
point from which the thermal effects become minimal or
insignificant. On wavelengths range from to nm,
corresponding to green and yellow, the retinal temperature is
only increased some degrees above the body temperature,
and the retina is not damaged even after prolonged exposures. For the wavelengths below nm, the prolonged
exposures produce actinic effects on the retina even though
there are no thermal damages.
There is no clear marked line between the thermal and
actinic effects, and there is a point where the photochemical
and thermal effects overlap . The action spectrum of the
actinic effects on the retina increases exponentially as the
wavelength decreases to nm . Below 450nm wavelenght, crystalline begins to absorb a little of the electromagnetic wave, with some photons, between blue and violet
spectrum, reaching the retina. According to Ham et al., blue
light creates free radicals in the eye in a similar way to what
happens with composites . On the retina, these free radicals react with the aqueous content of the visual cells forming
peroxides, which are very reactive and cause denaturation on
the photoreceptors and severe visual damage.
Briefly, the thermomechanical lesions require the intense
exposure to light, while the photochemical is caused by prolonged exposures, primarily to blue or near ultraviolet, at
levels that probably would be well tolerated if they were transitory [ 64]. According to the American Conference of
Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH), looking to a
blue visible light source for more than 12 min represents a
potential risk to the eyes. A positive point is that the light that
the dentist or the assistant see is not direct light, but the light
reflected by the patient’s mouth, which represents about
20–30% of the emitted light . However, there is the necessity that both patients, dentist, and assistant be protected
. For safety use of the light-curing units, it is necessary
the use of a light filter, such as orange safety glasses or handheld shields, with optical density capable to filter the blue
light . The optical density is the capacity that a lens has
to attenuate the passage of light in a wavelength harmful to
the eyes. It is calculated in relation to the maximum permissible exposure for each type of light source. The safety glasses
or shields offer comfort for the dentist work, which can
directly see the place of light application. The safety lens must
absorb most of the blue light but allow the observation of the
operating field . According to Chain , good safety glasses allow transmission of 1–5% of the light for the wavelength smaller than nm and 50% for the wavelength
greater than nm.
Tip
5Always extend curing time. The more you light cure,
the best mechanical and optical properties you’ll
obtain.
5Visually check, with proper eyes protection, the
curing tip position while curing.
5With long curing times, it is desirable to control the
temperature rise with air blow.
Conclusion
The world of operative and restorative dentistry is increasingly turning to the use of polymeric materials. It is evident
that the polymerization of adhesive systems, composite resins, and resin cements has a fundamental role in the optical
and mechanical performances of the materials themselves.
The photopolymerization phase must therefore be considered as a fundamental step in the clinical sequence, which
must be carried out carefully and with the right tools. The
dentist must understand how the polymerization reaction
occurs, as well the influence of the light irradiance on the
shrinkage stress, responsible for most of the problems related
to composite restorations. The gradual curing protocols are
options to reduce the shrinkage stress, besides the use of a
layering technique. The clinical use of the light-curing units
must be precise, mainly related to the positioning of the light
source in relation to the cavity entry, containing the restor -
ative material to be cured. The higher is the distance between
the end of the light guide and the surface of the composite,
the smaller will be the irradiance and the polymerization. The
light source must be placed as close as possible to the surface,
avoiding leaning the light guide. An increase in polymerization times can also improve the degree of conversion of the
materials, either in direct or indirect techniques. The constant
exposure to the visible light can cause damage to the eyes,
and protective shields are recommended.
References
1. AlQahtani MQ, AlShaafi MM, Price RB. Effects of single-peak vs
polywave light-emitting diode curing lights on the polymerization of resin cement. J Adhes Dent. ;15: –51. https://doi.
org/10. /j.jad.a29634.
2. AlShaafi MM. Effects of different temperatures and storage time on
the degree of conversion and microhardness of resin-based composites. J Contemp Dent Pract. ;17: –23.
3. Anusavice KJ. Phillips science of dental materials. 11th ed. St. Louis:
Elsevier; .
4. Aravamudhan K, Floyd CJE, Rakowski D, Flaim G, Dickens SH,
Eichmiller FC, et al. Light-emitting diode curing light irradiance
and polymerization of resin-based composite. J Am Dent Assoc.
; : –23. https://doi.org/10. /jada.archive. . .
Light-Curing Units
13 5. Arrais CAG, Giannini M, Rueggeberg FA. Effect of sodium sulfinate
salts on the polymerization characteristics of dual-cured resin
cement systems exposed to attenuated light-activation. J Dent.
;37: –27. https://doi.org/10. /j.jdent. .11. .
6. Arrais CAG, Rueggeberg FA, Waller JL, de Goes MF, Giannini
M. Effect of curing mode on the polymerization characteristics of
dual-cured resin cement systems. J Dent. ;36: –26. https://
doi.org/10. /j.jdent. .02. .
7. Baratieri LN, Monteiro Junior S, Andrada MA, Ritter AV. Odontologia
Restauradora: Fundamentos e Possibilidades. Santos: São Paulo;
.
8. Besegato JF, Jussiani EI, Andrello AC, Fernandes RV, Salomão FM,
Vicentin BLS, et al. Effect of light-curing protocols on the mechanical
behavior of bulk-fill resin composites. J Mech Behav Biomed Mater.
;90: –7. https://doi.org/10. /j.jmbbm. .10. .
9. Bouschlicher MR, Rueggeberg FA, Wilson BM. Correlation of bottomto-top surface microhardness and conversion ratios for a variety of
resin composite compositions. Oper Dent. ;29: – .
10. Braem M, Lambrechts P , Van Doren V, Vanherle G. The impact of composite structure on its elastic response. J Dent Res. ;65: –53.
https://doi.org/10. / .
11. Burgess JO, Walker RS, Porche CJ, Rappold AJ. Light curing–an
update. Compend Contin Educ Dent. ;23: –92, , passim; quiz
12. Caughman WF, Chan DC, Rueggeberg FA. Curing potential of dualpolymerizable resin cements in simulated clinical situations. J Prosthet Dent. ;86: –6.
13. Caughman WF, Rueggeberg FA, Curtis JW. Clinical guidelines for
photocuring restorative resins. J Am Dent Assoc. ; : –2,
,
14. Cavalcanti SCSXB, Arrais CAG, Oliveira MT, Giannini M. The effect
of the presence and presentation mode of co-initiators on the
microtensile bond strength of dual-cured adhesive systems used
in indirect restorations. Oper Dent. ;33: –9. https://doi.
org/10. /08-18.
15. Ccahuana-Vásquez R, Torres C, Araujo M, Anido A. Influência do tipo
de ponteira condutora de luz de aparelhos LED na microdureza das
resinas compostas. Rev Odontol UNESP . ;33:69–73.
16. Chain M. Unidades fotopolimerizadorasde luz vizível – Fotopolimerizadores. In: Baratieri L, editor. Estética Restaurações Adesivas
Diretas Em Dentes Anteriores Frat. 1st ed. São Paulo: Quintessence;
. p. –33.
17. Cook WD. Spectral distributions of dental photopolymerization
sources. J Dent Res. ;61: –8. https://doi.org/10. /
.
18. D’Alpino P , Svizero N. Fotoativação: Estágio atual. LED – Classificação e características. Rev da Assoc Paul Cir Dent. ;60: –11.
19. Daronch M, Rueggeberg FA, De Goes MF. Monomer conversion
of pre-heated composite. J Dent Res. ;84: –7. https://doi.
org/10. / .
20. Daronch M, Rueggeberg FA, De Goes MF, Giudici R. Polymerization kinetics of pre-heated composite. J Dent Res. ;85:38–43.
https://doi.org/10. / .
21. Davidson CL, Feilzer AJ. Polymerization shrinkage and polymer -
ization shrinkage stress in polymer-based restoratives. J Dent.
;25: –40.
22. Dederich DN. Laser/tissue interaction: what happens to laser light
when it strikes tissue? J Am Dent Assoc. ; :57–61.
23. Deliperi S, Bardwell DN. An alternative method to reduce polymer -
ization shrinkage in direct posterior composite restorations. J Am
Dent Assoc. ; : –98.
24. Dietschi D, Spreafico R. Restaurações Adesivas: Conceitos Atuais
Para o Tratamento Estético de Dentes Posteriores. Quintessence:
São Paulo; .
25. el-Badrawy WA, El-Mowafy OM. Chemical versus dual curing of resin
inlay cements. J Prosthet Dent. ;73: –24.
26. el-Mowafy OM, Rubo MH, El-Badrawy WA. Hardening of new resin
cements cured through a ceramic inlay. Oper Dent. ;24:38–44. 27. Ernst C-P , Price RB, Callaway A, Masek A, Schwarm H, Rullmann I,
et al. Visible light curing devices – irradiance and use in Ger -
man Dental Offices. J Adhes Dent. ;20:41–55. https://doi.
org/10. /j.jad.a39881.
28. Fan PL, Schumacher RM, Azzolin K, Geary R, Eichmiller FC. Curinglight intensity and depth of cure of resin-based composites
tested according to international standards. J Am Dent Assoc.
; : –34. quiz –3.
29. Fan PL, Wozniak WT, Reyes WD, Stanford JW. Irradiance of visible
light-curing units and voltage variation effects. J Am Dent Assoc.
; : –5.
30. Faria e Silva AL, Arias VG, Soares LES, Martin AA, Martins LRM. Influence of fiber-post translucency on the degree of conversion of a
dual-cured resin cement. J Endod. ;33: –5. https://doi.
org/10. /j.joen. .11. .
31. Feilzer AJ, De Gee AJ, Davidson CL. Setting stress in composite
resin in relation to configuration of the restoration. J Dent Res.
;66: –9. https://doi.org/10. / .
32. Ferracane JL. Correlation between hardness and degree of conversion during the setting reaction of unfilled dental restor -
ative resins. Dent Mater. ;1:11–4. https://doi.org/10. /
S01095641(85) -0.
33. Ferrari M, Mannocci F, Vichi A, Cagidiaco MC, Mjör IA. Bonding to
root canal: structural characteristics of the substrate. Am J Dent.
;13: –60.
34. Ferrari M, Vichi A, Mannocci F, Mason PN. Retrospective study of the
clinical performance of fiber posts. Am J Dent. ;13:9B–13B.
35. Finger WJ, Lee KS, Podszun W. Monomers with low oxygen inhibition as enamel/dentin adhesives. Dent Mater. ;12: –61.
36. Fleming MG, Maillet WA. Photopolymerization of composite resin
using the argon laser. J Can Dent Assoc. ;65: –50.
37. Fodor L, Ullman Y, Elmann M. Light tissue interactions. Aesthetic
Appl intense pulsed light. London: Springer; . p. 11–20.
38. Foxton RM, Nakajima M, Tagami J, Miura H. Bonding of photo and
dual-cure adhesives to root canal dentin. Oper Dent. ;28:
–51.
39. Gallagher C, Gallagher V, Whelton H, Cronin M. The normal range of
mouth opening in an Irish population. J Oral Rehabil. ;31: –6.
40. Gan J, Yap A, Cheong J, Arista N, Tan C. Bulk-fill composites: effec -
tiveness of cure with polyand monowave curing lights and modes.
Oper Dent. ;43: –43. https://doi.org/10. /16- -L.
41. Garófalo J, Caneppele T. Conhecendo o aparelho fotopolimerizador
e LED. In: Conceição E, editor. Dentística Saúde e Estética. Porto
Alegre: Artmed; . p. .
42. Goes M. Materiais e técnicas restauradoras. Como escolher e aplicar
materiais dentários. In: Cardoso R, Gonçalves E, editors. Dentística e
Laser. Artes Médicas: São Paulo; . p. –32.
43. Gutknecht N, Eduardo C. A Odontologia e o Laser – Atuação do
Laser na Especialidade Odontológica. Quintessence: São Paulo;
.
44. Ham WT, Mueller HA, Ruffolo JJ, Millen JE, Cleary SF, Guerry RK, et al.
Basic mechanisms underlying the production of photochemical
lesions in the mammalian retina. Curr Eye Res. ;3: –74.
45. Ham WT, Ruffolo JJ, Mueller HA, Guerry D. The nature of retinal
radiation damage: dependence on wavelength, power level and
exposure time. Vis Res. ;20: –11.
46. Ham WT, Mueller HA, Sliney DH. Retinal sensitivity to damage
from short wavelength light. Nature. ; : –5. https://doi.
org/10. /260153a0.
47. Hammesfahr PD, O’Connor MT, Wang X. Light-curing technology:
past, present, and future. Compend Contin Educ Dent. ;23:
18–24.
48. Hofmann N, Papsthart G, Hugo B, Klaiber B. Comparison of photoactivation versus chemical or dual-curing of resin-based luting
cements regarding flexural strength, modulus and surface hardness. J Oral Rehabil. ;28: –8.
49. Jordan R. Estética com Resinas Compostas – Técnicas e Materiais.
Santos: São Paulo; .
N. Scotti et al.
13
50. Kim Y-J, Kim R, Ferracane J, Lee I-B. Influence of the compliance
and layering method on the wall deflection of simulated cavities
in bulk-fill composite restoration. Oper Dent. ;41:e183–94.
https://doi.org/10. /15- -L.
51. Kim YK, Kim SK, Kim KH, Kwon TY. Degree of conversion of dualcured resin cement light-cured through three fibre posts within
human root canals: an ex vivo study. Int Endod J. ;42: –74.
https://doi.org/10. /j. - . . .x.
52. Kinomoto Y, Torii M, Takeshige F, Ebisu S. Comparison of polymer -
ization contraction stresses between selfand light-curing composites. J Dent. ;27: –9.
53. Kwon Y, Ferracane J, Lee I-B. Effect of layering methods, composite type, and flowable liner on the polymerization shrinkage stress
of light cured composites. Dent Mater. ;28: –9. https://doi.
org/10. /j.dental. .04. .
54. Van Landuyt KL, Cardoso MV, De Munck J, Peumans M, Mine A,
Lambrechts P , et al. Optimization of the concentration of photo-initiator in a one-step self-etch adhesive. Dent Mater. ;25: –8.
https://doi.org/10. /j.dental. .02. .
55. Langalia A, Buch A, Khamar M, Patel P . Polymerization shrinkage
of composite resins: a review. Quest Journals J Med Dent Sci Res.
;2(10):23–7.
56. Lanza MDS, Andreeta MRB, Pegoraro TA, Pegoraro LF, De Carvalho
RM. Influence of curing protocol and ceramic composition on the
degree of conversion of resin cement. J Appl Oral Sci. ;25: –
7. https://doi.org/10. / - - - .
57. Lee TY, Guymon CA, Jönsson ES, Hoyle CE. The effect of
monomer structure on oxygen inhibition of (meth)acrylates
photopolymerization. Polymer (Guildf). ;45: –62. https://
doi.org/10. /j.polymer. .06. .
58. Lempel E, Őri Z, Szalma J, Lovász BV, Kiss A, Tóth Á, et al. Effect of
exposure time and pre-heating on the conversion degree of conventional, bulk-fill, fiber reinforced and polyacid-modified resin
composites. Dent Mater. ;35: –28. https://doi.org/10. /j.
dental. .11. .
59. Leprince J, Devaux J, Mullier T, Vreven J, Leloup G. Pulpaltemperature rise and polymerization efficiency of LED curing lights.
Oper Dent. ;35: –30. https://doi.org/10. /09- -L.
60. Loguercio AD, Reis A, Schroeder M, Balducci I, Versluis A, Ballester RY. Polymerization shrinkage: effects of boundary conditions
and filling technique of resin composite restorations. J Dent.
;32: –70. https://doi.org/10. /j.jdent. .02. .
61. Lösche GM. Marginal adaptation of class II composite fillings:
guided polymerization vs reduced light intensity. J Adhes Dent.
;1:31–9.
62. Lutz F, Krejci I, Luescher B, Oldenburg TR. Improved proximal mar -
gin adaptation of class II composite resin restorations by use of
light-reflecting wedges. Quintessence Int. ;17: –64.
63. Maghaireh G, Price R, Abdo N, Taha N, Alzraikat H. Effect of thickness
on light transmission and Vickers hardness of five bulk-fill resinbased composites using polywave and single-peak light-emitting
diode curing lights. Oper Dent. ;44:96– . https://doi.
org/10. /17- -L.
64. Mainster MA, Ham WT, Delori FC. Potential retinal hazards.
Instrument and environmental light sources. Ophthalmology.
;90: –32.
65. Majumder A, Giri T, Mukherjee S. An in vitro study to compare the
influence of different all-ceramic systems on the polymerization
of dual-cure resin cement. J Indian Prosthodont Soc. ;19:58.
https://doi.org/10. /jips.jips_262_18.
66. Maktabi H, Balhaddad AA, Alkhubaizi Q, Strassler H, Melo MAS. Fac -
tors influencing success of radiant exposure in light-curing posterior
dental composite in the clinical setting. Am J Dent. ;31: –8.
67. Miletic V, Santini A. Micro-Raman spectroscopic analysis of the
degree of conversion of composite resins containing different
initiators cured by polywave or monowave LED units. J Dent.
;40: –13. https://doi.org/10. /j.jdent. .10. . 68. Mills RW, Jandt KD, Ashworth SH. Dental composite depth of cure
with halogen and blue light emitting diode technology. Br Dent J.
; : –91.
69. Morimoto S, Vieira G, Goveia J, Sesma N. Aparelhos fotopolimer -
izadores com fonte de radiação a LED (Diodo emissor de luz). Rev
Assoc Paul Cir Dent. ;58: –5.
70. Nomoto R, Uchida K, Hirasawa T. Effect of light intensity on polymerization of light-cured composite resins. Dent Mater J. ;13:
– .
71. de Oliveira D, Rocha M, Correr A, Ferracane J, Sinhoreti M. Effect of
beam profiles from different light emission tip types of multiwave
light-emitting diodes on the curing profile of resin-based composites. Oper Dent. ;44: –78. https://doi.org/10. /16- .
72. Opdam NJ, Feilzer AJ, Roeters JJ, Smale I. Class I occlusal composite
resin restorations: in vivo post-operative sensitivity, wall adaptation, and microleakage. Am J Dent. ;11: –34.
73. Oréfice R, Discacciati JA, Neves A, Mansur H, Jansen W. In situ evaluation of the polymerization kinetics and corresponding evolution
of the mechanical properties of dental composites. Polym Test.
;22:77–81. https://doi.org/10. /S0142- (02) -1.
74. Öztürk E, Chiang Y-C, Coş gun E, Bolay Ş , Hickel R, Ilie N. Effect of
resin shades on opacity of ceramic veneers and polymerization
efficiency through ceramics. J Dent. ;41:e8–14. https://doi.
org/10. /j.jdent. .06. .
75. Ozyesil AG, Usumez A, Gunduz B. The efficiency of different light
sources to polymerize composite beneath a simulated ceramic restoration. J Prosthet Dent. ;91: –7. https://doi.org/10. /
S0022391303007790.
76. Palin WM, Leprince JG, Hadis MA. Shining a light on high volume
photocurable materials. Dent Mater. ;34: – . https://doi.
org/10. /j.dental. .02. .
77. Pedreira APRV, Pegoraro LF, de Góes MF, Pegoraro TA, Carvalho
RM. Microhardness of resin cements in the intraradicular environment: effects of water storage and softening treatment. Dent Mater.
;25: –76. https://doi.org/10. /j.dental. .01. .
78. Pilo R, Cardash HS. Post-irradiation polymerization of different
anterior and posterior visible light-activated resin composites. Dent
Mater. ;8: – .
79. Piwowarczyk A, Bender R, Ottl P , Lauer H-C. Long-term bond
between dual-polymerizing cementing agents and human hard
dental tissue. Dent Mater. ;23: –7. https://doi.org/10. /j.
dental. .01. .
80. Price RB, Dérand T, Sedarous M, Andreou P , Loney RW. Effect of distance on the power density from two light guides. J Esthet Dent.
;12: –7.
81. Price RBT. Light curing in dentistry. Dent Clin N Am. ;61: –78.
https://doi.org/10. /j.cden. .06. .
82. Price RBT, Labrie D, Rueggeberg FA, Felix CM. Irradiance differences
in the violet ( nm) and blue ( nm) spectral ranges among
dental light-curing units. J Esthet Restor Dent. ;22: –77.
https://doi.org/10. /j. - . . .x.
83. Price RBT, Labrie D, Rueggeberg FA, Sullivan B, Kostylev I, Fahey
J. Correlation between the beam profile from a curing light and the
microhardness of four resins. Dent Mater. ;30: –57. https://
doi.org/10. /j.dental. .10. .
84. Price RB, Labrie D, Whalen JM, Felix CM. Effect of distance on irradiance and beam homogeneity from 4 light-emitting diode curing
units. J Can Dent Assoc. ;77:b9.
85. Price RBT, Felix CA, Andreou P . Evaluation of a dual peak third gener -
ation LED curing light. Compend Contin Educ Dent. ;26: –2,
, –8 passim; quiz
86. Qualtrough AJE, Mannocci F. Tooth-colored post systems: a review.
Oper Dent. ;28:86–91.
87. Rebelatto R, Reis A, Loguercio A, Gomes J, Júnior W. Fotoativação e
unidades fotoativadoras. In: Reis A, Loguercio A, editors. Mater Dentários Diretos – Dos Fundam à Apl Clínica. São Paulo: Santos; .
p. – .
Light-Curing Units
13 88. Roberson T, Heymann H, Swift E. Art and science of operative dentistry. Maryland Heights, Missouri: Mosby/Elsevier; .
89. Roberts H, Leonard D, Vandewalle K, Cohen M, Charlton D. The
effect of a translucent post on resin composite depth of cure.
Dent Mater. ;20: –22. https://doi.org/10. /j.dental. .10. .
90. Rueggeberg FA, Margeson DH. The effect of oxygen inhibition on
an unfilled/filled composite system. J Dent Res. ;69: –8.
https://doi.org/10. / .
91. Rueggeberg F. Contemporary issues in photocuring. Compend
Contin Educ Dent. ;S4–15; quiz S73.
92. Rueggeberg FA, Caughman WF, Curtis JW. Effect of light intensity
and exposure duration on cure of resin composite. Oper Dent.
;19:26–32.
93. Sahadi BO, Price RB, André CB, Sebold M, Bermejo GN, Palma-Dibb RG,
et al. Multiple-peak and single-peak dental curing lights comparison on
the wear resistance of bulk-fill composites. Braz Oral Res. ;32:e122.
https://doi.org/10. / -3107bor- .vol32. .
94. Sahafi A, Peutzfeldt A, Asmussen E. Soft-start polymerization and
marginal gap formation in vitro. Am J Dent. ;14: –7.
95. Sakaguchi RL, Peters MC, Nelson SR, Douglas WH, Poort HW. Effects
of polymerization contraction in composite restorations. J Dent.
;20: –82.
96. Schneider LFJ, Cavalcante LM, Consani S, Ferracane JL. Effect
of coinitiator ratio on the polymer properties of experimental resin composites formulated with camphorquinone and
phenyl-propanedione. Dent Mater. ;25: –75. https://doi.
org/10. /j.dental. .08. .
97. Sensi L, Baratieri L, Monteiro SJ. Fotopolimerização das resinas
compostas – Conceitos essenciais para obtenção de excelência
restauradora. In: Bottino M, editor. Livro do Ano Clínica Odontológica Bras. São Paulo: Artes Médicas; . p. –20.
98. Shawkat ES, Shortall AC, Addison O, Palin WM. Oxygen inhibition and incremental layer bond strengths of resin composites.
Dent Mater. ;25: –46. https://doi.org/10. /j.dental. .06. .
99. Shortall AC, Felix CJ, Watts DC. Robust spectrometer-based methods for characterizing radiant exitance of dental LED light curing
units. Dent Mater. ;31: –50. https://doi.org/10. /j.dental. .02. .
. Sliney D, Stuck B. The potential ocular hazards of LED emitters.
2nd CIE expert Symp LED Meas. .
. Stansbury JW. Curing dental resins and composites by photopoly -
merization. J Esthet Dent. ;12: –8.
. Suh BI. Oxygen-inhibited layer in adhesion dentistry. J Esthet
Restor Dent. ;16: –23.
. Taira M, Urabe H, Hirose T, Wakasa K, Yamaki M. Analysis of photoinitiators in visible-light-cured dental composite resins. J Dent Res.
;67:24–8. https://doi.org/10. / .
. Tanoue N, Matsumura H, Atsuta M. The influence of ultraviolet
radiation intensity on curing depth of photo-activated composite
veneering materials. J Oral Rehabil. ;25: –5.
. Tay FR, Loushine RJ, Lambrechts P , Weller RN, Pashley DH. Geo -
metric factors affecting dentin bonding in root canals: a theoretical modeling approach. J Endod. ;31: –9. . Teixeira ECN, Teixeira FB, Piasick JR, Thompson JY. An in vitro
assessment of prefabricated fiber post systems. J Am Dent
Assoc. ; : –12. https://doi.org/10. /jada.archive.
. .
. Torres CRG, Borges AB, Kubo CH, Gonçalves SE, Araujo RM, Celaschi S, et al. Clareamento Dental com Fontes Híbridas LED/LASER.
2nd ed. São Paulo: Livraria Santos Editora Ltda; .
. Truffier-Boutry D, Demoustier-Champagne S, Devaux J, Biebuyck
J-J, Mestdagh M, Larbanois P , et al. A physico-chemical explanation
of the post-polymerization shrinkage in dental resins. Dent Mater.
;22: –12. https://doi.org/10. /j.dental. .04. .
. Truffier-Boutry D, Gallez XA, Demoustier-Champagne S, Devaux J,
Mestdagh M, Champagne B, et al. Identification of free radicals
trapped in solid methacrylated resins. J Polym Sci Part A Polym
Chem. ;41: –9. https://doi.org/10. /pola. .
. Turp V, Sen D, Poyrazoglu E, Tuncelli B, Goller G. Influence of zir -
conia base and shade difference on polymerization efficiency of
dual-cure resin cement. J Prosthodont. ;20: –5. https://
doi.org/10. /j. -849X. . .x.
. Uno S, Asmussen E. Marginal adaptation of a restorative resin
polymerized at reduced rate. Eur J Oral Sci. ;99: –4. https://
doi.org/10. /j. - . .tb01052.x.
. Versluis A, Douglas WH, Cross M, Sakaguchi RL. Does an incremental filling technique reduce polymerization shrinkage stresses? J
Dent Res. ;75: –8. https://doi.org/10. /
.
. Versluis A, Tantbirojn D, Douglas WH. Do dental composites always
shrink toward the light? J Dent Res. ;77: –45. https://doi.
org/10. / .
. Watts DC, Kaiser C, O’Neill C, Price RB. Reporting of light irradiation conditions in laboratory studies of resin-composites.
Dent Mater. ;35: –21. https://doi.org/10. /j.dental. .12. .
. Whelan HT, Buchmann EV, Dhokalia A, Kane MP , Whelan NT,
Wong-Riley MTT, et al. Effect of NASA light-emitting diode
irradiation on molecular changes for wound healing in diabetic mice. J Clin Laser Med Surg. ;21:67–74. https://doi.
org/10. / .
. Wojno T, Singer D, Schultz RO. Ultraviolet light, cataracts, and
spectacle wear. Ann Ophthalmol. ;15: –32.
. Yoldas O, Alaçam T. Microhardness of composites in simulated
root canals cured with light transmitting posts and glass-fiber
reinforced composite posts. J Endod. ;31: –6.
. Yoshida K, Atsuta M. Post-irradiation hardening of dual-cured and
light-cured resin cements through machinable ceramics. Am J
Dent. ;19: –7.
. Yoshikawa T, Burrow MF, Tagami J. A light curing method for
improving marginal sealing and cavity wall adaptation of resin
composite restorations. Dent Mater. ;17: –66.
. Zach L, Cohen G. Pulp response to externally applied heat. Oral
Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol. ;19: –30.
. Zigman S. The role of sunlight in human cataract formation. Surv
Ophthalmol. ;27: –25.
N. Scotti et al.
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG
C. R. G. Torres (ed.), Modern Operative Dentistry, Textbooks in Contemporary Dentistry,
https://doi.org/10. / -3- - -0_14465 14
Composite Restoration
on Anterior Teeth
Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres and Rayssa Ferreira Zanatta
14.1 Introduction –
14.2 Basic Concepts About Color –
14.2.1 Definitions –
14.2.2 Optical Characteristics of Natural Teeth –
14.2.3 Shade Determination –
14.3 Selection of Composite Resin –
14.4 Indications of Composites on Anterior Teeth –
14.5 Esthetic Analysis of Anterior Teeth –
14.5.1 Enamel Translucency –
14.5.2 Morphology of the Incisal Edge –
14.5.3 Surface Texture –
14.5.4 Dental Dimensions and Proportions –
14.6 Restorative Technique –
14.6.1 Previous Clinical Procedures –
14.6.2 Tooth Preparation –
14.6.3 Restorative Procedure –
14.6.4 The Use of Color Modifiers –
14.6.5 Finishing and Polishing –
14.7 Durability and Maintenance of the
Composite Restorations –
References –
14Learning Objectives
The aim of this chapter is to teach the readers the following
topics:
5Basic concepts about color and optical characteristics of
natural teeth
5How to make the tooth shade determination and select
the appropriate composite resin
5Principles of esthetic analysis of anterior teeth in order to
reproduce the natural characteristics on the restorations
5How to perform the restorative procedure for all kinds of
lesions produced by caries or other non-carious origin
5How to perform restoration of fractured teeth with or
without the association of a surgical procedure
5The reattachment of fractured tooth fragments
5The use of composite for recontouring teeth
5The use of color modifiers
5Finishing and polishing procedure
5Factors affecting the durability and how to perform the
maintenance of composite restorations
14.1 Introduction
The composite resin is the most popular direct restorative
material among the clinicians and the most requested by the
patients, either for anterior or posterior teeth. Its main
advantage is the esthetics because it presents shades compatible with the remaining tooth structure. On anterior teeth, it
is the best option to restore the lost shape, function, and
esthetics. Another great advantage is its adhesion to the tooth
structure, which contributes to the retention of the restor -
ative material and helps to reinforce the remaining tooth
structure . The development of the dental adhesives
allowed a deep change on the paradigms in relation to the
tooth preparation, contributing for the creation of the minimally invasive dentistry.
With the recognition of the fact that caries incidence can
be significantly reduced or totally avoided, in addition to the
fact that some caries lesions can be arrested, remaining as a
scar, or even reversed and disappear, the necessity of tooth
restoration has decreased considerably. The invasive approach
of caries lesions treatment, without giving instructions for
patients in relation to the caries as a multifactorial disease,
results on the treatment failure in a short period of time. This
allows new lesions to occur on other areas of the same teeth
and/or on other teeth of the same patient. The restorations do
not cure the caries disease and do not promote health by
itself and failure earlier than most clinicians believe .
As discussed by Roulet and Degrange , in the past,
young clinicians could work their entire lives with the knowledge that they learned at the dental schools. This is not true
anymore, since the adhesives and restorative materials
changed and continue to change the way that many restor -
ative procedures are performed. The dentists now need continuing education to update themselves in relation to new
alternatives of materials and techniques, to offer the best
treatment possible for the patients.The first composite resin was developed in by Bowen
. It is a polymeric restorative material composed basically
by three main ingredients. The first is the organic matrix,
formed by a blend of resinous monomers with molecular
chains of different lengths, which can chemically bond and
form a rigid material. Some of the most commonly used are
the bisphenol A-glycidyl methacrylate (Bis-GMA), urethane
dimethacrylate (UDMA), bisphenol A polyethylene glycol
diether dimethacrylate (bis-EMA), and triethylene glycol
dimethacrylate (TEGDMA). Even though the polymerization reaction is essential to form a hard polymer, it results on
the volumetric shrinkage of the material by the reduction of
the intermolecular distance between the monomers, due to
the covalent bonding, creating stress at the tooth-restoration
interface . The mean volumetric shrinkage of the current
methacrylate-based composites in around 1.3–4% by volume
[29, 33]. This shrinkage produces stress on the toothrestoration interface of about 4–8 MPa, which can break the
bonding between the composite and the tooth structure, creating marginal gaps and allowing microleakage. This can
allow the occurrence of secondary caries lesions, besides
causing cracks or fractures on the enamel margin, cuspal
deflection, and postoperative sensitivity [1, 10].
The second ingredient is the inorganic filler, composed by
small glass or silica particles, which has the objective to
increase the mechanical strength of the restorative material
. The presence of fillers also reduces the organic matrix
content, diminishing the volumetric polymerization shrinkage. In addition, the strontium and barium elements in the
filler’s composition give radiopacity to the material, which
helps the diagnosis of secondary caries on restorations mar -
gins. The filler’s content reduces the coefficient of linear ther -
mal expansion in relation to an unfilled material, although
for regular composites it can still be up to three times higher
than the tooth structure. It also reduces the water sorption,
which can promote material’s degradation and staining .
The third ingredient is the silane coupling agent which
acts as a sort of intermediary, bonding the inorganic fillers to
the organic matrix. It produces the integration of the other
two main ingredients, making that all material’s components
behaves as a single body, increasing the mechanical strength
and reducing water sorption and solubility .
> The composite resins have three main ingredients:
organic matrix (resinous monomers that allows
polymerization), inorganic filler (glass particles that
gives strength), and silane coupling agent (agent that
bonds monomers and fillers).
The composites may be classified according to the type and
size of the filler particles, because it has a great influence on
its mechanical characteristics. The first composites created,
also known as conventional or macrofilled, were character -
ized by having large filler particles, of very similar and homogeneous size, in a Bis-GMA organic matrix ( . Fig. 14.1a ).
They were introduced on the 1960s and had on its composition grinded quartz filler particles, with average sizes larger
than 15 μm (15, nm), due to the technical limitation on
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
that time to produce thinner particles by grinding quartz, a
very hard material. They had an average filler content of
75–80% by weight and a good compressive strength . The
restorations made with these materials had a high surface
roughness, due to the large and extremely hard filler particles
difficult to cut by the polishing instrument. Therefore, they
were not indicated for preparations close to the gingiva
because promoted biofilm deposition. Also, this material
presented poor esthetic, high levels of wear, and low color
stability. When this material suffered abrasion, the polymer
between the fillers was removed, leading particles protruding
from the surface. With the time those particles were removed
creating craters. The craters and the protruding particles produce a rough surface, losing the surface gloss created by the
polishing procedures, making the restoration more susceptible to surface discoloration by extrinsic staining . When
placed on contact areas, this composite suffered more wear
than the natural enamel . Those materials were chemically activated, requiring a previous mixture of two pastes,
presenting only one shade. Due to the mixture, air bubbles
used to be incorporated into the material, increasing the
porosity of the restoration. In addition, the working time was
short and the color stability was reduced, due to the degradation of some chemical components, such as the amines . The amount of composite excess at the restoration’s margins
to the removed was also greater, due to the application in a
single increment. This type of composite is no longer used.
On the 1980s, an evolution of the conventional materials
came to the market, presenting thinner filler particles, with
the average size of 8 μm .
The microfilled composites were introduced as an alter -
native to solve the problems of high roughness and unsatisfactory gloss of the macrofilled materials. They present as
filler particles the pyrogenic or colloidal silica, with mean
filler particle size of 0.01–0.04 μm (10–40 nm), resulting on a
very smooth surface after polishing, with less biofilm retention and extrinsic staining ( . Fig. 14.1b ) [3, 31]. They present
a surface roughness average (Ra) of approximately 0. μm,
about ten times less than the conventional macrofilled composites (Ra = 0.30 μm). However, there was a technical problem to manufacture a high filler load when using those
particles, due to the greater surface area to volume ratio,
resulting in a too viscous material. To increase the total filler
loading without interfering on the viscosity, many manufacturers added to the formulation pre-cured resin filler particles. They are prepared by adding a large amount of silica
particles into the organic matrix, resulting in a viscosity
inadequate to the clinical use. The material is polymerized
ab c
de f
.Fig. 14.1 Distribution of filler particles on different types of
composites. a Macrofilled (Concise, 3M/ESPE); b microfilled (Durafill,
Heraeus Kulzer) – the lighter areas correspond to the precured resin
filler particles; c hybrid (Surefil, Dentsply); d microhybrids (TPH, Dentsply); e nanohybrids (GrandioSO, Voco); f nanofilled (Z350, 3 M/
ESPE). SEM images in backscattered electron imaging mode to show
the filler particles ( ×)Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14and grinded to form small particles. Those particles are then
added to more organic matrix and silica fillers, creating an
adequate viscosity for clinical use. Even with this process, the
microfilled composites have smaller filler loading in relation
to the other ones, resulting in lower mechanical strength and
wear resistance. They present an average filler loading of
35–60% by weight , which results in small compressive
strength. They are contraindicated for situations that undergo
high occlusal load, such as on the restoration of the incisal
edges, on the occlusal surface of the posterior teeth, and on
the lingual surface of the anterior teeth where there is occlusal contact or disocclusion guide. They have a higher volumetric shrinkage and a smaller depth of cure, due to the fact
that the small particles adversely affect the light penetration
inside the material . They are excellent in places where a
high polishing is required, such as on the restorations close to
the gingival margins or as on a surface layer of restorations of
the labial surfaces of anterior teeth, where the gloss has a
great influence of the final esthetic outcome. The surface
roughness of the polished material is similar to enamel and is
kept for a long time. In general, they become more translucent with whiter shade after curing . Some brands of
microfilled composites are still available on the market.
Considering that the greater the filler loading, the smaller
the resinous content and the volumetric shrinkage of the
material, the manufacturers tried to add the maximum of
filler possible in the organic matrix. They observed that when
using particles with similar size, despite its dimensions, a
maximum limit of incorporation was reached in a material
densely packed, with the particles the maximum close to each
other. In an attempt to incorporate even more inorganic content, it was tested the addition of particles even smaller than
the first ones, trying to fill the gaps between them. The spaces
left between these smaller particles were then filed with even
smaller ones. This method for increasing the filler content
creates the concept of hybrid composite ( . Fig. 14.1c ). They
associate the advantages of microfilled composites with the
strength of the composites with larger particles, due to the
association of fillers with different sizes. To reduce the problems of the high hardness of the quartz particles, softer or
more friable glasses were developed, such as the barium fluorosilicate-aluminum glass, ceramic glass, zirconiumcontaining glass, lithium-aluminum-silicate glass, or
strontium glass [1 ]. Those filler are easily cut by the polishing
instrument and results on a smoother surface than the macrofilled ones, increasing also the long-term polish retention.
This type of glass has also turned the material more
radiopaque, simplifying the detection of secondary of caries
on the restoration’s margins . The filler particles are generally obtained by grinding glass, resulting in irregular shapes.
However, this technique to manufacture limits the size of the
obtained particles, being hardly smaller than 0.5 μ m ( nm)
. Another way to produce particles is the sol-gel process,
using liquid substances as precursors, resulting on spherical
fillers of several sizes. The larger particles presented on these
composites increase the strength, while the smaller ones fill
the spaces between them, resulting in a high filler loading and low surface roughness. The hybrids composites have a filler
loading of about 75–85% by weight, which produces adequate
strength of the material and allows it to be indicated on both
posterior and anterior teeth. They have a mean filler particle
size of 0.04–5 μ m (40– nm), which creates a smoother
surface and an acceptable esthetical results [1 , 3].
To overcome the yet unsatisfactory polishing of the
hybrid composites, the manufacturers reduced the size of the
larger filler particles used on those materials, maintaining a
high filler loading but having a significant improvement of
the polishing results, being named microhybrid composites.
They present a filler loading of approximately 75–85% by
weight, with good strength, but the larger particles are not
larger than 1 μm, having a mean filler particle size between
0.04 and 1 μm (40– nm). They are indicated for anterior
and posterior teeth ( . Fig. 14.1d ) [1, 3].
A nanoparticle is commonly identified as a particle
between 0.01 and 0.1 μm (10– nm) in size, therefore,
below the wavelength of the visible light. Particles with nanometric sizes, such as the pyrogenic silica used on the microfilled composites or others, have a large surface area to
volume ratio and, therewith, high surface energy. When
added to the composite formulation beyond 40%, it creates
an extremely viscous mass that may not be processed and
used as a restorative material. To overcome this problem, the
manufacturers found a way to chemically inactivate the sur -
face of the freshly generated nanoparticles, reducing its sur -
face energy and its effects of increasing the viscosity.
Therefore, the inactivated nanoparticles were added to the
microhybrid composites, increasing, even more, the filler
loading, because it occupies the spaces between the smallest
particles. This material was named nanohybrid composite.
According to the manufacturers, due to the fact that the
nanoparticles are smaller than the wavelength of visible light,
the light absorption does not occur on those particles, and
the light is transmitted through the material, increasing its
translucency. This would help to create a “chameleon effect, ”
allowing the adjacent and underlying tooth structure to
reflect light through the restoration, which blends the restoration with surrounding tooth remaining and improves the
esthetic outcomes. The addition of nanoparticles improved
some characteristics of the material, but in general it has a
similar clinical behavior in relation to the traditional microhybrid composites, with the same indications, advantages,
and disadvantages ( . Fig. 14.1e ) [28, 42, 46].
Another kind of composite according to the filler particles is called purely nanofilled. This materials present individual nanoscale particles of 20 nm; and also nanoclusters of
those nanoparticles, with mean particle size of 0. μm (75
nm). The nanoclusters are produced by a sintering process,
which results in loosely agglomerated nanoparticles.
Although structurally different from the regular dense filler
particles found in other composites, these nanoclusters
behaved similarly in terms of providing high filler loading,
which gives strength to the material. In . Fig. 14.1f , the
nanoclusters of spherical shape can be observed. During the
polishing, the nanoclusters are easily cut, resulting on a
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
superficial smoothness similar to a microfilled composite.
They result on a better polishing than the microhybrid materials, even though are similar to the modern nanohybrid
composites . According to the manufacturer, the wear
rate of the clusters is closer to the wear rate of the surrounding matrix, increasing the polish retention. They are indicated for both posterior and anterior teeth and present good
strength and polishing.
The composites may also be classified according to its viscosity in low, medium, or high viscosity ( . Fig. 14.2a–c ). The
low-viscosity or flowable composites generally have smaller
filler loading than the others, which is responsible for its flowability, but results in inferior mechanical properties and
higher wear rate. They also generally present a larger volumetric shrinkage . Even though they are easy to use and have
good wettability and handling properties, its clinical indications are limited. They are indicated for: Class V restorations,
because this region undergoes compressive and tensile stress
but has no direct contact with the opposing tooth; as the first
layer under composite restorations on posterior teeth, because
it promotes a better adaptation to the internal angles of the
preparation; on restorations of small preparations in the
occlusal surface of posterior teeth; as pits and fissure sealants;
and for repair the defective margins of preexisting restora-tions. Some brands have different flowability levels, covering
more indications. In the recent years, flowable composites
with a higher filler content were developed, increasing its
indications for some more stress-bearing situations.
The medium-viscosity or conventional composites are
considered of universal indication, for both anterior and posterior teeth, being the most widely used by the clinicians. Its
viscosity allows the application of increments, maintaining
the shape when in place without flowing, enabling the use of
a layering technique. The high-viscosity materials, namely
condensable composites, were developed for use on posterior
teeth for helping the restoration of the contact points with
the adjacent tooth. Its viscosity helps to press the matrix dur -
ing the application, although they were more difficult to
handle. However, some techniques can allow the proper restoration of the proximal contacts without the need of such a
high viscous materials. For this reason, those are currently
seldom used on the daily dental practice.
The composites may also vary according to the levels of
translucency. A material is considered translucent when part
of the light that hits its surface is transmitted through the
material, allowing the underlying background to show
through ( . Fig. 14.3). It is possible to see through a translucent material, but the image is not clear. This characteristic is
observed in variable levels on the dental enamel. The opposite property of translucency is opacity. A material is considered a totally opaque when the light that hits its surface is not
capable to pass through it ( . Fig. 14.3). Although the dentin
is not completely opaque, it has a higher opacity level than
the enamel. A material is called transparent when it allows
almost total transmission of the light that hits its surface
without being scattered, like a perfect glass, allowing to
clearly see through it. A perfect transparency is not observed
on the tooth enamel, even though they may be highly translucent. The translucency can also be described as partial
opacity or a state between complete opacity and complete
transparency. The degree of translucency is related to how
deeply the light penetrates the tooth or restoration before it is
reflected outward . The enamel has high translucency,
while the dentin has low translucency, even though it is not
completely opaque.
ab c
.Fig. 14.2 Types of composites according to the viscosity. a Low; b
medium; c high
Incident ligh tI ncident ligh tI ncident ligh t Transmitted ligh tT ransmitted light
Absorbed light
Opacit yT ranslucenc yT ransparenc y
.Fig. 14.3 Differences among opacity, translucency, and transparencyComposite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14 > A material is considered translucent when part of the
light that hits its surface is transmitted through it.
The opposite property is called opacity. The dental
enamel is more translucent than the dentin, which is
almost opaque. For the proper restoration of the
tooth structure, the use of composites with
translucency levels close to the natural dental tissues
is necessary. The translucency of a composite is as
relevant as its color, since it affects the final
restoration appearance.
The overlapping of the enamel over the dentin on differ -
ent thickness, according to the region of the tooth, is the
responsible for the polychromatic effect observed on the
natural teeth [3 ]. The thicker is the enamel or dentin layer,
the less translucent it appears. The dentin is thicker and
the enamel thinner on the cervical region of the teeth,
which gives a general opaquer aspect to this region. The
shade is more saturated, with a greater inflence of the
dentin color. On the middle third of the crown, the differ -
ences of thicknesses between enamel and dentin are less
discrepant, making this region less saturated and more
luminous. On the incisal third, the enamel is thicker and
minimum or no dentin exist, prevailing the optical char -
acteristics of the enamel [1 ]. The enamel translucency is
not only due to its high degree of mineralization, but also
because of its internal mineral organization of low refractive index, which allows the transmission of most of the
incident light. The enamel prisms act similarly to the
optical fibers. The light that enters the prisms is reflected
by its crystals and remain on its interior, running through
it. This effect is empowered by its radial orientation from
the dentin-enamel junction (DEJ), directing the light to
the center of the tooth, toward the dentin [1 , 22]. For the
proper restoration of the tooth structure, the use of composites with optical characteristics close to the natural
tooth is necessary to obtain excellence on the esthetic
results.
The dental composites are generally available with three
levels of translucency. The high-translucency one, namely
incisal shade, are indicated for restorations of the enamel
on the highly translucent incisal edges observed on some
teeth. The composites with medium translucency, nemely
enamel shade, are indicated for restorations of the enamel
on most situations. They are also called by some manufacturers as universal or body shade composites. The lowtranslucency composites, nemely dentin shade, are used to
restore the lost dentin tissue. They are referred by some
manufacturers as opaque shade composites. The translucency of a composite is an essential optical property, as relevant as to color, since it affects the composite shade
appearance. The knowledge about the translucency can
help the selection of the most adequate composite and
obtain the best esthetic results. The translucency of the
human enamel increases with the years since its mineralization increases and the thickness decreases [2 ].14.2 Basic Concepts About Color
14.2.1 Definitions
The color phenomenon is a psychophysical response to the
physical interaction between the luminous energy and an
object, associated with the subjective experience of an
observer . Visible light is a form of electromagnetic radiation, with wavelength range between and nm, which
is detected by the light-sensitive photoreceptor cells of the
human eyes. Each wavelength corresponds to a specific color.
A light source can emit a single wavelength (monochromatic)
or multiple wavelengths (polychromatic). When the light
source is observed directly, the color that human vision
detects is a result of the emitted wavelengths, which is the
color of the light by itself. The more colors are emitted simultaneously by a light source, the more it comes close to white
color. When the light hits an object, it can be transmitted
through it, absorbed, or reflected, and this last one is responsible for the color perception that the humans have about the
object. The more the incident light is absorbed by the object,
the darker it is perceived by the observer. The more the polychromatic light is reflected by the object, the whiter it appears
to the observer. Therefore, there is the color of the light,
which corresponds to the wavelength emitted by the light
source, and the color of the objects, which is the light reflected
by an object.
The color phenomenon is a psychophysical response to
the physical interaction between the luminous energy
and an object, associated with the subjective experience
of an observer. The color of the light corresponds to the
wavelength emitted by the light source, while the color
of an object corresponds to the light reflected by it.
There are three factors that may affect the color perception,
which are the light source, the object that is being seen, and
the observer that is looking at the object . The light source
can emit luminous energy on a broad wavelength range, and
it is characterized by the relative amount of energy for each
wavelength on the visible spectrum. This way, the color per -
ception is affected by the light that illuminates an object,
because the different light sources have variable amounts of
each wavelength of the visible light . In relation to the
object, its spectral reflectance or light transmission characterizes its color. For example, a red object has this color
because it reflects the wavelength corresponding to the red
color more than the green or blue ones ( . Fig. 14.4a–e ). In
relation to the observer, the visual systems and the brain also
affect the color perception.
The primary colors are a biological concept based on the
physiological response of the color vision system in the
human eye to the light, and not a fundamental property of
light. Essentially, the light is a continuous spectrum of
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
wavelength, with an infinite number of colors. However, the
retina of the human eye contains only three types of color
receptors, called cone cells, having a trichromatic color
vision. Each one of those cones is especially sensitive to cer -
tain wavelengths of light, which correspond to red, green,
and blue colors. Those colors are considered the primary
colors of the light source (RGB system – red, green, and
blue), because each of them can independently stimulate
the cones, allowing a large range of color perception.
The color can be described according to the Munsell color
system, which is a three-dimensional model based on the
premise that each color has three qualities or attributes: hue,
value, and chroma. Hue is the actual color, for example, the
red, green, and blue ( . Fig. 14.5). Value indicates the lightness of a color, ranging from for pure black to pure white
(. Fig. 14.6). The chroma is the intensity a color. When the
chroma is low, the color is weak, while when it is high, the color is strong or vivid ( . Fig. 14.7) . The combination
between the three-color dimensions gives the shade or tone
of a color.
> The three dimensions of color are hue (actual color),
value (lightness), and chroma (intensity). The
combination between them gives the shade or tone of
a color.
14.2.2 Optical Characteristics of Natural
Teeth
Due to the large range of colors found on the natural teeth, it
may be hard to choose the proper shade for a restorative
material. Natural teeth are not monochromatic, and with a
single composite shade, it can be impossible to match the
polychromatism of teeth . The natural polychromatism is
the result of several shades found on enamel and dentin,
influenced by the different thickness of those structures along
the crown .
When analyzed separately, the enamel color varies from
white to gray, while the dentin has variable amounts of yellow, orange, and red. The enamel is thicker on the incisal
aIncident ligh t
Absorbed ligh tIncident ligh t
Reflec ted ligh tb
cd e
.Fig. 14.4 Color of the objects. a Every wavelength is absorbed
resulting in the black color; b every wavelength is reflected, resulting in
a white color; c –e prevalence reflection of a certain wavelength.
(Adapted from Fraser and Banks )
.Fig. 14.5 Hue or color name
.Fig. 14.6 Value or the lightness of a color
.Fig. 14.7 Chroma or hue strengthComposite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14edge and thinner in the cervical region. When the incisal
edges are not worn, frequently have blue, violet, or gray tones,
due to the enamel translucency and absence of the dentin.
Therefore, a single monochromatic composite cannot match
the complex color of the natural tooth . The translucency
of the composite varies according to the ratio between the
smaller and larger filler particles. The perceived color of a
composite restoration will also be influenced by the color of
the background (preparation walls) .
> A single monochromatic composite cannot match the
complex color of the natural tooth.
When the environmental light interacts with the tooth sur -
face, the color perceived by the observer is a mixture of several wavelengths reflected by the tooth. As enamel is a
translucent structure, when the light hits its surface, a certain
part is reflected, another is absorbed, and the rest is transmitted through it, reaching the underlying dentin. From this
light, a part is absorbed or transmitted, and the rest is
reflected back to the enamel. The dentin is the main responsible for the basic hue of the tooth, presenting a chromaticity
that varies from orange to yellow . Therefore, the shade of
the tooth structure perceived by the observer is a result of the
light reflected by both dentin and enamel.
The degree of translucency is related to how deep the light
penetrated the tooth or the restorations before it is reflected.
The normal is that light penetrates through enamel up to the
dentin before it is reflected, which gives the lively and realistic appearance of the intact teeth. The little light penetration
frequently results in the loss of the esthetic vitality for the
restoration. This is a common phenomenon found when
restoring teeth with veneers, a type of restoration that covers
the entire labial tooth surface of very dark teeth ( 7 Chap. 17).
Even though the opaque material is used to mask the background dark color, the loss of esthetic vitality usually is a
result on little light penetration. The illusion of translucency
may be created to increase the realism of the restoration.
Color modifiers, also referred as tints, can be used to obtain
the translucency appearance, darken the shiny stains, or
characterize the restorations .The enamel has a peculiar characteristic called opalescence, due to its similar optical characteristics of the opal
stone. When the enamel receives white light, which is a combination of different wavelengths, it is capable to reflect the
shorter wavelengths, specially the blue, and transmit the longer wavelengths, such as the yellow and the red . This is
due to the mineral structure of the enamel, where the mineral crystals with 0.02–0.04 μm of thickness, smaller than
some wavelengths of visible light, cause the selective reflection of the blue waves. The longer wavelengths, corresponding to the red and orange colors, do not deviate from its track
and are completely transmitted through the enamel [1, 23].
Opalescence is a capacity of some materials to reflect
the shorter wavelengths of light, mainly the blue, and
transmit the longer wavelengths, such as the yellow and
the red, like the opal stone.
The tooth has anisotropic optical properties, which means
that its visual appearance changes depending on the angle of
view or the angle of illumination. . Figure 14.8a, b shows a
tooth that had its entire dentin removed illuminate from labial
or lingual direction. When a white light source was positioned
in front of the labial tooth surface, the light reflected by the
enamel gave a bluish color to the structure. On the other hand,
when the white light source was positioned behind of the
tooth structure, hitting the lingual surface, the transmitted
light gave an orange appearance to the tooth, due to the fact
that enamel only allowed the transmission of longer wavelengths. However, in the daily life, where light source is always
locate outside the mouth, the light that hits the labial surface
is filtered by the enamel before reaching the dentin, which
only receives the longer wavelengths. Mostly of this light is
absorbed by the dentin, and a certain part is reflected, which
returns through the enamel to the external surface. Thus, the
light that observer sees when looking to a tooth is the addition
of the blue light reflected by the enamel and the yellow and red
wavelengths reflected by the dentin.
a b
.Fig. 14.8 Tooth with completely removed dentin. a View under reflected light; b view under transmitted light
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
In relation to the general color of the tooth structure, in
which the dentin tissue is present, the amount of blue light
reflected is small in relation to the longer wavelengths. For
this reason, the teeth are seen as a combination of reflected
light colors, which is mainly a mixture of yellow and red in
different ratios, resulting on an orange shade, together with a
small amount of blue from the opalescence. The opalescence
can be seen on the entire enamel, and it is not influenced by
the thickness [1 ]. The enamel opalescence increases the lightness of the tooth and creates effects of optical depth and vitality . However, when there is an evident translucent incisal
edge, without underlying dentin, a preponderance of the
shorter wave reflection occurs in this area, giving it a bluish
appearance, known as opalescent halo ( . Fig. 14.9). There are
composites which are really opalescent and may be used to
restore the lost enamel, and they should be applied over the
entire labial tooth surface. However, when a opalescent composite is not available, the incisal edge with its characteristic
appearance can also be recreated with a color modifier with
bluish shade, covered by a highly translucent composite, even
though this composite is not really opalescent by itself [1 ].
On the other hand, some people have the dentin on the
tip of the developmental lobes of anterior teeth with intense
white opaque shade. This does the dentin in this area to have
higher light reflection capacity than the rest of the tooth.
Therefore, in this specific region, the reflection of yellow and
red light which crossed the enamel and hit the dentin will be
higher, resulting in an orange appearance to the area
(. Fig. 14.10a–d ). This phenomenon is called counteropalescence. In . Fig. 14.11 , clinical aspect of the counteropalescence can be observed.
In . Fig. 14.12a–c , the counter-opalescence phenomenon
can be reproduced with some naturally opalescent composites, changing the background color. To obtain this effect
during the restorative procedure on anterior teeth, the tip of
the dentin lobes can be restored with wither and opaque
composite than the rest of the dentin. Then, it is covered with
a highly translucent layer of naturally opalescent composite.
The light transmitted and filtered through the enamel shade
composite layer is reflected by the white dentin composite on the tip of the lobes, creating the orange appearance on this
area [ 1]. When truly opalescent composites are not available,
the effect can be recreated with orange color modifiers, creating an illusion of counter-opalescence .
The way the light waves pass through the composite is different from the way they interact with the natural crystalline
mineral tooth structure. When the light hit the filler particles
of different sizes and shapes of a composite, its scattering happens on an uneven way. This creates on a higher light refractive index than enamel. Therefore, it is difficult to guess the
ideal thickness of the enamel shade composite layer necessary on the labial surface of a tooth to be restored, without
compromising the final translucency and lightness [1 ]. The
thickness of the enamel and dentin shade layers of a composite is one of the main factors that modulate the final esthetic
result. Very thin enamel shade layer can allow us to look
through the dentin too much, resulting in restorations more
saturated (higher chroma) and with smaller lightness (smaller
value). On the other hand, a very thick enamel shade layer
results in a monochromatic and grayish restoration. However,
the restoration of lost enamel with a composite, following to
the natural enamel thickness, results in an optical behavior
opposite to the natural tooth when enamel illuminated.
While for the natural enamel the increase of its thickness produces the increase of the lightness, thicker composite enamel
shade layers reduce the final lightness. When the enamel is
reconstructed with anatomic thickness, the higher refractive
index of the composite results on a low lightness restoration,
with grayish appearance [1 ]. To overcome this difference, the
enamel shade composite layer must have about one-third of
natural enamel thickness, increasing the thickness of the dentin shade composite, allowing to recreate the enamel lightness without compromising its translucency [1 ].
> The thickness of the enamel and dentin shade layers of
a composite is one of the main factors that modulate
the final esthetic result of a restoration.
Another optical property of the tooth structure which influences the restorative procedure is the fluorescence. It is a phenomenon of spontaneous emission of radiation by some
atoms and molecules inside the tooth structure composition,
being considered a kind of photoluminescence. The photoluminescence is the light emission from any form of matter
after the absorption of photons. It occurs when an atom
receives stimulation by light waves of a specific wavelength,
and this energy is absorbed. The electrons change the atomic
energy level from a ground energy state to a more external
level, entering in an excited energy state. This excited state is
unstable, and the electrons spontaneously come back to a
ground energy state, releasing the difference in energy
between the two states as a photon of light, generally with a
wavelength different from the one that first exited the atoms.
There are two types of photoluminescence, named phosphorescence and fluorescence. The phosphorescence naturally
occurs in some mineral when the material is stimulated by a
light source. The energy is absorbed by the atoms, and a
phosphorescent light is generated and slowly released, even
.Fig. 14.9 Bluish aspect of the incisal edge due to the opalescent
enamel (opalescent halo)Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14
ab
cdOpalescenc e
Opalescenc e Opalescenc e
.Fig. 14.10 Opalescence and counter-opalescence. a Whitish dentin
on the tip of the developmental lobes; b incidence of white light on
three different areas of the labial surface (1, incisal edge without
dentin; 2, tip of the whitish dentin lobules; 3, rest of the tooth
structure); c reflection of the blue light (shorter waves) by the enamel on the three areas and transmission of the orange light (longer waves)
toward the dentin; d complete transmission of the yellow light through
the incisal edge without dentin (1) and reflection of the light by dentin,
more intense on the tip of the whitish lobules (2 – counter-opalescence) and less intense on the rest of the structure (3)
.Fig. 14.11 Clinical aspect of the counter-opalescence showing
orange areas on the incisal third of the labial surface, on both central
incisors
ab c
.Fig. 14.12 Composite slabs placed over a white and black
background, showing the counter-opalescence over the white
background. a, c opalescent composites – over the white background,
they seem to be more yellow than over the black background; b
non-opalescent composite (the background has no inflence on its color)
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
after the end of the stimulation, making the object remains
glowing for a certain time. In case of the fluorescence, after
the energy from a light source is absorbed, the fluorescence
light generated is only emitted, while the object is still stimulated by the light source.
Fluorescence is a phenomenon of spontaneous emission
of radiation by some atoms and molecules, consisting
on absorption of light in a certain wavelength (generally
UV) and emission in another, generally visible light.
A specific type of fluorescence can be noticed on the human
teeth after they are irradiated with ultraviolet light. This
wavelength is part of white light emitted by the sun, but it is
more evident on places illuminated with “black light, ” gener -
ated by light bulbs that produce mainly ultraviolet light,
being used in nightclubs, theaters, stage, and as special
effects. This ultraviolet wavelength is almost invisible to bare
eye. However, when absorbed by the tooth structure, results
in the emission of visible light of whitish-blue color, which
does the tooth, appear brighter. Even though enamel and
dentin are fluorescent, this property is three times bigger on
the dentin than on the enamel. The enamel seems to act as a
filter, attenuating the intense fluorescent emissions that come
from the dentin [1, 43]. It is the result of the excitation of
some organic molecules specially located in the dentin, such
as the pyridinoline, thymine, and tryptophan. The fluorescence turns the natural teeth whiter and brighter under daylight, seeming as they are internally illuminated.
Differently from natural teeth in which the dentin and
the enamel contribute to the final fluorescence emission, on
the composite restorations, the main responsible for this
effect is the superficial layer, despite the underlying layers
were or not restored with a fluorescent composite. It means
that a superficial layer with a nonfluorescent composite
blocks the emission of an underlying layer of fluorescent
material; and a superficial layer of fluorescent composite
gives fluorescence to the restoration when applied over nonfluorescent composites. Therefore, it is a surface phenomenon [ 1].
People with composite restoration made of nonfluorescent composites have its esthetics impaired on the places illuminated with black light, because the restorations become
evident as dark areas ( . Fig. 14.13a, b ). However, in an
attempt to simulate the dental fluorescence, some manufacturers to produced composites even more fluorescent that the
natural teeth, resulting in the opposite effect. The restorations done with those materials appear brighter than the
teeth under UV . This way is important that the composite
has fluorescence, but its intensity must be similar to the natural tooth structure ( . Fig. 14.14a, b ).
The DEJ is a thin partially mineralized layer, formed
mainly by collagen fibers. It works absorbing the forces
applied over the enamel, transmitting it to the dentin, playing
also an important role in the way the light is dispersed and
transmitted inside the tooth. The DEJ is a highly translucent
structure, of low refractive index, allowing all light that goes
through the enamel reaches the dentin. This contributes to
the feeling of depth and vitality of the natural teeth, and it is
important to the process of internal light diffusion and control of lightness. The reproduction of the DEJ on direct restorations can be made with materials and techniques that allow
the same light interaction and optical results. A thin layer of a
flowable composite specially developed for this purpose can
be used (Glass Connector, Micerium), applied on the labial
surface in a thin layer between the dentin shade, composite
previously light-cured, and the enamel shade layer, increasing
the light diffusion and the lightness of the restoration [1 ].
The color of the natural teeth is something dynamic. It is
influenced by the incident light, topographical anatomy, and
hydration condition of the tooth structure, besides the individual optical properties of enamel and dentin. Therefore, it
is not enough to understand the concept of the three-color
dimensions, but also its interaction with the translucency,
opalescence, counter-opalescence, fluorescence, and superficial enamel texture . An important point when analyzing
tooth color is the fact that it is a polychromatic structure. As
the color observed is a result from the interaction of the light
ab
.Fig. 14.13 Patient with restoration with nonfluorescent materials. a under environmental light; b under ultraviolet lightComposite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14
with the enamel and dentin, the amount of each tissue and its
individual chromatic characteristics will result on a specific
shade. In fact, the tooth color is mainly determined by the
dentin and modified by the enamel.
> The color of the natural teeth is influenced by the
incident light, topographical anatomy, and hydration
condition of the tooth structure, besides the individual
optical properties of enamel and dentin. Therefore, it is
not enough to understand the concept of the
three-color dimensions but also its interaction with the
translucency, opalescence, counter-opalescence,
fluorescence, and superficial enamel texture.
. Figure 14.15a, b shows that enamel and dentin thickness
vary according to the region on the crown, resulting on different shades depending on the location. On the incisal third
of the crow, there is more enamel than dentin, while toward
the cervical third, the amount of dentin increases and of
enamel decreases, resulting on a darker shade . The dentin chroma increases from incisal edge toward the cervical area and from DEJ toward the pulp . Therefore, the incisal
third has a higher value and translucency than the cervical
third, while the middle third is a mixture of the incisal and
cervical shades . The use of several composite shades
may be required to esthetically restore the teeth. The dentin
shade must be taken looking directly to the dentin, whenever
it is exposed, or in the cervical region of the tooth, where the
enamel is thinner and more translucent, which allows the
best comparison with the underlying dentin chroma. The
enamel shade of a composite can be better taken on the middle third of the tooth to be restored, where the thickness of
the enamel is larger than in cervical area and there is less
influence of the chromaticity promoted by the dentin. Even
though the enamel translucency can be evaluated on the incisal third, the absence of the underlying dentin structure and
the presence on the dark background of the mouth on this
region, may confuse the clinician and lead to the selection of
excessively translucent composite . Although the teeth are
polychromatic, many may present a single shade from cervical margin up to the incisal edge .
ab
.Fig. 14.14 Comparison between the fluorescence of several composites (specimens in disc shape) and a human tooth fragment. a Aspect
under day light; b aspect under ultraviolet light (“black light”)
ab
Cervical thir d
Incisal thir dMedium thir d
.Fig. 14.15 a Transverse cut of an upper central incisor crown showing the enamel and dentin thickness on each third; b clinical aspect of the
teeth with noticeable shade differences from cervical to the incisal area
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
14.2.3 Shade Determination
When performing a composite restoration, the first step is to
select a restorative material with similar shade to the remaining
tooth structure and/or the adjacent teeth. The teeth shades
were classified by the restorative materials manufacturers on
specific categories, which represent the most common teeth
colors. Different types of shade guides were produced, related
to the shades of their respective products. At the beginning,
each composite brand had its own shade guide, which made
more difficult for the dentists to move to another brand, because
they have to learn how to work and recognize the new shades.
However, with the time, most of the dental materials manufactures started to match the shade of their product with the VITA
Classical shade guide (VITA, Bad Säckingen, Germany), developed for VITA ceramics. It presents four shade families that
differ according to the hue. The family A varies from reddish to
brownish, while the B varies from reddish to yellow. The C family has grayish shades due to the smaller chroma. The D family
has the reddish-gray shades. The shades on each family vary
simultaneously according to the chroma and value, being classified by the numbers 1, 2, 3, 3.5, or 4 ( . Fig. 14.16a ).
To use the VITA Classical shade guide, first the hue
should be selected (A, B, C or D). For that, shade tabs of different hues but with the same chroma/value are selected (. Fig. 14.16b ). They are placed near the tooth, choosing the
one that most match the tooth color. Then the tabs of the
chosen hue, with different chromas/values (1, 2, 3, 3.5, 4) are
placed close to the tooth, and the one that best match is
selected ( . Fig. 14.16c, d ).
To improve accuracy of the shade selection process, the
VITA Company developed a new shade guide, in which each
color dimension is selected separately, namely VITA
Toothguide 3D-MASTER. It uses a dichotomic decision method ( Y es/No or Better/Worse) ( . Fig. 14.17a–i ).
First of all, the value is determined by selecting the one of the
lightness groups (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5). For that, the upper
shade tabs are used (0M1, 1M1, 2M1, 3M1, 4M1, and 5M1)
by making a simple yes or no decision if they match the tooth
(. Fig. 14.17b, c ). The selection should be started with the
darkest group first. The second step consists on determining
the chroma. On the basis of the determined value level, the
middle hue group (M) is chosen, spreading the tabs out like a
fan. Then, one of the three shade samples (1, 2, or 3) is
selected ( . Fig. 14.17d, e ). Finally, the hue is selected looking
if the natural tooth is more reddish (R) or more yellowish (L)
as compared to the shade sample selected ( . Fig. 14.17f–h ).
Despite the efforts of the manufacturers to match the
color of its direct restorative materials to the VITA shade
guide, this last one is made of ceramic, with huge differences
a b
cd
.Fig. 14.16 Use of the VITA Classical shade guide. It can be noticed variation on the chroma and value for each hue. a VITA Classical shade
guide; b selection of hue (A, B or C); c simultaneous selection of the chroma and the value (1, 2 or 3); d selected shade (A1) Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14
in relation to composites, such as the presence of an organic
matrix. Therefore, this reproduction can never be exact .
The shade guides should rather be made with the same composite to be used for the restoration. In addition, they
should be kept hydrated by immersion in a water container,
because hydrated composites are always darker .
ab c
d e
fg
h i
.Fig. 14.17 Use of the VITA Toothguide 3D-MASTER. a Shade guide; b , c selection of the value (group); d , e selection of chroma; f , g selection of
hue; h selected shade; i black and white image to confirm the value of the shade selected
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
In order to perform the shade determination using shade
guides, some basic principles must be followed. The first one
is to hold it at least at one arm’s length to the patient’s mouth.
To look the shade guide too close adversely affect the shade
selection. The teeth should be viewed along a line of sight per -
pendicular to the tooth surface. The shade tab should be
placed parallel to the tooth being matched and in the same
plane. The shade determination must be performed before the
rubber dam isolation, with the teeth clean and hydrated. It
must be done before the teeth undergoes any long drying
period, because the dehydration makes the teeth lighter, as the
result of the translucency reduction . This way, if the shade
was correctly selected before the rubber dam isolation, immediately after its removal, the restoration will appear darker
than the dehydrated tooth remaining. If the restoration shade
is similar to the dehydrated tooth remaining, it is probably
that the shade selection was incorrect and with the hydration,
after the contact with saliva, it will appear lighter [3 ]. The
complete hydration of the teeth may take several hours.
Another point is the color of the office room where the
shade determination is performed. The walls and other object
in dental office reflect the light in the wavelength corresponding to its color. This will influence the color of the other
objects observed in the same room, such as the teeth. For this
reason, the walls, dental treatment unit and furniture must
have neutral colors. It is also important to ask the patients to
remove the red lipstick. If the patient is wearing colorful
clothes, it is advisable to cover them with a patient bib with a
neutral color, such as white or gray.
The observed color of objects depends on the characteristics of incident light. If an object is illuminated with white
light, it will have a certain color, determined by its interaction
with the different wavelengths of this polychromatic illuminant. This same object, when illuminated with another light
source which has the predominance of different wavelengths,
its final color can be different. This phenomenon is called
metamerism . Each material interacts in a specific way
with the incident light from each light source. Therefore, the
color of objects with different compositions can change when
the illumination is modified. Two objects may have the same color under a certain light source, but have very different
color under other illuminations. In the dental office, when
the teeth of a patient and a selected shade guide tab matching
its color are illuminated under natural sunlight they can
match perfectly . However, when the same teeth and shade
tab are illuminated by an incandescent light bulb, such as the
one in most of the overhead chair lights, the teeth and the
shade tab atoms will not interact on the same way with the
incident light, because they are made by different materials.
This will result on different shades from those observed
under the natural light, making the initial shade determination to appear incorrect ( . Fig. 14.18a, b ). Therefore, the
shade taking must be performed under the natural light or
under artificial light that simulates the daylight (fluorescent
light bulb), because this is the illumination of the environment which they are exposed on most of their daily lives .
Another important point during the shade determination
is the fact that the dentist should not keep looking to the
teeth and shade guide for a long time. That must be done very
quickly. After about 30 s, the photoreceptor cells of retina
become saturated by the wavelengths reflected from the
teeth, creating a visual fatigue. That adversely affect the distinction of small differences on the shade from yellow to
orange range observed on the tooth structure . In case
that happened, it is convenient that the clinician relaxes the
eyes looking for a few seconds at an object of complementary
colors in relation to the teeth colors, such as the blue, violet,
or green [27, 31]. Blue is the complementary color of orange,
while violet is of yellow and green of red [31, 40]. When looking at objects of complementary colors, the photoreceptor
cells of the eyes are recovered, increasing the sensitivity to
notice the small variations in yellow and orange . Then,
the dentist can come back to the shade determination procedure. Some clinicians ask the aid of the dental assistant as a
second opinion to help the shade match . The shade
selected must be registered on the dental records of the
patient, as well as the composite brand that will be used .
If dental bleaching is planned on the patient’s treatment plan,
it must be performed before any restorative procedure with
composites .
ab
.Fig. 14.18 Metamerism. a Shade determination of a natural tooth under environmental daylight; b natural tooth and shade tab under dental
light with halogen lampComposite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14
To evaluate the color match of the shade guide, besides
other characteristics of the tooth, a photographic camera can
be used. The glossy areas can be eliminated through polarizing
filters, allowing observing more details of the inner dentin,
clearly identifying the translucent areas of enamel [2 ]. A digital
photography of the shade tab and the teeth can help to evaluate
if the matching is correct. Using a photo editing software, the
image can be turned black and white, helping to evaluate if the value of the shade tab matches the tooth ( . Fig. 14.19a–d ).
Another possibility for shade determination is the use of intraoral spectrophotometers. They have the advantage of making
an objective color reading, without human interference, offer -
ing shade results according to the VITA Classical and
3D-MASTER shade guides ( . Fig. 14.20a, b ).
After the shade determination, a direct matching confirmation can be performed using the selected restorative
ab
c d
.Fig. 14.19 Digital color image converted to black and white a , c color images; b , d the same images in black and white to evaluate the value
match between the shade guide and tooth
ab
.Fig. 14.20 a VITA Easyshade spectrophotometer; b device being used
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
material. It is well-known that composites generally do not
perfectly reproduce the shade guides. This way, a small
portion of this material can be applied over the tooth to be
restored and light-cured, without previous adhesive application, verifying if the selected shade was correct .
After that, the composite can be easily removed with an
exploratory probe . It is important to light-cure the
materials because the composite shade slightly changes
after curing ( . Fig. 14.21a, b ) [2, 27]. A good polymerization for the complete elimination of the camphorquinone
residues, responsible for this color changes, is necessary.
On the case of the teeth with several chromatic nuances, it
is possible to make a restoration mock-up, building the
entire restoration with the combination of shades and
opacities selected for the composites, without adhesive
application, evaluating if the final shade matching was
adequate [1 –3, 27].
During the shade determination procedure, it must be
evaluated how translucent is the tooth enamel, verifying if it
will be required the use of a highly translucent composite
during the restoration. However, on older patients, its use is
generally not necessary . Even though the shade determination is a very important step to obtain a good esthetic for a
restoration, this procedure by itself does not guarantee that a
perfect result will be obtained. The final shade of the restoration is the result of the interaction between the color of the
background, if there is some remaining tooth structure, the
color of the dentin shade composite, and the color and translucency of the enamel shade composite applied over it.
. Figure 14.22a–d shows a shade guide simulation made with
actual composite, which allows to superimpose enamel shade
veneers over the dentin shade cores, being possible the color
analysis of various combinations. In . Fig. 14.22a, b , are
shown different dentin shade cores covered by the same
enamel shade composite venners, showing a different final
shade for each combination. In . Fig. 14.22c, d , are shown
the same dentin shade cores covered by different enamel
shade composites venners, creating different final shade
results.Some manufactures produce actual shade guides following
the superimposition concept presented, in which are possible
to check the combination of enamel and dentin shade tabs. An
example is the Coltene Company, which named this method
as “nesting” shade selection ( . Fig. 14.23a–c ) because the
enamel shade tab has a veneer shape and nestle over the dentin
shade tab with a core shape. Using this shade guide is necessary to place some water or glycerol between the veneer and
the core, creating an optical contact. That avoids possible
effects of light refraction at the transition and reveals the final
color, allowing the comparison with the tooth structure. If
there is no match, a different enamel or dentin shade can be
selected. The use of the same colors for enamel and dentin
shades, e.g., dentin A2 and enamel A2, results in the same final
color for the restoration, in this case, A2. However, as shown
in . Fig. 14.23a–c , when associating the dentin A1 with the
enamel A2, or the dentin A3.5 with the enamel A2, the final
color obtained will be intermediate between the original colors. This must be considered when it is planned to combine
different colors for the enamel and dentin shades in a certain
restoration. The tooth color observed in the clinical exam
must match the resulting color of the shade’s combination.
ab
.Fig. 14.21 a Composite portions without polymerization (to the left) and polymerized (to the right). a Palfique Estelite Sigma (Tokuyama); b
Z350 (3M/ESPE)
Tip
In order to perform a good shade determination, the
following principles should be followed:
5 The dentin shade selection should be done taking the
shade tab close to some exposed dentin area,
whenever it is possible, or close to the cervical region
of the tooth.
5 The enamel shade of a composite can be better taken
on the middle third of the tooth to be restored.
5 The shade guides should be made with the same
composite to be used for the restoration and kept
hydrated by immersion in a water container.
5 The shade guide should be hold it at least one arm’s
length far from the patient’s mouth.Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
.3 Selection of Composite Resin
After the shade determination is finished, the choice of the
kind of composite to be used on that particular restoration
must to be performed. The first point to be evaluated is the
stress level that the future restoration will undergo. In
places where the restorations will not receive the direct
occlusal loads, such as on Class V and Class III preparations without the involvement of the lingual surface, restor -
ative materials with inferior mechanical properties can be
used, such as the microfilled composites. However, if the
restoration involves the lingual surface, on a contact area or
disocclusion guide, or even on restorations of the incisal
edge, it is necessary to use a stronger restorative material,
such as the hybrid, microhybrid, nanohybrid, or purely
nanofilled composites.
Another point is the necessity of obtaining a high polishing of the restoration surface. Mainly for those in the
cervical regions, the restorative material must be polished
until reaching a surface roughness similar to the natural
enamel, reducing biofilm deposition ang gingival inflammation. For that, the microfilled, nanohybrid, purely nanofilled, or even microhybrid composites can be preferably
used. The macrofilled and hybrid composites should be
avoided.
ab
cd
.Fig. 14.22 Shade guide simulation allowing superimposition of enamel shade veneers over dentin shade cores. a , b Same enamel shade over
different dentin shades; c , d different enamel shades over the same dentin shade 5 The teeth should be viewed along a line of sight
perpendicular to the tooth surface.
5 The shade tab should be placed parallel to the tooth
being matched and in the same plane.
5 The shade determination must be performed before
the rubber dam isolation.
5 The walls and furniture of the dental office must
have neutral colors and the patient is asked to
remove the red lipstick.
5 If the patient is wearing colorful clothes, it is
advisable to cover them with a bib with a neutral
color, such as white or gray.
5 Shade taking must be performed quickly, under the
natural light or under artificial light that simulates
the daylight.
5 When taking too much time looking to the tooth to
choose the right shade, it is convenient that the
clinician relaxes the eyes looking to an object blue,
violet, or green, for a few seconds, to recover the
eyes from fatigue.
5 To confirm the shade selection, small amounts of
composite can be applied and cured over the tooth
without adhesive, and mock-up restoration can be
performed.
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
Finally, an important point is the esthetic results provided by the material, which besides a proper color match,
must have translucency and gloss similar to the tooth
structure. It can be noticed that there are large differences
among the composites provided by different manufactur -
ers, mainly in relation to the optical properties. This way,
even if a correct shade determination has been performed,
the final esthetic outcome may not be adequate. In addition, certain brands may not have a composite that match
some specific patient’s tooth being restored. The clinician
must become familiar with the differences between the
products to be able to choose best alternative for each
patient. However, the composites that allow a better polishing have a higher chance to produce an adequate result.
The modern materials such as the microhybrid, nanohybrid, and nanofilled composites may allow these
required results.
14.4 Indications of Composites on Anterior
Teeth
The composite restorations on anterior are indicated on
teeth that suffered carious or non-carious lesions, fractures, or abnormal formation of the enamel. They can also
be indicated on teeth that require modifications due to its
shape, such as in the case of diastemas or peg-shaped teeth,
or due to its wrong position, such as rotated or inclined
teeth. The composite also can be applied on cases of teeth
with color alteration that could not be properly bleached,
when labial surface can be completely covered by the
restorative material to improve the esthetics of the
smile (see 7 Chap. 17).
As can be observed for all restorative materials, the composites also do not show a good behavior in patients with
poor oral hygiene. The acids produced by the bacteria attack
the organic composite matrix, resulting in the softening of
the material, increasing its wear and premature staining.
Patients with parafunctional activities such as bruxism,
clenching, nail biting, and pencil chewing must be alerted
about the possibility of fractures or displacement of the restoration. The excessive and cyclic loads applied over the restored teeth can generate fatigue of the restorative material,
resulting in fracture and/or displacement of the restoration. The parafunctional habits must be treated, and, in some
cases, the use of an occlusal splint for an indefinite period of
time is necessary to protect the teeth and the restoration. The
smoking habit also causes premature staining of the restorations, which will need to be often repolished to maintain the
good esthetic result. In the same way, deleterious eating habits such as high intake of acidic food and drinks, as well as
food colorings agents and alcohollic beverages, will also
result in the degradation of the organic matrix of the composite.
Even though most composites allow a good polishing of
its surface, tooth preparations with cavosurface margins
inside the crevice represent a great challenge. First of all,
there is a difficulty to obtain proper isolation of the operating field, which may result in the contamination of the
preparation with the fluid from the gingival sulcus, blood,
or saliva. It is known that the adhesive procedure can only
be performed in a completely clean and dry preparation;
otherwise, the bonding to the tooth structure will fail .
In addition, in some cases, there is no enamel on the gingival cavosurface angle. As the bonding to the dentin margin
is more difficult and less predictable than to enamel, more
marginal gaps can occur, increasing the microleakage and
the probability of secondary caries. Other than that, the difficulty to proper finish and polish the restoration margin
may result in the presence of overhangs or rough surfaces
that increase the biofilm deposition and cause constant gingival inflammation.
The composite restorations are also indicated as part of
the treatment for the non-carious lesions of erosive tooth
wear, abrasion, or abfraction. The restorations are indicated
when the lesion is active and no success was obtained on the
attempts to interrupt its progression; the structural integrity
of tooth is threatened or there is a risk of pulpal exposure; the
structural defect is unacceptable on the esthetic point of
view; the dentin is hypersensitive and the sensitivity was not
reduced with the non-restorative treatment; or there are carious lesions associated . Besides several other advantages,
the restorations decrease the rate of progression or even
arrest the structural loss process.
ab c
.Fig. 14.23 a Nesting shade guide of the Brilliant composite (Coltene) showing dentin shades on the left and enamel shades on the right; b , c
combination of the same type of enamel shade (A2) with different dentin shades (A1, A2, and A3.5) resulting on several final tonesComposite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
.5 Esthetic Analysis of Anterior Teeth
In 7 Chap. 1, several factors related with the smile esthetics
were discussed, based on the relations among the group of
teeth forming the dental arch and the positions of the lips
and gingiva. In the following sentences, aspects related to
tooth units alone will be discussed, which is important for
the proper restoration of the lost tooth structure.
According to Baratieri et al. [2 ], the hands are capable to
reproduce just what the eyes were able to see. In other words,
when trying to restore a tooth, it is important that the dentist is
capable to identify their multiple and complex anatomical
details. Therefore, a comprehensive esthetic analysis of the
damaged tooth must be performed before performing a restoration. The contralateral tooth can be used as a reference to
guide the restoration of the lost tooth structure. The first strategy for that is to observe the tooth from several angles, allowing that all topographical details can be noticed
(. Fig. 14.24a–c ). The restored areas on the teeth must reflect
the light in a similar manner to the intact adjacent surface .
14.5.1 Enamel Translucency
The translucency of the dental enamel must be evaluated
before performing a composite restoration. The anterior
teeth of many patients, mainly the younger ones, present a translucent incisal edge that must be reproduced in the
composite restoration ( . Fig. 14.25a, b ). An opaque halo
can also be observed, which is an optical phenomenon produced by the changes in the enamel prism direction. The
halo thickness, contour, and proximal extensions can vary
from tooth to tooth [1 ]. The opaque halo effect is produced
by the total reflection of the light, because angle of incidence is greater than the limiting angle of the enamel, that
is, 37° [2 ]. When the teeth are hydrated, the light refraction
is changed in relation to when they are dried, reducing the
thickness of the opaque halo and increasing the enamel
translucency [1 ].
14.5.2 Morphology of the Incisal Edge
The newly erupted anterior teeth have an irregular contour of
the incisal edge due to the presence of mamelons, which are
three-rounded protuberances formed by the developmental
lobes, separated by grooves, which can be compared with the
shape of the fleur-de-lis ( . Fig. 14.26a, b ). On patients with a
very translucent incisal edge, the contour of the dentin mamelons can be observed through the enamel ( . Fig. 14.27a, b ).
To improve its visualization, a digital photograph of the anterior teeth can be obtained and manipulated in image editing
software, increasing its saturation ( . Fig. 14.27b ).
. Figures 14.28a–d , 14.29a–d , and 14.30a–d show extracted
ab c
.Fig. 14.24 a, b, c Pictures taken from different angles showing several topographical details of the surface that should be reproduced, such as
sulcus and lobes
ab
.Fig. 14.25 a, b Translucent incisal edge and opaque halo (arrows)
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
ab
.Fig. 14.26 a, b Incisal edge contour with shape of the fleur-de-lis (arrows)
ab
.Fig. 14.27 a Demarcation of the lobes seen through the translucent incisal edge; b to increase the saturation of a digital picture allows better
observation of the dentin lobes
ab
.Fig. 14.28 Outer and inner morphology of an upper central incisor. a , c With enamel; b, d enamel completely dissolved by immersion in the
acid solution, allowing dentin visualization
intact upper anterior teeth before and after its complete
demineralization, through the immersion of an acidic solution for some days, remaining only its collagenous dentin structure. With this technique, the outer morphology of the
enamel and the inner morphology of the dentin can be compared, allowing a direct view of the dentin lobes.Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14
14.5.3 Surface Texture
The surface texture of natural teeth is composite by macroand microtexture. The macrotextures are represented by the
depressions and elevations found on the enamel surface. On
the labial surface of an upper central incisor, the macrotexture is generally characterized of three vertical lobes separated by two grooves ( . Fig. 14.31a, b ). The macrotexture is responsible for the areas of light reflection creating the relief
sensation of the surface. The visual impact and the dimension perception of width and length come from the interaction of the light with those areas, which is reflected in the
more elevated areas on the surface topography .
The microtexture is created by the perikymata, which are
incremental growth lines in youthful teeth that appear on the
surface of enamel as a series of transverse parallel grooves,
ab
cd
.Fig. 14.29 Outer and inner morphology of an upper lateral incisor. a , c With enamel; b, d enamel completely dissolved by immersion in acid
solution, allowing dentin visualization
cd
.Fig. 14.28 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
affecting the light reflection and the lightness of a tooth, creating areas of light and shadows that give movement sensation. On young patients, the perikymata create a very
irregular surface. However, due to the enamel wear with the
years, the tooth surface becomes smoother, and the perikymata disappear ( . Fig. 14.32a, b ). For a better observation of
the surface details during the clinical exam, it is recommended to place the index finger on the cervical region of the teeth, creating shadows that better reveals the morphology
. To obtain good esthetic results with composite restorations, it is essential that the texture details are properly reproduced.
When the macroand microtexture are recreated, with
glossy and light-reflecting areas, the lightness can be manipulated and indirectly decrease or increase the translucency
of the restoration. A rough and irregular surface, rich in
ab
c d
.Fig. 14.30 Outer and inner morphology of an upper canine. a , c With enamel; b, d enamel completely dissolved by immersion in the acid
solution, allowing dentin visualization
ab
.Fig. 14.31 a, b Macrotexture. Demarcation of grooves between the developmental lobes on the labial surface (lines)Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14microtexture, reduces the tooth lightness but increases the
translucency, reducing the gloss and interfering with the
chromatic perception. A well-polished surface becomes less
translucent, reflects more light, and increases the lightness
. The understanding about the relation between the
macroand microtextures over the reflection and dispersion
of the light, as well as its influence on the lightness and
translucency of the restoration, is essential when performing the finishing and polishing procedures [1 ]. During the
esthetic analysis of the tooth to be restored and the neighbor
teeth, its shape and dimensions must be analyzed, as will be
mentioned further on, as well as the size and shape of the
incisal embrasures, according to what was described in
7 Chap. 1 (. Fig. 1.11a –d) .
14.5.4 Dental Dimensions and Proportions
The dental dimensions and clinical crown width-to-length
ratios, part of what is called microesthetics, have a large
influence on the esthetic of the smile. The presence of disproportion on dimensions may be corrected in some cases
through a restorative treatment or periodontal surgery. The
length of the clinical crown on anterior teeth is the distance
between the incisal edge and the gingival margin. For some
individuals, the teeth may clinically seem to be shorter than
the anatomical crowns really are, because the gingival margin
is more coronal to the cementoenamel junction (CEJ) than
the ideal, due to an altered passive eruption . On older
adults, it is expected the abrasion on the incisal edges, which
also causes the shortening of the clinical crown. In some
cases, the reduction of the teeth length due to the wear is
compensated by the gingival recession due to a gradual
reduction of the periodontal support .
Most of the studies about the dental proportion concluded that the width of esthetically harmonic upper central
incisor corresponds to about 80% of its length, with variations between 75% and 85% ( . Fig. 14.33a–f ) [14, 37]. This
width-to-length ratio distinguishes its characteristic shape. The length of the upper central incisor range between 10.4
and 11.3 mm and the width between 8.3 and 9.3 mm. Men,
generally, have incisors with a larger width than women,
while women generally have a clinical crowns with a shorter
length than men [14, 37]. The central incisors present a dominance on the final aspect of the smile. A key point for esthetic
smile is the symmetry of those teeth that generally present
the same shape and size, as a specular image, even though in
nature it is hard to find those teeth perfectly identical, which
occurs in only 14% of the cases. The asymmetry is common
both on the width and on the length, although discreet differ -
ences are not noticed. However, discrepancies on the width
and length larger than 0.3 mm will be easily noticed by the
observers and may be convenient some kind of correction
. The dimensions of the upper incisors also have a relation with the dimensions of the lower incisors. The width of
the upper central incisor corresponds to approximately the
width of the lower central incisor added to half the width of
the lower lateral incisor .
> The width of esthetically harmonic upper central
incisor corresponds to about 80% of its length, with
variations between 75% and 85%.
The upper lateral incisors have the shape and contour similar
to the central incisors, although with a smaller width of about
2–3 mm . The length of the crown is about 1–1.5 mm
shorter (approximately 20%) than the central incisors. The
differences of size and position between the lateral incisors
may be very large, not only from one person to another but
also inside the same mouth. The variations found in size of
those teeth allow that, if necessary, small changes in the
length and width can be performed in one or both teeth,
because it will hardly be noticed by the observers, since the
small differences are frequent on nature [14, 35]. On the
other hand, the presence of diastema may significantly
adversely affect the esthetics of the smile, requiring its closing
by means of an adhesive restoration, as will be discussed fur -
ther in this chapter.
ab
.Fig. 14.32 Microtexture. a Young patient’s teeth showing the transversal lines corresponding to the perikymata; b middle-aged adult patient
showing smooth labial surfaces
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
Tip
The variations found in size of lateral incisor allow that
small changes, in the length and width, can be
performed in one or both teeth using composite,
because it will hardly be noticed by the observers, since
the small differences are frequent on nature.
The upper canines are about 1–1.5 mm smaller in width than
the central incisors, even though having a similar length, with a variation of only 0.5 mm . They also have variations in the morphology. In some people, they have a sinuous
shape, with a sharp point that gives them a vigorous appear -
ance, while sometimes they are particularly round and delicate. Their gingival zenith and the tips of the cusp are
generally not perfectly aligned to the horizontal plane. Its
faciolingual position is also asymmetric, and it may cause
disharmony on the progression of the inter-incisor angle or
incisal embrasures .
The analysis of the width-to-length ratio of the anterior
teeth may be performed directly in the mouth, using a bow
ab
c d
ef
.Fig. 14.33 Width-to-length ratio (R) of the central incisors (W-width, L-length). a , b Teeth with normal proportions; c , d excessively long teeth;
e, f excessively short teethComposite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14compass with two needle points positioned on the teeth,
which is then placed over a ruler to measure the distances in
millimeters, or using calipers. The mathematical calculations
may be performed obtaining the proportions. However, this
process takes time and is preferred to be performed on a
study model. An alternative to simplify this procedure is to
use the proportion gauge developed by the professor Stephen
J. Chu, marketed by the name of Chu’s Aesthetic Gauge (HuFriedy) ( . Fig. 14.34a ). The complete set of instruments
includes a proportion gauge to measure the proportions of the crown; a crown lengthening gauge to evaluate the need
for lengthening of the clinical crowns, due to discrepancies of
the gingival margin position by means of periodontal sur -
gery; and a special calibrated periodontal probe or sounding
gauge to verify the position of the alveolar bone crest in relation to the gingival margin.
The proportion gauge allows a fast diagnosis of the discrepancy on the width-to-length ratio of the clinical crown,
directly inside the mouth through on a visual color-coded
system. One end of the instrument has a T-bar tip with
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 14.34 a Chu’s Aesthetic Gauge (T-bar and in-line tips); b
width-to-length ratio on the T-bar; c intraoral analysis of the upper
anterior teeth proportions; d analysis of width and length of the central
incisor in relation to the red bands on the horizontal and vertical arms; e width and length of the lateral incisor in relation to the blue band; f width
and length of the upper canines in relation to the yellow band; g width-tolength ratio on the in-line tip; h measurement of the crown length with
in-line tip; i measurement of the crown width with in-line tip
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
vertical and horizontal arms to measure length and width
at the same time, being used for teeth with normal alignment. The opposite end has an in-line tip with short and
long parallel arms, helping to measure the length and
width independently, in cases of crooked or crowded teeth
where the use of the T-bar tip may be difficult ( . Fig.
13.34a ). Both tips have a predetermined ratio of about
78%, which is an average value for the population.
The T-bar tip has a vertical arm, a horizontal arm, and an
incisal guide. It is placed on the labial surface of the tooth,
with the vertical arm parallel to the long axis of the teeth, on
the central region of the crown, and the incisal guide touching the the incial edge. The vertical arm is used to measure
the length of the crown, while the horizontal one measures
its width. The instrument is made with a yellow material that
contains blue, red, and black color bands. A particular color
band on the vertical arm corresponds to the same color band
on the horizontal arm, helping to ensure that the tooth is in
proportion.
The most common width/length dimensions for the
upper central incisors (8.5/11 mm) correspond to the exter -
nal ends of the red bands ( . Fig. 14.34b ). The most common
dimensions for a lateral incisor (6.5/8.5 mm) correspond to
the external ends of the blue bands, while the average values
for the upper canines (7.5/9.5 mm) correspond to the exter -
nal ends of the yellow bands. In . Fig. 14.34b, f , the dimen-sion corresponding to each band on the T-bar tip and in-line
bar tip can be observed. The measurements must begin on
the central incisor, looking for which size ranges the other
teeth must be evaluated (common, small, large, or extralarge), passing to the lateral incisor and then to the canine
(. Fig. 14.34c–f ). This way, it can be known if the width -tolength ratio of each tooth is correct, as well to know if the
teeth have compatible sizes.
On the case of small teeth, the measurement of the crown
length will move downward (one full band) and the width
toward the center (one full band) of the most common measurements. On this case, the measurement of the central incisor begins on the internal part of the red band, while the
canine will start on the external end of the blue band and the
lateral incisor on the internal end of the blue band. In large
teeth, the measurement will move one band upward and outward, while the extra-large ones will move two bands.
The in-line tip is designed to measure, independently,
the length of the teeth with the longer arm and the width
with the shorter arm, on the cases where the T-bar may
not be used ( . Fig. 14.34h–i ). It works in the same way that
the T-bar tip does, except by the fact that the horizontal
arm on T-bar becomes the short arm of the in-line tip. For
its use, first, the length of the central incisor must be measured, aligning the tool with the long axis of the dental
crown (. Fig. 14.34h ). To start the measurement, the incigh
i
.Fig. 14.34 (continued)Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14sal guide, which is the first black band, must be placed on
the incisal edge as the starting reference to measure the
length. To measure the width of the crown, the short arm
must be aligned perpendicularly to the long axis of the
tooth parallel to the incisal edge ( . Fig. 14.34i ). The measurements of the lateral incisor and canine are done in the
same way.
14.6 Restorative Technique
14.6.1 Previous Clinical Procedures
The first clinical step is the pre-procedural antisepsis of the
patient’s oral cavity, using a chlorhexidine digluconate solution or another type of antiseptic mouthwash. The patient is
asked to swish it in mouth for 30 s. The use of an antiseptic
mouth rinse reduces drastically the emission of the contaminated particles to the surrounding atmosphere, during the
use of a high-speed handpiece, helping to protect the dental
health-care workers of infections by pathogenic bacteria,
viruses, and fungi. A radiographic examination can also be
performed to analyze the lesion depth and evaluate if there
is any pathological periapical radiographic change. If the
lesion depth is shallow or medium and there are no periapical changes, the local dental anesthesia can be performed. If
the lesion is large and deep and there is doubt if the pulp has
turned necrotic or not, the sensitivity thermal testing must
be performed. In the absence of painful response after the
application of the thermal stimulus, the test cavity preparation can be done, starting the tooth preparation without
anesthesia, to evaluate if there is any painful response. If the
tooth has a painful response to the test cavity, the anesthesia
of the area should be performed. If the pulp has turned
necrotic and endodontic treatment is necessary, it must be
provided before the restoration is started. However, on the
cases where the esthetic re-establishment cannot be postponed, the restoration may be done first, followed by the
root canal access cavity preparation to start the endodontic
treatment.
In case the tooth is covered by biofilm or extrinsic stains,
a prophylaxis must be performed with pumice or prophylactic paste without fluoride and brush, or with a prophy-jet
device, which uses pressurized slurry of sodium bicarbonate or glicine powder, taking care not to injure the gingival
tissue leading to bleeding. After choosing the kind of composite to be use, performing the shade determination, the
esthetic analysis of the tooth to be restored and of the adjacent teeth, the occlusion evaluation must be performed with
a thin double-sided two colors articulating paper (e.g., red
and black), allowing a two-tone representation of static and
dynamic occlusion. The first step is to inspect the eccentric
contacts (dynamic occlusion). The paper is placed on the
Miller articulating paper forceps, in a way that the red side is
facing the tooth to be restored. The patient is asked that to
occlude at centric occlusion (CO) and do protrusive and lateral excursive movements. The patient must open the mouth and the presence of interferences during disocclusion movements be analyzed. After that, the paper is then turned in the
forceps in a way that the black side faces the tooth to be
restored. The concentric contact (static occlusion) is analyzed, asking the patient to close the mouth in CO and open
it again. The color sequence can, of course, be altered.
Whenever possible, the tooth-to-tooth contacts occurring
during CO should not be included in the preparation outline, remaining over the intact tooth structure. In case it is
not possible, care must be taken so that it will not be located
over the tooth-restoration interface. It must be verified
which teeth participate of the disocclusion guides, avoiding
its modification when guides are working properly.
Sometimes eccentric interferences can occur and should be
evaluated and adjusted. The presence of wear facets must be
verified, which indicates the presence of intense contacts on
that area [3 ].
14.6.2 Tooth Preparation
In case of a caries lesion located on the proximal surface,
without affecting the enamel on the labial or lingual surfaces,
it is necessary to choose the most convenient entry direction,
which can be the labial, lingual, or strictly proximal approach.
The proximal approach should be chosen every time is possible, because it promotes the maximum preservation of the
healthy remaining tooth structure. It can be performed in the
absence of adjacent teeth, when there are lesions on both
adjacent tooth surfaces, in a way that the entry may happen
through the preparation on the neighboring tooth. It is also
possible on cases of wrong positioning of the tooth or presence of diastemas, or even when the adjacent tooth has some
type of restoration or temporary crown that can be removed
(. Fig. 14.45a–l ) .
Another option is to perform a dental separation. It can
be done in two different ways (rapid and slow separation).
The rapid or immediate separation uses mechanical separators which employ the wedge principle, such as the Elliot or
Ivory (. Fig. 3.47a– c). On those cases, only a topical anesthetic should be used on the interdental papilla on the way to
reduce the painful sensation. The separation procedure must
be performed slowly, considering the sensitivity reported by
the patient. The injection of an anesthetic before the separation eliminates completely the sensitivity, increasing the
chances to harm the periodontal tissue. After the separation
is complete, obtaining the necessary access to the lesion,
anesthesia should be performed before the tooth preparation. However, the patient discomfort and the chances of
injuries to the periodontium have reduced the use of this
technique. The slow or delayed separation technique is less
traumatic. On this technique, the orthodontic elastic tooth
separator (rubber rings of different thickness as shown on
. Fig. 3.48) is stretched with two pieces of dental floss and
applied between the teeth, remaining for 1 or 2 days before
the restoration. The ring must surround the contact area. If
the ring is breaking during the application, the teeth can be
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
slightly separated with a wooden wedge and the region lubricated with a water-soluble glycerin gel, so the rubber can
slide easily. It may be required, when the patient return on
the next appointment, to replace the ring for a thicker one to
be able to reach the necessary direct access to the proximal
area [ 2, 3]. After this period the rubber ring is removed, the
isolation of the operating field is performed, and a wedge is
applied to maintain the space obtained. Then, a conservative
tooth preparation and the restorative procedure are per -
formed.
When the gingival border of the caries lesion is subgingivally located, a wooden wedge should be placed between the
teeth to protect the gingiva during the tooth preparation. In
case the rubber dam isolation has been previously applied,
the wedge will also protect the rubber sheet . If the proximal contact was removed during the preparation, the wedge
will promote an additional dental separation to compensate
the thickness of the matrix band and help the restore of the
contact point . It must be inserted through the larger
embrasure. If the wedge is going to be applied after the rubber dam isolation, the sheet must be stretched with the tip of
the finger, first pressing firmly the rubber and the underlying
soft tissues and then pulling the rubber and moving it far
from the tooth. The wedge is inserted and the rubber is
released ( . Fig. 14.48b ) .
After obtaining access to enter the lesion, the carious tissue must be removed preserving the maximum of the healthy
remaining tooth structure possible. The entry must be per -
formed with a round diamond point in a high-speed handpiece. The carious dentin tissue is removed using a round
bur, of largest diameter possible, compatible with the preparation size, in a low-speed handpiece, or using dentin spoons
of adequate size . The final preparation dimensions are
usually determined by the size, shape, and location of the
lesion, as well as the necessary extension to obtain access to
visualize the walls and use the instruments . The preparation must be restricted to the removal of the carious tissue in
the most conservative way. On the case of proximal entry
approach, no bevels on the margins are necessary because
there is no esthetic commitment.
> The tooth preparation is restricted to the removal of
the carious tissue in the most conservative way. The
final dimensions are determined by the size, shape,
and location of the lesion, as well as the necessary
extension to obtain access to the walls.
In case it is not possible to perform a dental separation, and
the lesion is restricted to the proximal surface, the lingual
entry approach should be chosen, preserving the labial
enamel, even if undermined, to guarantee good esthetic
results for not exposing the composite to visible areas. As the
indirect vision is frequently necessary, a first surface reflection, clean and without scratches mirror must be used, allowing a clear view and without distortions . Sometimes, on
the upper arch, the direct vision may be obtained leaning the
patient’s head backward, according to what is describe in
7 Chap. 2 (. Fig. 2.13a ) .Before touching the tooth, the rotary instrument is
positioned and activated on high speed with an air/water
spray. The assistant directs the airstream from the air/water
syringe toward the mirror and places the saliva ejector (SE)
next to the operating field. The ideal is the use of high-volume evacuator (HVE) with a plastic tip with beveled end,
placed close to the tooth surface ( . Fig. 7.49a ). The adjacent tooth must be protected with a steel matrix band. The
initial opening must be performed in the correct incisogingival position of the lesion center, as close as possible to
the adjacent tooth, without touching it. The rotary instrument is held perpendicular to the enamel surface, in a
mesiodistal angle that places the neck of the instrument
almost touching the adjacent tooth, in the region of the
embrasure. It is directed toward the lesion until feeling the
sensation of falling in a hollow space, which means that the
lesion was reached ( . Fig. 14.35a–d ) . Incorrect entry
overextends the lingual outline to stress areas, such as the
marginal ridges, unnecessarily weakening the tooth. The
outline of the preparation must be the most conservative as
possible, as sometimes smaller than the internal dimensions of the preparation ( . Fig. 14.36a–f ). The same instrument is used to enlarge the opening only enough for caries
removal and convenience form, while establishing initial
axial wall depth. Using pendular movements, the carious
tissue is removed without increasing the opening size [3 ,
31]. Unless it is extremely necessary to remove the carious
tissue, the preparation should not include the contact area,
extended to the labial surface or subgingivally . On the
case of lingual entry approach, no bevel on the margins is
recommended because no esthetic commitment occurs. In
addition, the bevel may extend the restoration margins
toward the centric contact areas or undergoes heavy masticatory forces, increasing the wear and susceptibility of
fracture [3 ].
The labial entry approach should be used when: the carious lesion has already reached and destroyed the enamel on
the labial surface; the labial surface was destroyed and the
lingual surface is intact; both labial and lingual surfaces were
affected there is an faulty restoration on the labial surface;
there is an irregular alignment of the tooth or facial positioning of the lesion and the lingual approach would require
excessive cutting of the tooth structure [3, 31]. The procedure
is simpler because the direct vision can be used and the lesion
or inadequate restoration are generally larger . The opening of preparation has to allow the correct removal of the
carious tissue but in the most conservative way possible.
When there are two adjacent lesions to be treated on contiguous teeth, many times one of them is larger than the
other. When the preparation of the larger lesion is performed
first, the preparation of the smaller lesion can generally be
even more conservative, due to the improved access provided
by the larger preparation ( . Fig. 14.48a–g ). The opposite
sequence must be followed when the material is applied dur -
ing the restorative procedure, i.e. the smaller preparation is
restored first . After the anesthesia, the preparation can
be done before or after the rubber dam isolation. In both Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14cases, a wedge should be placed on the interproximal space to
retract the rubber dam and the gingival papilla, improving
the access to the gingival margin of the lesion . The entry
is performed with a round diamond point in a high-speed
handpiece, and the carious dentin tissue is removed with a
round carbide bur in a low-speed handpiece . The tip of
an exploratory probe must carefully inspect the DEJ to detect
the presence of remaining carious tissue . The removal of
the carious tissue must start on the surrounding walls, reducing the contamination of the preparation, finishing on the
axial wall. This way, if an accidental pulp exposure occurs,
the risk of contamination of the pulpal tissue is reduced. The
undermined enamel may remain since it will be reinforced
by the adhesive restoration .
Tip
When there are two adjacent lesions to be treated on
contiguous teeth, the preparation of the larger one is
performed first, which allows the second
preparation to be more conservative due to the
improved access. The opposite sequence should be
followed when the material is applied during the
restorative procedure.Tip
The removal of the carious tissue must start on the
surrounding walls, reducing the contamination of the
preparation, finishing on the axial wall. This way, if an
accidental pulp exposure occurs, the risk of
contamination of the pulpal tissue is reduced. The
undermined enamel may remain since it will be
reinforced by the adhesive restoration.
Due to the important esthetic requirement on the labial sur -
face and the difficulty to mask a butt joint restoration margin,
a bevel can be prepared only on the cavosurface angle on the
facial tooth surface. The main purpose of this procedure is to
help masking the interface between the restoration and the
remaining tooth structure. It is a small cut performed on the
cavosurface angle on a 45° with the external surface, using a
conical, flame, needle, or round-shaped diamond point in
high speed, with an average width of 0.25–0.5 mm or larger
[3, 31]. The marginal bevel creates a progressive transition
between the restorative material and the tooth structure,
helping to mask the restoration and improve the esthetics
. The larger the bevel width, the more likely is to obtain
an excellence esthetic result.
ab
cd
.Fig. 14.35 Entry direction for preparation opening (incisal view of
extracted teeth assembled and cross sectioned to show the lesion and
illustrate the procedure). a Incorrect entry position; b , c correct entry direction; d cross section of the finished preparation preserving the
marginal ridge
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
When composite materials started to be used to restore
anterior teeth, the bonding to the tooth structure was
restricted to the enamel tissue. Due to its many advantages,
the bevel used to be always indicated on the entire enamel
cavosurface angle of the preparation on those days. It increases
the bonding area, improving the retention and the marginal
sealing of the restoration; exposes a more reactive enamel
which improves the quality of the acid etching; and cuts the
prism transversally to create a better end-on etching pattern
than when the prisms are etched sideways [3 , 31]. The bevel
also removes the prismless enamel layer, providing more micromechanical retention. However, more effective bonding
agents are available nowadays, for both enamel and dentin tissues, and the retention does not depend only on bonding to
enamel. Therefore, it is no longer recommended to perform
the bevel on the whole cavosurface angle. In addition, the
bevel requires an extra cut of the tooth structure and makes
the preparation procedure more aggressive. Considering that
the restoration will probably fail after some year and will be
replaced, the most conservative preparation is desirable. This
way the bevel is currently only recommended on regions
where the esthetic is fundamental, such as in facial surfaces.
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 14.36 Correct entry direction for opening the preparation
from lingual approach (proximal view of an extracted tooth used to
illustrate the procedure). a Correct entry angle in relation to the lingual surface; b access to the lesion; c , d pendular movements to produce
the proximal outline; e removal of carious tissue with a round bur in
low-speed handpiece; f preparation finishedComposite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14Some authors just contraindicate the bevel on any preparation margins, aiming the maximum preservation of the
tooth structure. They suggest the application of some excess
of composite covering the margin and the near tooth surface,
creating some over contour, and attempting to mask the transition between the preparation and the restoration. It is also
possible to make a restoration mock-up without bevel on the
margins to evaluate the esthetical result. The composites of
selected shades and opacities are applied in the preparation
without any previous adhesive treatment. After curing, the
mock-up is evaluated in relation to the esthetic result and can
be easily removed afterward. If the result is not adequate,
after its removal, the bevel can be performed before doing the
final restoration. The restoration mock-up is more indicated
in cases of tooth fracture or large Class IV cavities, when the
preparation is not self-retentive, being easily removed by
pulling out on its margin with the aid of an exploratory
probe. For Class III preparations, the removal of mock-up
will be more difficult, being necessary the use of rotary
instruments. In addition, the mock-up takes time and uses
more restorative material, which will interfere on the costs of
the treatment. However, it is certain that when a bevel is
made on the margins with esthetic commitment, the chances
to obtain a good esthetic outcome is higher, especially when
a mock-up is not made. For this reason, the bevel on areas
with esthetic commitment can be still recommended.
On the other hand, in the cases of large preparations or
fractured teeth, where the amount of tooth to be restored is
larger than the remaining tooth structure, a larger bevel with
0.5–2 mm width on the entire cavosurface angle may be
important to obtain the required retention . The larger
the bevel, the higher is the bonding area and the retention
obtained. The dentist must take a decision on each case in
relation to do or not the bevel on the margin, choosing
between the maximum preservation and the esthetical or
retention requirement of each preparation. On preparations
where the gingival margin is too close to the CEJ, such as on
the gingival walls of large Class IV , III, or Class V preparation, a careful evaluation is important to analyze if the bevel
will not completely remove of the remaining enamel, resulting in bonding directly to the dentin and cementum on the
cavosurface angle, which is much poor in relation to the
bonding to enamel. If the gingival margin of the preparation
is located on the root surface, no bevel is done on the cementum margin .
When there is a cavitated lesion reaching dentin, sur -
rounded by a white or brown spot lesion on enamel that
extends over the tooth surface, beyond the preparation outline, after finishing the preparation on the cavitated area, the
margins should be extended to include all demineralized
areas, using an round diamond point, restricted to the enamel
tissue on the necessary depth to remove the lesion
(. Fig. 14.38g–i ) .
Due to the proximity of the pulpal chamber, the Class V
carious lesions are shallow on the mechanic point of view, but
deep on the biological point of view, since a pulpal tissue
exposure may easily happen [3 ]. This must be avoided at all cost, and a stepwise excavation can be indicated when the
dentist realizes that, if the preparation continues, an pulpal
exposure may happen. On the cases of non-carious cervical
lesions, it is important to identify its etiology before preceding
the restoration of the lost tooth structure, avoiding the relapse
of the problem. Once the etiological factor was diagnosed and
treated, the tooth can be restored. The preparation is restricted
to a small bevel on the incisal cavosurface angle, and a composite that provides adequate polishing can be used .
The decision to restore or not a cervical lesion on the buccal and facial surfaces is based on several factors. If it is a
white spot lesion, which is a subsuperficial carious lesion
without cavitation, preventive measurements can be applied
to reduce the caries disease activity and arrest the lesion, such
as biofilm control, dietary changes, and fluoride use, promoting its remineralization. A restorative intervention is not
indicated . The caries infiltration technique may also be
applied, completely stopping the lesion progression, as it is
described in 7 Chap. 16. If there is cavitation, the area must
be restored, unless it is too superficial and the patient is able
to clean, mechanically removing the biofilm from inside the
cavity with the toothbrush, and there is no esthetic commitment. On the case of non-carious lesions, if they are small
and the etiological factors were identified and controlled,
they can stay without being restored. If the area is hypersensitive due to dentin exposure, a desensitizer agent can be
applied to reduce the pain, as discussed in 7 Chap. 18. If the
sensitivity persists after the treatment, it may be necessary to
restore the area, covering the dentin with composite . If
the cervical lesion is identified as the cause of biofilm retention and gingival inflammation, it should also be restored
. If a non-carious lesion is large and deep, the restoration
of the defects is recommended to avoid its progression
toward the pulpal chamber. In addition, very large lesions
may compromise the fracture resistance of the tooth. The restoration of the area reinforces the remaining tooth structure
and prevents the progression of the defect .
The inactive cervical caries lesions may be stained
(brownish or black) and shiny, sometimes presenting sclerotic dentin with high mineral density, in which the dentin
tubules are obliterated by mineral deposition and an
increased layer of peritubular dentin. They are more resistant
to the acid etching, impairing a proper bonding to the restor -
ative material. The increase of the etching time may be
desired on this situation or a gentle removal of the superficial
sclerotic layer with round burs, exposing an underlying less
sclerotic substrate . If there are old faulty restorations, they
are removed with a round diamond point on high speed. In
case of large old restorations, sometimes it must be advisable
to remove only the defective part and to perform a repair .
When there are located areas of color alteration on the
tooth surface, such as white, yellow, or brown, resulting from
enamel hypomineralization, they may be removed and
restored if the patient desires. The non-carious white lesions
are very common and may or may not reach the underlying
dentin. On this case, after the shade selection, the affected
tissue is removed with a round diamond point, followed by a
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
bevel on the margins. As already described, the bevel is not
mandatory, and related only with the masking of the restoar -
ion margin. The acid etching and bonding application is per -
formed, followed by the composite increments . Another
option for esthetic treatment of this kind of lesions is to use
the resin infiltration technique, which requires a previous
etching of the surface with a hydrochloric acid gel, followed
by dehydration with ethanol and application of an infiltrant
resin. Although this method was initially developed for caries
lesions, good results were also obtained when applied on fluorotic lesions and other hypomineralized enamel lesions. In
some cases, such as on Molar Incisor Hypomineralization
(MIH), a previous opening of the surficial enamel layer with
a bur is required before the infiltration (deep infiltration).
The resin infiltration technique is a more conservative way
for esthetical treatment of white lesions than the regular composite restoration. More details are presented in 7 Chap. 16.
14.6.3 Restorative Procedure
For all types of preparations, it is important that before any
restorative procedure, the moisture of the operating field is
under control. Any moisture contamination by saliva, blood
and gingival crevicular fluid will result in total failure of the
adhesion to the tooth structure, and consequently to a defective restoration. Therefore, especially for the beginners, the
moisture control with the rubber dam isolation is easier and
reliable. When working on the anterior teeth, the rubber
sheet should be applied at least from right canine to left
canine, usually without any clamp. However, on patients
where the moisture control may be effectively performed by
the assistant, the cotton roll isolation may be safety used. For
that, the cotton rolls are placed and changed when moist,
associated with saliva ejector and cheek retractor . On the
cases of cervical lesion, a retraction cord can be introduced
into the gingival sulcus.
When a total-etch adhesive system is selected, the next step
is the application of a 32–38% phosphoric acid gel in the entire
preparation. First of all, the proximal surface of the tooth adjacent to the preparation must be protected with the polyester or
polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) strip ( . Fig. 14.49c ) . Even
though the accidentally etched enamel seems to be clinically
normal after a few days, scanning electron microscopy images
showed that the etched enamel is not completely remineralized
up to 90 days . The adhesive system selected must be
applied according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.
The acid etching is started on the enamel of the surrounding
walls, up to 1 mm beyond the cavosurface angle or bevel, over
the external tooth surface. After that, the gel is applied over the
dentin, remaining undisturbed for 15 s [3 , 31]. The etching
beyond the margin will prevent that any excess of composite
(flash) inadvertently applied over a non-etched area will stain
within a short period of time due to microleakage [3 ].
The phosphoric acid acts over the enamel promoting a
nonselective superficial removal of about 10 μm, followed by
a further selective demineralization of about 20–30 μm deep, creating the characteristics of microporosities of the enamel
etching pattern ( . Fig. 6.55b ) . The by-products of the
acid action over the enamel are water-soluble salts which are
removed by the rinsing. The acid etching increases the sur -
face energy and the surface area, allowing the penetration of
the resinous fluid monomers into the microporosities, creating resinous tags responsible for the micromechanical inter -
locking. On dentin, the acid etching removes the smear layer,
opens the tubules, and demineralizes about 5 μm of the
underlying dentin, which represents approximately the
thickness of a strand of hair divided by 10, exposing the collagen fibers network ( . Fig. 6.53b ).
The preparation must be thoroughly rinsed away with an
air/water spray for about 20–30 s [3, 31]. The spray is first
applied on the adjacent teeth to prevent the acid-rich water
to be projected over the patient, dentist, and assistant. The
preparation must be carefully evaluated to verify if no acid
residues remained. Then, the excess moisture is removed
with the blot dry technique using a small cotton pellets, foam
pellets, disposable applicators, absorbent paper, or suction
with a cannula, resulting in a visibly moist surface but without pooled water [3, 31]. The surface must have a glistening
aspect (. Fig. 14.38f ‘). The dehydration of the etched dentin
results in the collapse of the collagen fiber network of the
intertubular dentin, preventing the monomer penetration
into the labyrinth of nanochannels formed by the dissolution
of hydroxyapatite crystals between the collagen fibers. On the
other hand, pooled moisture dilutes the adhesive and results
on the formation of bubbles and empty spaces in the adhesive
layer, which becomes weak areas of the adhesive interface. If
the access allows, a small cotton pellet may be placed inside
the preparation, and the tooth surface, adjacent teeth, and
the rubber dam can be dried with airstream, avoiding the
dentin dehydration . If the preparation walls are occasionally excessively dried, they can be rewet with an applicator
soaked in water, followed by the dentin blot drying . If
any contamination of the preparation walls, with saliva or
blood, happens after the etching, it must be repeated for 10 s
on the entire preparation followed by rinsing and drying, to
remove the residues that could interfere with the monomer
impregnation . When the cotton roll isolation is used, the
cotton rolls must be replaced after the rinsing, taking care to
prevent any contamination of the preparation .
Some authors recommend the application of a 2%
chlorhexidine digluconate solution for 10 s after the acid
etching, before the application of the adhesive, to promote
the antisepsis of the preparation . In addition, the main
action of the chlorhexidine, in this case, would be the inhibition of the dentin matrix metalloproteinases, which are
enzymes present in the dentin matrix released and activated
by the acid etching. They are responsible for the degradation
of the unprotected dentin collagen that can sometimes
remain at the bottom of the hybrid layer, reducing the bonding durability . Several studies have shown that the application of chlorhexidine after the acid etching is capable to
significantly increase the bonding durability to the dentin
substrate [9, 30], although the collagen degradation cannot Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14be completely stoped. When applied as part of the adhesive
protocol, the excess must be removed with a small cotton pellet, leaving the surface visibly moist. The adhesive system
must be taken into the preparation using disposable applicators such as Microbrush or small bristle brushes. They must
have an adequate size to enter the preparation and take the
solution to all surfaces. For that, different manufacturers produce applicators with several dimensions ( . Fig. 14.37 ).
When a total-etch two-bottle adhesive system (fourth
generation) is selected, the primer containing hydrophilic
monomers and solvents is applied to all surfaces followed
by gently airstream, allowing the formation of a thin coat
and evaporation of the solvent . It is important to highlight that primer application to the enamel does not
adversely affect the bonding . The preparation walls
must be inspected, and they should be uniformly shiny, as
an evidence of sufficient coating [3 , 31]. If dry spots remain,
that means that, at this region, the collagen fibers were not
correctly impregnated and remain unprotected, as well as
dentin tubules are still open. On this case, the primer must
be reapplied and the walls, dried and the preparation inspected again, as many times as necessary . After
that the adhesive (bond) is applied, which mainly contain
hydrophobic monomers, followed by a soft airstream to
leave a thin coat. As most adhesives are radiolucent, every
effort should be done to avoid its pooling on the margins,
which may create radiolucent radiographic images on the
interface and may be misdiagnosed as a caries lesion [3 ].
After that, the adhesive can be light-cured for 10 s. The tip
of the light guide must be placed as close as possible to the
tooth, without touching it . Even though the internal
walls have to be entirely covered by the adhesive system, the
film must be thin.
When a total-etch one-bottle adhesive system (fifth generation) is selected, in which the primer and the adhesive are combined in a single solution, it must be applied in a similar way as
it has already been described, followed by a soft airstream. If dry spots remain, the adhesive must be applied once more until
a homogeneous coat is obtained, following a light-curing for 10
s. The excessive thinning of the adhesive coat with a strong and
too close airstream may adversely affect the bonding due to the
oxygen inhibition layer occur inside the monomers impregnated collagen network. This way, the hybrid layer will not be
cured when receiving the composite [3 ].
In the cases where the preparation or the area to receive
the composite does not present exposed dentin, after the
etching, the surface can be dried with an airstream since
there are no exposed collagen fibers that might collapse .
That will result in a white-opaque appearance. Therefore, the
etched enamel may be dry or wet before the application of the
adhesive system, but the etched dentin must never be dry.
When using a two-bottle adhesive, if the enamel is air dried,
the primer does not need to be applied. Just the hydrophobic
adhesive will provide an excellent bonding. However, if the
enamel is left wet, the primer must be applied, which is essential to interact with the superficial moisture.
When a self-etching adhesive system is selected, the
etching of the substrate is performed by the acidic monomers in the adhesive formulation by itself, without a separated etching step. In the two-bottle/two-step systems, the
primer is applied during the time recommended by the
manufacturer, generally from 20 to 30 s, followed by an air -
stream. After that the adhesive is applied and spread with an
airstream, followed by light-curing 10 s. For the two-bottle/
one-step and for the one-bottle/one-step systems, it is
applied during the recommended times, followed by an air -
stream and lightcuring. Similarly to the total-etch adhesives, after the selfetching adhesive application, the
preparation walls should be uniformly shiny, as evidence of
sufficient coating. Some studies have shown that the double
application of the self-etching primers is capable to promote
a more effective etching of the substrate, increasing the bond
strength values . In addition, the active application,
moving the applicator over the surface, also improves the Tip
To improve the bonding to the tooth structure, the
following steps are very relevant:
5After washing the phosphoric acid gel, the blot dry
technique is recommended, resulting in a visibly moist
surface but without pooled moisture, showing a
glistening aspect.
5After the application of the adhesive, the preparation
walls must be inspected, and they should have a
uniformly shiny aspect, as an evidence of enough
coating. If dry spots remain, the adhesive must be
reapplied.
5The self-etching adhesive should be actively applied,
rubbing the impregnated applicator over the preparation walls during the whole time recommended by the
manufacturer.
.Fig. 14.37 Disposable applicators. (1, 2, and 3) Applicators for
tooth preparations; (4) applicator for root canal (Cavibrush Longo,
FGM); (5) applicator for root canal (Endo Tim, Voco); (6, 7, and 8)
disposable bristle brush with several dimensions; (9) bended applicators to improve the access to the preparation
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
etching pattern and bond strength . However, despite
the kind of adhesive system selected, the manufacturers’
instruction should always be followed.
Some studies have shown that self-etching adhesives can
produce an insufficient enamel etching pattern, especially on
intact enamel surface or on those areas covered by prismless
enamel ( . Fig. 6.1d). Therefore, when the retention is the
main point for a restoration, a selective acid etching just of
the enamel can be performed, leaving the dentin covered by
the smear layer. It is followed by rinsing with an air/water
spray, drying, and application of the self-etching adhesive on
the entire preparation following the manufacturer’s instructions.
On the cases where there is no exposed dentin on the area
to receive the restoration, such as on diastemas closure or
reanatomization of peg-shaped teeth, the use of acid etching
approach has advantages in relation to the self-etching, to
guarantee an effective etching pattern of the enamel prisms,
obtaining the necessary micromechanical retention.
When performing the restoration, it is important to
remind that the tooth is a polychromatic structure, composed by tissues with different optical characteristics, being
the enamel translucent and the dentin more opaque.
Therefore, to reach an optimal shade match, composites with
different translucency levels should be selected. The composite is applied on a stratified layering technique, restoring each
tissue with the most adequate material. It can be placed into
the preparation with a hand instrument or directly from the
composite capsule (compule). The first method is preferable,
especially in cases where the access is restricted, since the
diameter of the syringe tip is generally large .
14.6.3.1 Cervical Lesions on Facial or Lingual
Surfaces (Class V or Site 3 on Smooth
Surfaces)
With the population aging associated with the success of the
caries disease preventive measures, people are keeping their
teeth much longer than in the past, sometimes during their
entire lives, allowing gingival recessions and non-carious
lesions to happen. This way, the number of Class V restorations performed in the dental offices has been substantially
increased.
To perform the restoration, after the pre-procedural
mouth rinsing, prophylaxis, and shade selection, the anesthesia of the area must be done. Then, the position of cavosur -
face margin is evaluated, determining if it is supragingival,
equigingival, or subgingival, which may adversely affect the
access to the lesion. On most of the cases, the rubber dam
isolation using a retraction clamp or the cotton roll isolation
using a retraction cord allows an excellent operating field.
However, if the biologic width has been invaded for a caries
lesion, for example, surgery for its re-establishment must be
previously performed . In some cases, the gingival margin
of the preparation is subgingivally located, and, although
without invasion of the biologic width, the retraction cord
does not provide an adequate displacement of the gingival tissue, and the use of a retraction clamp would excessively
harm the gingiva. On those situations, a trans-surgical restoration is indicated. For that, an intrasulcular incision with or
without an internal bevel can be performed, producing a
small envelope flap, allowing the application of the retraction
clamp and rubber dam .
When the rubber dam isolation is selected in a single
Class V preparation, the No. or No. 212M retraction
clamps should be used ( . Fig. 14.39a–x ). In case of preparations on two neighboring teeth, the No. 212L and 212R
(. Fig. 14.38f, b ‘) will allow both restorations to be performed
simultaneously. If the clamp is not perfectly stable, low fusing
compound or a light-cured gingival barrier may be applied to
the region of the bow, touching the incisal edges or the occlusal surface of the adjacent teeth, providing stabilization,
which prevents the clamp movement that could harm the
tooth and surrounding soft tissues [3, 31].
When the cotton roll isolation is selected, an extra fine
(size ) non-impregnated gingival retraction cord is
applied into the gingival sulcus before the preparation, to
retract the gingiva and reduce the crevicular fluid flow
(. Fig. 14.44c, d ) [3, 31]. If the control of bleeding is necessary, the cord can be impregnated with an hemostatic agent.
For each tooth, about 8–10 mm of cord is required, besides
thin edge retraction cord packing instrument . The cord
insertion inside the crevice should start in the interproximal
area, in the region of the gingival papilla, following to the
other end slightly further than the limit of the tooth preparation. When an additional gingival retraction is required, a
new cord can be placed over the first one. It should be avoided
at all cost to harm the gingiva or cause ischemia of the tissue
. The gingival retraction can be associated with a cheek
retractor, which displace the cheeks and lips from the operating field, allowing a proper restorative procedure to be per -
formed.
After the operating field isolation, the tooth preparation
is inspected, evaluating the proximity of the axial wall to the
pulpal chamber. On the cases of very deep preparations, an
area with pink discoloration on the axial wall indicated that a
remaining dentin layer of less than 0.5 mm exists, probably
associated with clinically undetected microscopic pulp exposures . On this situation, a thin layer of calcium hydroxide cement is applied, only over the pink dentin, with the goal
to stimulate the formation of tertiary dentin. When accidentally etched by the phosphoric acid gel during the adhesive
procedure, the calcium hydroxide cement is dissolved and its
by-products are deposited on the preparation walls, adversely
affecting the hybridization and the marginal sealing of the
restoration. For this reason, a protective layer of GIC should
be applied . On the case of deep cavities, without any
pink discoloration area, only a thin layer of the GIC should
be used, restricted to the regions close to the pulp. On a shallow or medium-depth preparation, the application of any
protective material is not necessary. Further information
about the protection of the dentin pulp complex is available
in 7 Chap. 9.Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 14.38 Patient with several carious lesions on anterior teeth. a
Baseline aspect; b application of a biofilm disclosing agent; c close view
of the central incisors; d 1 week after receiving the biofilm control
instructions; e shade determination; f rubber dam isolation using No.
L and R clamps. Removal of carious dentin tissue with round bur; g
removal of carious enamel with round diamond point; h , i bevels on
the incisal (conical diamond point) and cervical (round diamond point)
cavosurface angles; j finished preparations; k , l acid-etching; m blot
drying technique; n glistening aspect of the wet surface; o application
of the adhesive system; p application of a gently airstream; q lightcuring; r, s application of opaque dentin shade composite (Amaris,
Voco; shade O2); t application of translucent enamel shade composite
(Amaris, Voco; shade TN); u contouring of last composite layer with a
flat brush; v immediate result; w baseline aspect with lesions covered
by biofilm; x 1 week after receiving the biofilm control instruction; y
removal of the carious dentin tissue on the canine and lateral incisor; z
bevel on the incisal cavosurface angle with a conic diamond point; a ′
bevel on the gingival cavosurface margin with round diamond point; b ′ preparation complete; c ′, d′ Acid-etching; e ′ blot drying with cotton
pellets; f′ glistening aspect of the wet dentin; g ′ application of the
adhesive system; h ′ light-curing of the adhesive coat; i ′, j′ placement of
matrix and wedge and restoration of the proximal walls with enamel
shade composite; k ′ application of enamel shade composite over the
matrix band on the distal surface; l ′ proximal surfaces restored; m ′
application of composite in the undermined enamel areas; n ′, o′
application of the dentin shade composite recreating the tooth
contour; p′ application of enamel shade composite; q ′ surface
smoothening with a flat brush; r ′ view of the recovered labial contour;
s′ preparation of grooves dividing the lobes on the labial surface; t ′ and
u′ preparation of horizontal scratches to simulate the enamel
perikymata, moving mesiodistally the diamond point; v ′ polishing with
a felt disc (Diamond, FGM) and diamond polishing paste (Diamond
Excel, FGM); w ′, x′ aspect 2 weeks after the end of the restorations. The
white spot lesions on the premolars were still in a remineralization
process. A good option for immediate color masking of those lesions is
the use of the caries infiltration technique, described in . Fig. 16.12
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
gh
ij
kl
mn
.Fig. 14.38 (continued)Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14
qr
uvstp o
.Fig. 14.38 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
wx
yz
a’ b’
c’ d’
.Fig. 14.38 (continued)Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14
e’ f’
i’ j’
k’ l’g’ h’
.Fig. 14.38 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
m’ n’
s’ t’q’ r’o’ p’
.Fig. 14.38 (continued)Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14Although not mandatory, a bevel can be performed on
places where there is enamel on the cavosurface angle, at 45°
with the external tooth surface, using a No. conicalshaped or a flame-shaped diamond point in high speed,
helping to mask of the tooth-restoration interface. On the
gingival margin, due to the lack of access for the proper
positioning of the conical or flame-shaped points, a No.
or round diamond point can be used ( . Fig. 14.38h,
i). However, when the amount of remaining enamel is very
small in this area, no bevel should be performed due to the
risk of its complete removal. The etching using 32–38%
phosphoric acid gel is applied first on the enamel and then
extended to the dentin, remaining for 15 s. Then, the preparation is rinsed with air/water spray for 20–30 s and blot
dried, using small cotton pellets, followed by the adhesive
system application.
The adhesive system should be dispensed from the bottle
only after the acid etching and rinsing. At the moment the
dentist is blot drying the preparation, the assistant dispenses
the material into a Dappen dish, and it is immediately
applied; otherwise the solvent in its composition will evaporate and the adhesive will become ineffective.
The composite resins can be supplied in opaque syringes
or in capsules with an applicator tip, namely compules, to
be used with an injection gun. For the use of syringes, a small amount is removed using a sterile spatula and placed
over a glass mixing slab or mixing pad. To avoid its curing
due to the environmental light, it must be covered with an
opaque object, such as a plastic opaque Dappen dish. Small
portions are taken with a non-stick composite filling
instrument and adapted into the preparation. The composite should be placed by using rapid shallow strokes, as
if you were thumping the composite in place, reducing the
chance of detaching from the cavity wall, which can create
voids. After finishing the restoration, any material left over
the glass slab is discarded. The encapsulated composites
can be taken directly into the preparation and adapted with
hand instruments . However, on small cavities, it is
hard to directly insert the encapsulated material due to the
size of the delivery tip to be larger than the preparation
access, being more recommended to apply it with a hand
instrument [3 ].
After applying some increments into the preparation, the
composite can start to stick on the filling instrument. When
the instrument is taken away from the preparation, it can pull
the composite back, and a gap is formed between the material and the wall. After curing, it will generate a permanent
interfacial defect . Therefore, it is extremely important to
avoid the composite sticking to the instrument. For that,
non-stick filling instruments made of anodized aluminum or
u’ v’
w’ x’
.Fig. 14.38 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
highly polished stainless steel, or coated with titanium nitride
or PTFE, as well as silicone or thermoplastic elastomer tips,
should be used. In addition, the instrument should be kept
clean during the procedure and the composite residues constantly removed using damp alcohol gauze . It must also
be evaluated if the instrument is not scratched, which will
increase the sticking. If the composite is still sticking too
much to the instrument, it can be wet with a very small
amount of adhesive . The ideal are adhesives without solvents, such as on the systems where the primer is in a separated bottle. There are specific products for this purpose,
such as the Composite Wetting Resin (Ultradent) and
Signum Liquid (Kulzer). Some studies have shown that this
procedure does not affect the bonding between the increments . The primers or self-etching adhesives should be
avoided, because they contain water and other solvents that
adversely affect the bonding of new increments . To avoid
premature polymerization of the composite during the placement and modeling, the central focus of the overhead chair
light should be moved away from the operating field, using a
minimum illumination that comes from borders the light
beam [ 3]. However, some overhead lighting has a built-in
orange light source to prevent premature light polymerization of composite materials.
To restore the dentin, a proper shade composite simulating the dentin opacity must be selected, according to the
method that has already been described. The chroma may
vary from the cervical region toward the incisal third, especially in the cases of the large restorations on anterior teeth.
Therefore, more than one dentin shade may be required.
Over it, an enamel shade composite must be applied. Besides
its hue, chroma, and lightness, the thickness of the enamel
shade layer will also interfere on the final color. To predict the
effect of the layers thickness, superimposed shade guides can
be used, as it can be observed in . Fig. 14.23 .
For Class V restorations, conventional viscosity or flowable composite can be used ( . Figs. 14.38a–x ‘, 14.39a–x , and
14.40a–i ). It is important to select a restorative material that
provides good polishing, reducing the biofilm deposition and
gingival irritation. The microfilled composites are an excellent option for the cervical restorations. Besides producing a
smooth surface, they have a low elastic modulus due to its
reduced filler content, being more flexible and capable to dissipate internal stress generated during the masticatory loads,
generally responsible for restoration displacement .
According to some studies, the elastic modulus is relevant on
abfraction lesions, which are produced by stress concentration on the cervical area. The microhybrid, nanohybrid, and
nanofilled composites are also good options for Class V restorations . The flowable composites also have the same
advantages related to the low elastic modulus, in a similar
way to the microfilled ones. Besides improving retention, it
also improves the adaptation of the restoration to the preparation walls .
On shallow Class V preparations, restricted to enamel, a
single increment is generally enough, considering the maximum layer thickness of 2 mm for obtaining a proper lightcuring. For preparations with all the margins on enamel but
with loss of dentin tissue, generally two increments are indicated. The first layer fills the lost dentin covering the axial
wall, using an opaque composite. The second replaces the
enamel using a more translucent material ( . Fig. 14.38r–t ).
The composite is applied using a hand instrument, adapted
on the preparation walls by gently thumping action with the
instrument nib, instead of rubbing it over the surface .
On preparations with gingival margins on cementum, if the
composite is inserted in a single increment, as the bond
strength to enamel is higher than to the dentin, the shrinkage
stress would break the interface between the composite and
the dentin, on the gingival margin, instead on enamel mar -
gin, resulting in marginal gaps on the gingival cavosurface
angle. A way to reduce this problem is to apply the first increments on the cervical and middle thirds of the preparation,
in a way that they do not contact the enamel. Large cervical
restorations may require the use of a darker shade on the cer -
vical third and a lighter one on the middle and incisal thirds
. The increments must have a beveled transition and over -
lap in about 50% to avoid the sudden transition from one
shade to another, which could be noticed on the surface of
the restoration, impairing the esthetical result [3, 27]. A polychromatic effect may also be obtained using special tints,
applied preferably over a cured composite layer and then
covered with a enamel translucent shade . The opaque
dentin shade selected must partially cover the bevel when
performed, helping to mask the transition between the
restorative material and the remaining tooth structure. At the
end, dentin shade material must be completely covered with
a translucent enamel shade composite, recovering contour of
the external tooth surface. The last layer may be contoured
with a flat brush, for example, the No. 4A and 4B of Kota
Company ( . Figs. 4.45d , 14.38z , and 14.39o ).
Fahl [ 13] suggested the placement of final increment
using a small sphere of composite, prepared with the tip of
the index finger and thumb, which is placed in position and
contoured with a hand instrument and flat brush. The rubber
gloves must be thoroughly washed with water and dried
before manipulating the composite, avoiding contamination
with the glove powder, or use powder free gloves . When
the external layer is placed on more than one increment, it is
common that air can be trapped on the junction between
those increments. Therefore, a single final increment could
cover the entire surface. As it is very difficult to place the
exact amount of composite, it is preferable to apply a slight
excess that can be removed during the sculpture or the finishing procedure [3 ]. During the increment placement, the dentist must not touch the external oxygen inhibition layer on
the already light-cured increment, which has free methacrylate groups working as adhesive between each composite
layer [3 ]. However, when the surface is touched by the dentist’s fingers, this layer is removed, being recommended the
application of an adhesive coat, followed by an airstream .
Each layer must be light-cured for at least 20 s with an
adequate light source ( 7 Chap. 13). The tip of the light guide
should be protected with the clear PVC film sheet. Each layer Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14should not be more than 2 mm thick, to obtain an adequate
polymerization on bottom of the increment . It should
also be avoided to connect more than two preparation walls
at the same time on each increment, due to the C-factor (see
7 Chap. 13). The light beam must reach the preparation on a right angle with the tooth surface, where the preparation
access was made, and the light guide tip must be placed as
close as possible, almost touching the surface. The distance
between the light guide tip and the tooth surface must never
be larger than 1 mm. The dark shades are harder to light-cure
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 14.39 Restoration of the non-carious cervical lesion with
conventional viscosity composite. a Initial aspect; b shade determination; c rubber dam isolation using a No. 212M retraction clamp; d bevel
on enamel margin; e , f acid-etching; g rinsing; h blot drying; i
Application of the adhesive system; j light-curing of the adhesive coat;
(k–m) application of increments of dentin shade composite (GrandioSO – Voco); n, o application of enamel shade composite and surface
smoothening with a flat brush; p restoration finished recreating the
buccal surface contour of the cervical area. It can be observed the shiny surface that corresponds to the superficial oxygen inhibited
layer; q, r application of an oxygen blocking gel (Oxiblock, FGM) and
light-curing through it; s after the polymerization, it can be observed
the absence of the superficial shiny oxygen inhibited layer, compared
with Figure p ; t marginal finishing of the with a fine grit conical
diamond point with non-cutting tip; u , v polishing with abrasive
rubber (Silicone points, Microdent) and abrasive disc (Diamond Pro,
FGM); w additional polishing with felt disc (Diamond Flex, FGM) and
diamond past (Diamond Excel, FGM); x final result
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
gh
ij
kl
mn
.Fig. 14.39 (continued)Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14
op
qr
st
uv
.Fig. 14.39 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
wx
.Fig. 14.39 (continued)
than the lighter ones; also the opaque composites are harder
to cure than the translucent ones. The manufacturer’s instructions must be followed in relation to the curing time. The
composites should be at room temperature before use, since
the materials that were recently removed from the refrigerator have a smaller polymerization [3, 39].
The oxygen on the atmosphere inhibits the polymerization of about 1–5 μ m of the superficial layer of each composite increment. When a new increment is applied over it, the
air is eliminated, and the layer of uncured monomers polymerizes together with the new material, providing bonding
between them. However, the surface of the last composite
layer of a restoration will not be completely cured,
compromising its mechanical properties, especially if the
surface does not receive a proper polishing. To overcome
this problem, after the polymerization of the last increment,
the surface can be covered by a transparent glycerin-based
oxygen blocking gel and light-cured through it, eliminating
the oxygen and allowing a complete polymerization, leaving
a glazed aspect ( . Fig. 14.39q, r ). The gel is then removed
with an air/water spray [3 ]. The restorations must be analyzed in relation to the presence of flash or overhangs using a
dental explorer, mainly on the gingival margin where usually
more overhangs are detected. The explored must be placed
inside the gingival sulcus, touching the root surface, and
moved incisally. Any overhang detected must be removed
with a thin fine grit conical-shaped diamond point, with
non-cutting tip, as shown in . Fig. 14.66 , avoiding an
unwanted grinding of the root ( . Figs. 14.66a, b and 14.39t ).
A scalpel blade can also be used to trim flashes and over -
hangs. The polishing may be performed with abrasive rubber
point, abrasive discs, or felt discs with polishing pastes
(. Fig. 14.39u–x ).
After finishing the restoration, the patients must be
advised that abusive intake of staining agents, such as coffee,
certain dark colored tees and soft drinks, several times a day,
as well heavy smokers, can observe premature color alteration of the restorations. . However, the occasional con-tact with such substances do not result in a significant color
change.
In some cases, the cervical lesions can be associated with
gingival recession, resulting on very long clinical crown.
When the restoration of the entire defect is done with a
tooth-colored composite, an esthetic commitment may
occur, breaking the harmony of the width-to-length ratio
and of the gingival zenith position. To overcome this problem, periodontal surgery, such as coronally positioned flap or
a gingival graft, can be used. However, some patients cannot
or does not want to undergo surgical procedures. On those
cases, a gingiva-colored composite can be used, such as the
Amaris Gingiva (Voco) or Beautifil II Gingiva shade (Shofu),
making the tooth appears to have a shorter clinical crown
(. Figs. 14.41a–l and 14.42a–a ‘). The lost structure on the
crown must first be restored with a tooth-colored composite,
before restoring the most cervical area with the gingiva-colored material.
First of all, the patient’s gingival shade is determined
using a shade guide. For Amaris Gingiva, he different
shades are obtained associating one of three opaque flowable composites in the set, which is dark, light, and white,
with the more translucent composite of conventional viscosity, with a standard pink shade (natural). Therefore, the
final shade of the restoration is determined mainly by the
selected flowable. It is also possible to combine the differ -
ent opaque flowable composites trying to reach the patient’s
gingival shade. The step-by-step procedure is presented in
. Figs. 14.41a–l and 14.42a– a‘. Cotton roll isolation are
used associated with a retraction cord, so the gingival
shade can be evaluated during the procedure. A cheek
retractor can also be very helpful for this kind of restoration. The flowable opaque composite is applied on a very
thin layer and light-cured. Over it the composite with
regular viscosity is placed and shaped, creating the contour
of the edge of the free gingiva. The polishing is performed
with abrasive rubber points and polishing pastes associated with felt discs.Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14
ab c
d e
f g
h i
.Fig. 14.40 Restoration of non-carious cervical lesion with flowable
composite. a Initial aspect; b isolation and prophylaxis; c bevel on
enamel margin; d application of the self-etching adhesive One-Up
Bond F Plus (Tokuyama); e , f application of the first increment of flowable composite Palfique Estelite Medium Flow (Tokuyama); g
application of the second increment; h immediate aspect; i result after
1 week
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
The cervical lesions can also be restored with conventional GIC or RMGIC, being specially indicated to elderly
patients with high caries risk . The tooth preparation is
the same as for composites, with exception that no bevel is
performed. Before the application, the preparation walls
are etched with 10–11.5% polyacrylic acid for 20–30 s, followed by rinsing and drying. For the RMGIC the application of a primer can be recommended, according to each
manufacturer’s instruction. The material is placed into the
preparation on a single increment, and the excesses are
quickly removed with hand instruments. To take the material into the preparation, it is possible to use a calcium
hydroxide placement instrument, which has a small sphere
on the nib. Another option is to use a gun design Centrix
syringe ( . Fig. 14.43a–f ). A capsule (orange tube) model
with a thin tip can be selected, allowing a better control
during the application. The material is mixed and backloaded into capsule, no more than half full, followed by the
plug, which must be fully inserted. The capsule is then placed into the syringe barrel. For the application, the
syringe is squeezed with a slow and steady pressure. An
amount of the material enough to fill the preparation is
applied on a single increment.
Due to its viscosity and sticky characteristics, the GIC
or RMGIC are difficult to contour and sculpt. For this reason, cervical matrices are widely indicated for Class V
restorations, because they contour and maintain the material in position during the setting or curing. When a conventional GIC is selected, metallic matrices can also be
used (. Fig. 8.10a , b). However, when the light-cured
materials are chosen, clear plastic matrices must be
selected, holding the material while the light-curing is
performed during the time recommended by the manufacturer ( . Fig. 14.44a–l ). After its removal, the major
excesses are trimmed with a No.12 scalpel blade. When a
GIC is used, a thin layer of cavity varnish or a light-cured
adhesive must be applied over the restoration surface,
receiving a soft airstream to create a thin coat. When an
ab
c d
.Fig. 14.41 Cervical restoration with gingiva-colored composite. a
Initial aspect of the cervical lesions; b Amaris Gingiva composite
(Voco); c shade selection of the gingiva; d gingival retraction cord
inserted; e acid-etching; f application of the adhesive system; g
application of the selected opaque flowable composite; h application
of the pink shade composite; i contouring of the composite with a flat paddle-shaped filling instrument; j immediate result; k clinical aspect
after ending the adjacent teeth restorations and finishing procedures.
The crown of the teeth 34 was restored with a tooth shade composite,
before the restoration of the cervical area with a pink composite; l final
aspect of the teeth 44–34 with cervical restorations with gingivacolored compositeComposite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14
ij
kl
ef
gh
.Fig. 14.41 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
ab c
de
fg
.Fig. 14.42 Esthetic appearance improvement of anterior teeth
using gingiva-colored composite. a Impacted right central incisor was
treated with orthodontic traction. However, the correct repositioning
was not obtained, and a composite restoration was previously per -
formed in the incisal third of the crown. After some time, gingival
recession resulted on the exposure of the root surface. The teeth 11
and 21 showed a strong darkening, in comparison with the other teeth
on the arch. b Tooth 11 suffered pulpal necrosis and the 21 a dystro -
phic calcification of the pulp, which explained the color changes; c on
close view, it was observed that even though the restoration of the
tooth 11 had an adequate shape, the shade and translucency of the
composite were not correct; d aspect after the endodontic treatment
and external and internal bleaching of tooth 11 and external bleaching
of tooth 21; e after the removal of the old restoration of the tooth 11, it
was possible to observe its real position; f test of the silicone index
previously made directly in the mouth over the old restoration; g
protection of the neighbor teeth with PTFE strip (IsoTape, TDV) and acid-etching; h application of the adhesive system Solobond M (Voco);
i application of the opaque dentin shade composite (Amaris, Voco;
color O1), covering part of the labial surface to mask the transition
between the restoration and the tooth; j application of the enamel
shade composite (Amaris, Voco; shade TL); k smoothening of the
surface with a modeling silicone instruments (Micerium, Oraltech); l
finished restoration; m measurement of the clinical crown length of the
tooth 21 with a bow compass with two needle points; n and o
planning of the desired dimensions; p and q enameloplasty for
adjustment of the clinical crown length; r evaluation of the final dimensions with the compass; s proportional clinical crowns of both the
upper incisors; t shade determination of the gingiva (Amaris Gingiva –
Voco); u acid-etching of the root surface; v application of the adhesive
system; w application of a pink color opaque flowable composite; x
placement of the regular viscosity composite (Nature); y finished
restoration; z and a ′ clinical aspect of the smile before and after the
treatmentComposite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14
jk
l m
no
hi
.Fig. 14.42 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
rs
tu
vwpq
.Fig. 14.42 (continued)Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14
xy
za '
.Fig. 14.42 (continued)
adhesive is used, its light-curing is performed for 10 s.
This procedure prevents the dehydration and cracks of the
restorations or water sorption from the saliva during the
initial setting stages. The RMGIC is generally more resistant to dehydration or water sorption and does not require
protection. This is due to the fact that its resinous components immediate polymerization provides an umbrella
effect, protecting the ongoing acid-base setting reaction.
However, the manufacturer’s instructions must be strictly
followed for each material .
The GIC restoration can be finished and polished only
after the end of the setting reaction, about 24 h the placement into the preparation. However, the RMGIC may be
immediately finished and polished. Even after the final setting, care must be taken to not dehydrate the GIC restoration surface during the finishing and polishing procedures.
Conventional rotary instruments can be used under water
spray. Rubber points and discs may be used lubricated with
glycerin gel or petroleum jelly. Polishing pastes and felt
discs can also be used . Some brands of RMGIC present
a fluid resin, called finishing gloss, that can be applied over
the restoration after the polishing, spread with an airstream
and light-cured.14.6.3.2 Proximal Lesions Without
Involvement of the Incisal Edge (Class
III or Site 2, Sizes 1–3)
During the restorations on anterior teeth, every time possible
the rubber dam isolation at least from right to left canine
should be performed, because it allows a better visualization
of the lingual surface. In general, there is no need to use
clamps, unless it is not possible to stabilize the rubber sheet
with dental floss ligatures on the canines, or rubber stripes
on the distal surface of the last isolated teeth. In patients with
little salivation, the rubber dam isolation is acceptable. The
preparation is inspected and pulpal protection performed
when necessary.
For preparations restricted to the proximal surfaces,
without adjacent tooth or with a temporary crown or restoration that may be easily removed, the restoration may be
performed with hand instruments, without the use of a
matrix, similarly a Class V restoration ( . Fig. 14.45a–l ).
However, every time there is contact between the tooth that
will be restored and the adjacent, a protective polyester or
PTFE strip (IsoTape – TDV) must be placed between them
during the acid etching, adhesive application, and lightC. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
curing. This procedure prevents undesirable etching of the
intact neighbor tooth surface and bonding between the
tooth to be restored and the adjacent one. The strip used for
protection can be discarded, and a clean and new polyester
strip is placed and wedged before applying the composite to
perform the restoration ( . Fig. 14.47a–u ) . The placement of matrix after the bonding procedure reduces the
chances of adhesive pooling on the margins close to the
matrix.Tip
When there is contact between the preparation be
restored and the adjacent teeth, a protective polyester
or PTFE strip must be placed between them during the
acid etching, adhesive application, and light-curing,
preventing undesired etching and bond to the
neighbor tooth.
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 14.43 Use of gun design Centrix syringe to apply restorative materials. a Different types of capsules; b loading the material into the
capsule; c, d placement of the plug; e placing the capsule into the syringe barrel; f syringe ready to useComposite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14However, sometimes, the wedge insertion may cause
fracture of some undermined enamel on the cavosurface
angle, which will be permanently lost. In this case, the composite is applied over non-etched and bonded enamel, resulting on marginal microleakage on this area. One possibility to
overcome this problem is to apply the matrix and wedge
before the acid etching. Therefore, it would at the same time
protect the neighbor tooth from etching and bonding and
assist the tooth restoration. However, special attention must
be given to remove any pooled excesses of adhesive on the margins, using airstream, and dry microbrush applicators if
necessary.
The purpose of the matrix and wedge placement is to
hold the composite inside the preparation, helping the contouring and shaping of the external restoration surface,
improving the isolation, eliminating or reducing overhangs,
and simplifying the finishing procedure. The wedge holds the
strip in position, allowing a slight dental separation to compensate the matrix strip thickness, if the contact has been
completely destroyed by the lesion .
a
b
c
d
e
f
.Fig. 14.44 Restoration with RMGIC using clear cervical matrix. a
Cervical matrices (TDV); b initial aspect of the non-carious cervical
lesions; c, d placement of the gingival retraction cord; e primer
application (Vitremer, 3M); f light-curing of the primer coat; g fitting test of the cervical matrix; h restorative material application using
Centrix syringe; i positioning of the matrix before light-curing; j
polishing with abrasive rubber (Silicone tips, Microdont) after 7 days; k
application of the glaze coating; l final result
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
g
h
i
j
k
l
.Fig. 14.44 (continued)Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14Due to the fact that the proximal tooth surface is convex
inciso-gingivally and the polyester strip is flat, it may be
necessary to shape it to adapt to the desired tooth contour.
A way to do this is to draw it across a hard and rounded
object, such as the round end of a clinical tweezer. The
amount of convexity created will depend on the contour
necessary . Several pull movements with strong pressure may be required to obtain enough convexity
(. Fig. 14.46 ). The matrix strip is placed between the teeth
and analyzed if it provides the adequate contour to the sur -face to be restored. It must be extended at least 1 mm fur -
ther than the gingival and incisal preparation margins. If
the strip does not slide through a tight remaining contact
or sharp preparation margin, a small immediate tooth separation can be obtained inserting a wedge in the interproximal space, allowing the passage of the strip. After that, the
wedge is removed, and the matrix is taken in the desired
position inside the gingival sulcus, between the gingival
papilla and the tooth surface. Then, the wedge is inserted
tightly once again .
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 14.45 Restoration restricted to the proximal surface. a Carious
lesion with direct access due to the absence of the adjacent tooth; b
opening of the preparation with round diamond point; c removal of
the carious dentin tissue; d preparation completed; e , f Acid-etching; g blot drying; h adhesive system application; i , j application of dentin
shade composite; k application of enamel shade composite; l final
result
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
Tip
To shape a flat polyester strip, draw it across a hard
and rounded object, such as the round end of a clinical
tweezer, until it creates the necessary contour.
The wedge is inserted into the interproximal space using a
mosquito forceps with a curved end, preferably on the
opposite side of the preparation entry. In other words, it is
facially inserted when lingual access was performed and vice versa, always apically to the gingival cavosurface angle.
It must be kept as short as possible to avoid conflicts with
the access area, not hindering the placement of the restor -
ative material [3 , 31]. If the preparation has a facial access,
the pad of the index finger of the left hand, for the righthanded people, or of the right hand for the left-handed ones,
can be positioned over the lingual aspect of the strip, pressing it toward the remaining tooth structure. The labial por -
tion is reflected away from the access with the thumb
(. Fig. 14.47o ). If the wedge is too long and interferes on
this procedure, it must be shortened . The convex shape
gh
ij
kl
.Fig. 14.45 (continued)Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14of the finger pad will allow the ideal contour of the lingual
surface, which is concave. Then, the composite is placed
inside the preparation using a stratified layering technique,
employing a non-stick composite filling instrument with a
flator round-shaped nib like a plugger ( . Fig. 14.47p ). On
the last layer, the material is placed with a slight excess. The
major excess is removed with the filling instrument or dental explorer before closing the matrix. The labial aspect of
the matrix strip is placed over the labial tooth surface, keeping in position with the thumb, applying a slight pressure for
contouring the composite. The material is then light-cured
through the matrix ( . Fig. 14.47q–s ) . After that, an
additional light-curing is performed placing the light guide
tip on the lingual surface.
Tip
If the preparation has a facial access, the pad of the
index finger can be placed over the lingual aspect of
the matrix strip, pressing it toward the remaining
tooth structure, creating the ideal concave contour of
the lingual surface. The initial composite increments
can be placed inside the preparation using a non-stick
composite filling instrument with a flator
round-shaped nib like a plugger.
When there is no remaining dentin on the preparation or
when it extends from labial to lingual surface ( . Fig. 14.43a ),
the use of an opaque dentin shade composite is important;
otherwise, most of the incident light over the labial surface
will pass through the restoration instead of being reflected.
This will result on a darker aspect to the restoration, with
half-moon margins, due to the dark background of the
mouth. The use of an opaque shade composite eliminates this
problem, reflecting part of the incident light and increasing
the lightness of the restoration. On teeth with less translucent natural enamel, the entire lingual and central area of the
preparation, including the contact area, can be restored using
dentin shade composite, leaving a small space on the labial
surface that later is covered by enamel shade material
(. Fig. 14.47p ).
> When there is no remaining dentin on the preparation,
or when it extends from labial to lingual surface, it is
essential to use an opaque dentin shade composite;
otherwise the restoration will have a darker aspect
with half-moon margins.
On teeth with very translucent enamel, it is advisable to
start the restoration on the lingual and proximal surfaces,
with a thin enamel shade composite layer, followed by the
restorations of the central area with dentin shade material, which is finally covered with a thin enamel shade
layer (. Fig. 14.38i‘–r ‘). On those cases, the composite
placement is started over the matrix on the lingual sur -
face, creating a background for the following increments.
After that the proximal surface is also restored with
enamel shade, leaving a space in the central area for
placement of dentin shade composite. The first increment of enamel shade composite must be very thin. After
its light-curing, the increment can be evaluated and, if
necessary, more material be applied to reach the adequate
enamel thickness. The enamel shade composite layer
should be about 0.2–1 mm thick, continuous and prefer -
ably of a single shade [2 ]. The dentin shade is then
applied, preferably in a cervico-incisal direction. An
enough space for the final enamel shade layer must be
left, which can be evaluated looking in an inciso-cervical
direction. A sphere of enamel shade composite is prepared, placed, and contoured with a flat paddle-shaped
hand instrument [2 ]. After that, the matrix strip must be
reflected over the labial tooth surface, covering the composite. The cervical edge of the strip is pulled toward the
incisal edge to avoid cervical overhangs [3 ]. The lightcuring is performed through the strip, creating a very
smooth surface. It is very important to ensure that the
entire area to be restored was filled with composite, especially on the margins [3 ].
If two adjacent restorations in neighbor teeth are per -
formed simultaneously, they can be restored at a single
appointment. The preparation with a smaller access must be
restored first ( . Fig. 14.48a –a′). If there was any excess or
over-contour at the end of the restorative procedure, the finishing with an abrasive strip, abrasive disc, or diamond point
must be performed before starting the next restoration. If the
adhesive system was applied to both preparations simultaneously and the second preparation was contaminated with
residues generated by the finishing, it has to be rinsed and
etched and receive the adhesive application again, before any
composite is placed.
If a lingual access was performed, the same principles in
relation to the application of the increments are valid
.Fig. 14.46 Contouring of the polyester strip with the round end of
a clinical tweezer
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 14.47 Composite restoration through the facial access. a
Defective restorations removed; b shade determination; c preparation
of a bevel on the labial cavosurface angle; d acid-etching; e rinsing; f
blot drying with a cotton pellet; g application of the adhesive system;
h application of a polyester matrix between the teeth to avoid
undesired bonding; i light-curing of the adhesive; j placement of
matrix and wedge and insertion of dentin shade composite (Opallis –
FGM); k, l last increment of enamel shade composite inserted followed by matrix closing; m light-curing through the closed matrix; n aspect of
the first restoration completed; o placing of matrix and wedge and
positioning of index finger for the second restoration. p insertion of
the dentin shade composite, leaving enough space for application of a
enamel shade layer; q application of enamel shade composite; r matrix
closed; s light-curing through the matrix; t immediate results showing
the dehydration of the teeth; u final aspect after the polishingComposite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14
gh
ij
kl
mn
.Fig. 14.47 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
op
qr
st
u
.Fig. 14.47 (continued)Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 14.48 Restoration of proximal lesions through the lingual
access. a Initial aspect of the lesion; b stretching the rubber before
placing the wedge; c opening of the larger cavity with a round
diamond point; d removal of the carious dentin tissue with round bur
in low-speed handpiece; e opening of adjacent lesion through the
access of the larger lesion; f removal of the carious dentin tissue; g
finished preparations; h acid-etching; i application of the adhesive
system; j application of the matrix strip between the teeth to avoid
undesirable bonding during the light-curing of the adhesive coat; k
insertion of matrix and wedge for restoration on the smaller preparation; l matrix closed over the lingual surface before light-curing of the
last increment; m insertion of matrix and wedge to restore the larger preparation; n, o placement of composite (Opallis, FGM) and adaptation of increments with round-shaped nib filling instrument; p
placement of the last composite increment; q closing the matrix over
the lingual surface; r initial aspect; s finishing with pointed football
shape fine grit diamond point; t removal of the cervical excess with a
contour carbide carver (TZC12, Thompson/Miltex); u removal of excess
with a No. 12 scalpel blade; v , w finishing of proximal surface with
abrasive strip (3M); x , y polishing of lingual surface with abrasive
rubber points in a decreasing grit size sequence (Microdont); z
polishing with felt disc (Diamond Flex, FGM) and polishing paste
(Diamond Excel, FGM)
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
g h
ij
kl
mn
.Fig. 14.48 (continued)Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14
op
q r
st
uv
.Fig. 14.48 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
wx
yz
.Fig. 14.48 (continued)
(. Fig. 14.48a –a′), even though the labial and proximal sur -
faces are restored first, and finally the lingual one. The lingual surface does not require an enamel shade composite
because this area cannot be seen during the patient’s daily
life. On preparations restricted to the proximal surface, generally, there is no need to use dentin shade composite, unless
on large and deep preparations. Furthermore, on this situation, if there is no adjacent tooth, the composite may be
applied without the use of a matrix. However, if the access to
the strictly proximal preparation was made through the
lesion on an adjacent tooth, the use of the matrix simplifies
the restorative procedure, avoiding the occurrence of over -
hangs.
14.6.3.3 Proximal Lesions with Involvement
of the Incisal Edge (Class IV or Site 2,
Size 4)
This kind of lesion may be a result from carious lesion progression or fractures caused by dental traumas on this area.
The composite indicated for this situation must have good
physical properties to resist to the masticatory forces, besides
providing an adequate final esthetics ( . Fig. 14.49a–o ). The
procedures related to isolation of the operating field, pulpal
protection, and application of the adhesive systems are the
same as it has already been described. On this type of prepa-ration, similarly to the lesions without involvement of the
incisal edge, the use of a polyester clear matrix is essential for
the correct restoration of the anatomical shape of the lost
surfaces. The matrix strip must be inserted into the gingival
sulcus between the papilla and the tooth surface. The dentist
folds the strip end to end to form a loop, which is placed and
pushed down toward the gingival sulcus with the tip of the
index finger ( . Fig. 14.49f ). The wedge must be inserted in
the largest embrasure, having a certain height that does not
invade the preparation. The index finger will be positioned
over the lingual aspect of the strip, pressing it toward the
remaining tooth structure, creating the lingual contour. The
labial portion is reflected away from the labial surface with
the thumb. After that, the matrix is evaluated from all possible directions, to verify if on its interior there is an adequate
shape and contour to restore the tooth’s anatomy. A very
common problem at this moment is the improper matrix
contour on the region of the mesiolingual or distolingual
external line angles to be restored . Due to the flexibility
of the polyester strip and the fact that it is originally straight,
on the region of the external line angles, generally the matrix
does not present the adequate contour, which can be observed
by looking the positioned matrix from the incisal edge. To
create the correctly contour, a small fold on the matrix at this
region can be created with the tip of paddle-shaped hand Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14instrument. While the index finger pad is kept pressing the
matrix on the lingual surface, the instrument tip is moved
incisocervically on the region of the lost external line angle,
toward the intact angle of the adjacent tooth ( . Fig. 14.49g ).
The enamel shade composite is placed on a very thin layer, over the matrix secured by the index finger pad, which is
light-cured, creating the contour of the lingual surface
(. Fig. 14.49h ). Then, the same composite is placed on the
region of proximal surface ( . Fig. 14.49i ). Before lightcuring, the matrix must be pulled over the labial surface,
ab
c d
ef
.Fig. 14.49 Restoration of Class IV preparation using polyester clear
matrix. a Defective restoration removed; b preparation of a bevel on
labial enamel margin; c protection of the adjacent tooth with a PTFE
strip and acid-etching; d application of the adhesive system; e
light-curing of the adhesive; f insertion of the matrix into the gingival
sulcus, between the interdental papilla and the tooth, surrounding the
tooth, pressing it cervically with the index finger; g insertion of wedge
and placement of the index finger pad pressing the strip over the
lingual surface, followed by making a small fold on the matrix in the
distolingual external line angle, with the tip of paddle-shaped hand instrument; h restoration of the lingual surface with enamel shade
composite Z350 XT (3M/ESPE); i application of enamel shade composite to restore the distal surface; j before light-curing the matrix is
closed; k distal surface completed; l insertion of dentin shade
composite; m insertion of enamel shade composite, followed by the
matrix closing. A paddle-shaped hand instrument may be placed
internally into the matrix, on the region of the external line angle,
while pulling the matrix, to guarantee the proper contour before the
light-curing; n aspect after finishing with the teeth yet dehydrated due
to the isolation; o result after polishing
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
gh
ij
kl
m n
.Fig. 14.49 (continued)Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14avoiding the occurrence of excess on the proximal area
(. Fig. 14.45j, k ). This way, the regions harder to restore will
be already concluded. After light-curing, the dentin shade
composite is then incrementally placed in the central region,
leaving space for the restoration of the labial surface with
enamel shade composite ( . Fig. 14.49l ). The dentin shade
composite should cover half of the bevel width, helping to
mask the toothrestoration interface. After that, the enamel
shade composite is placed and contoured, the matrix is pulled
over the labial tooth surface, and the light-curing is per -
formed through the matrix ( . Fig. 14.49m ). Care should be
taken when closing the matrix strip, avoiding pulling it too
strong. That would do the material flow toward the incisal
edge, resulting on a restoration subcontour on the region of
the external line angle with the labial surface. To avoid this
problem, paddle-shaped hand instrument can be placed
internally to the matrix, in the region of the angle, while pulling the matrix, to guarantee the proper contour before the
light-curing ( . Fig. 14.49m ). If there is a failure on the contour, more composite can be applied to obtain the required
shape. After the end of filling procedure and matrix removal,
an additional polymerization must be performed from the
labial and lingual approaches.
In case of large dental fractures or caries lesions that
resulted in the loss of the two incisal point angles (mesiolabioincisal and distolabioincisal), the same restorative procedure described can be used, using polyester strips, first
restoring the lingual surface and applying enamel shade
composite over the matrix, secured by the index finger pad,
and then one proximal surface at a time. Then, the dentin
shade composite is applied, finishing with the application of
the enamel shade material over the entire labial surface.
However, in those situations, the transparent plastic crown
forms or the palatal silicone index techniques can also be
applied.
The transparent crown form technique consists in selecting a crown with a size compatible to the tooth to be restored
(. Fig. 8.13a , b). It must be cut to fit correctly to the remaining tooth structure. It can be used in two different ways. On
the first way, the composite is applied inside the crown form, placed in position, the material excess that flowed through
the margins is removed, and the light-curing is performed.
On this case, it is important that, before filling the form, a
small hole is made in the incisal edge, which will help the
flowing of composite excess. This technique presents as disadvantage the fact that the composite is placed on a single
increment, making difficult to obtain a polychromatic restoration simulating the natural tooth. It is also hard to control
the marginal overhangs, and there is a larger risk to have air
bubbles entrapped inside the restoration. As they have some
standard shapes, they may not adapt to all teeth, besides
being harder and thicker than the polyester strips, which
adversely affects the passage through the proximal contact
region . The second way to use the crown forms is to select
a crown that better adapts to the tooth and then cut off the
labial side maintaining the lingual, proximal, and incisal
areas intact . The crown is placed in position and wedged.
The composite is then incrementally applied, creating a polychromatic restoration ( . Fig. 14.50 ).
The technique of the palatal silicone index, which is a custom-made matrix, is performed using a plaster model of the
fractured tooth with the wax-up of the restoration
(. Figs. 14.51a–u and 14.52a–x ) or directly in the mouth when
a defective restoration is present ( . Fig. 14.62a–d ′). On the
first way, an alginate impression of the dental arch must be
taken previously to the restorative procedure, obtaining a plaster model . Over this model, the wax-up of the future restoration is performed, sculpting the ideal anatomy on every
surface. A putty silicone impression material is applied directly
with the fingers to the model (trayless impression), over the
waxed tooth to be restored and some adjacent ones
(. Fig. 14.51j, k ). After the curing, the impression is removed.
Then, with a scalpel blade, the labial part of the mold is
removed, remaining only the lingual and proximal areas and
the incisal edge ( . Fig. 14.51l ). The adaptation of the silicone
index is tested placing it in position. Outside the mouth, a thin
layer of the enamel shade composite is applied over the lingual
surface of the silicone index, on the area of the restoration,
slightly further than the cavosurface angle. It is placed in
o
.Fig. 14.49 (continued)
.Fig. 14.50 Transparent crowns forms with the labial side removed
placed on a fractured tooth
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
position, evaluating if the composite applied is touching the
remaining tooth structure, followed by the light-curing
(. Fig. 14.51m–o ). It is always better to apply a thin layer
because it is easier to add composite than to remove. The silicone index is then removed from the position, remaining the
layer of enamel shade composite on the lingual surface (. Fig. 14.51p ). Then, a thin filament of the opaque dentin
shade composite is applied on the incisal edge to simulate the
effect of the opaque halo ( . Fig. 14.51q ) . The opaque halo
has a similar shade to the cervical area; therefore, the same
composite shade should be used [1 ]. Then, the dentin mamelons are made with the opaque dentin shade material
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 14.51 Restoration technique using palatal silicone index and
previous wax-up of the restoration. a Fractured teeth; b wax-up of the
restoration over a plaster model; c rubber dam isolation; d preparation
of bevel on the labial cavosurface; e acid-etching; f rinsing; g blot
drying; h application of the adhesive system; i Light-curing of the
adhesive; j, k silicone modeling of the over the plaster model; l cutting
of the labial side with a scalpel blade; m test of the silicone index; n
application of the enamel shade composite in the index (Amaris – Voco, shade TN); o index with composite taken in position; p lingual
surface completed; q Application of a small filament of the opaque
dentin shade composite on the incisal edge to simulate the effect of
the opaque halo; r restoration of dentin lobes with dentin shade
composite (Amaris, Voco; shade O2); s application of high-translucency
composite between the lobes (Filtek Supreme, 3M/ESPE; shade TB); t
application of enamel shade composite (Amaris, Voco; shade TN); u
polishing with felt disc and diamond paste; v final resultComposite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14
gh
ij
kl
mn
.Fig. 14.51 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
op
qr
st
u v
.Fig. 14.51 (continued)Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14(. Fig. 14.51r ). Between the mamelons tips and the opaque
halo, a highly translucent composite is placed to create an
opalescent halo ( . Fig. 14.51s ). The selection of the highly
translucent composite to be used must be performed before
the isolation, placing small portions (small spheres) of differ -
ent translucent composites touching the incisal edge of the
adjacent intact teeth, without any type of adhesive, followed
the light-curing. The patient is asked to open and close the
mouth. The effect can be verified with and without the lower
incisors on the back. For this step, really opalescent composites
can be used, or non-opalescent ones associated with a thin coat
of blue tints to increase the bluish opalescent effect between
the lobes. If present on the adjacent teeth, other esthetic char -
acteristics, such as white spots, may be created with white
opaque tints . The external surface is covered by the
medium translucent enamel shade composite ( . Fig. 14.51t ).
. Figure 14.52a–x shows a sequence of clinical procedure
to restore a fractured tooth using a silicone index, associated
with the cementation of a glass fiber post to improve retention. After the preparation of the root canal with the adequate
bur, a dual-cure adhesive system was applied and then post
cemented with dual-cure resin cement. The enamel and dentin shade composites were applied in the same way as it has
already been described. On the attempt to reproduce the
opaque white patches on the adjacent teeth, which are areas
of enamel hypomineralization caused by fluorosis, a white
opaque tint was applied between the layers of enamel shade
composite using a disposable applicator.
14.6.3.4 Restoration of Fractured Teeth
The restoration of fractured teeth is a great challenge for the
operative dentistry. They may involve one or more tissues,
with different incidences: only enamel (21%), enamel and
dentin (57%), enamel-dentin-pulp (6.4–18.3%), and enameldentin- pulp and periodontium (4.3–10%). In some cases, the
conservative pulp treatment is possible and desirable, especially in the cases of incomplete root formation, where the
tooth remains with a wide open apex and fragile root canal
walls, with enhanced risk of root fractures. The pulpotomy
will promote the pulp revascularization and the continued
physiological development and formation of the root, both
on apical and lateral direction.
To restore a fractured tooth, the first step is to take a dental radiograph of the area to identify any nonclinically visible
fractures lines. If nothing abnormal was found, it is necessary to verify if any pulp exposure had happened. On the
cases of pulpal exposure, it is necessary to decide which procedure is more recomended: pulp capping, pulpotomy, or
pulpectomy (details on 7 Chap. 9). On the case of fractured
tooth with incomplete apex but recent pulpal exposure, a
direct pulp capping can be performed with calcium hydroxide powder and calcium hydroxide cement. However, there
are no objective criteria to determine the degree of contamination of an exposed pulp, so the symptoms are the most
important aspect [3 ]. If the direct pulp capping is performed
without previous curettage, the risk of remaining bacterial
contamination is greater, and the pulp must be thoroughly washed with sterile saline solution before the application of
the protector [ 3]. Then, the calcium hydroxide powder is
applied by means of a very small and sterile applicator, placing the material without pressure. When the pulp curettage
is performed, it must be done in the most conservative way
possible, cutting the contaminated superficial tissue and covering it with calcium hydroxide [3 ]. The pulpotomy should
only be indicated in the cases where there is incomplete root
formation, but pulpal tissue was contaminated due to exposure to the oral cavity for a long period of time. It consists of
the removal of the inflamed coronary pulp tissue, maintaining the integrity of the radicular pulp. However, the pulp tissue must present characteristics of vitality, from a
macroscopic perspective, at the moment of cutting [3 ]. More
details can be seen in 7 Chap. 9. On the cases of complete
root formation but with large microbial contamination, due
to long time exposures to the oral cavity, the pulpectomy
should be performed. When the pulp is necrotic, and the
tooth has an incomplete root formation, apexification techniques need to be applied.
When the dentist decides to maintain the pulp vitality
and perform a pulpotomy, it should be verified if the tooth
does not present spontaneous pain and the pulp presents
firm consistency, resistance to cut, and moderate to slight
bleeding with bright red color, that stops in a few minutes
after cutting. Those parameters are the most important one
to determine the success. The more recent the pulp exposure
had happened, the greater the success probabilities of the
treatment, even though old exposures can still show positive
results, especially in younger patients. In addition, the size of
the pulpal exposure does not determine the success, because
it may be obtained in small as large ones. The consistency is
also not a good parameter to predict the success. Liquefied
pulps have a bad response to the treatment due to the insufficient blood flow. Teeth with incomplete root formation and
thin root walls generally provide a better prognosis . It
must also be evaluated if the tooth may be restored without
the need of retentive post inside the root canal.
On the cases where no pulpal exposure occurred, but
there is an area of dentin where it can be observed a pink
discoloration ( . Fig. 9.7d), it indicates that a remaining dentin layer of less than 0.5 mm exists, probably associated with
clinically undetected microscopic pulp exposures. Therefore,
this region must be covered with a thin layer of calcium
hydroxide cement to stimulate the formation of reactionary
dentin.
14.6.3.5 Trans-surgical Restoration
On the cases of fractured teeth, many times, the margin of
the fractured area is located below the edge of the free gingiva. On those cases a surgical access through a gingival flap
is usually necessary to expose the fracture margin, allowing
the correct restoration ( . Fig. 14.53a–l ). After the access, it
must be evaluated if the biologic width was invaded. On
positive cases, if the invasion is small and it is only restricted
to the lingual side, a small osteotomy can be performed to
recover the biologic width. However, if a fracture below the
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
alveolar bone crest has occurred on the labial side or the
invasion of the biological width happened on the proximal
area or on the labial surface, the osteotomy will lead to a
change of the gingival position on the labial surface, resulting in esthetic problems. On those cases, an orthodontic extrusion is required ( . Fig. 14.54a–o ). It can be performed with
fixed or removable orthodontic appliances. However, it is
recommended to perform a weekly supracrestal fiberotomy,
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 14.52 Restoration of a fractured tooth associated with a glass
fiber post and silicone index. a shade determination; b restoration
wax-up in a plaster model; c application of silicone on the model; d
removal of the labial side of the index; e preparation of root canal; f
fitting test of glass fiber post (Whitepost – FGM) and the silicone index;
g bevel on the enamel margin; h protection of the adjacent teeth with
PTFE strip and acid-etching; i rinsing; j drying the canal with an
absorbent paper points; k application of the dual-cure adhesive system
Futurabond U (Voco) with a disposable applicator (Cavibrush, FGM); l
application of the silane over the post; m application of the dual-cure
resin cement directly inside the root canal (Bifix QM, Voco); n post insertion inside the canal; o lightcuring after excess removal; p lingual
surface of the restoration performed with enamel shade composite
(Amaris, Voco, shade TN) using the silicone index; q placement of the
matrix and wedge to restore the proximal surface; r proximal surfaces
restored; s dentin shade composite inserted reproducing the dentin
mamelons and the incisal opaque halo; t high-translucency composite
applied between the mamelons; u insertion of a layer of enamel shade
translucent composite, followed by an opaque tint creating the white
areas scattered irregularly with a disposable applicator, an attempt to
simulate the white fluorotic spots on the adjacent tooth; v, w application of the last increment of enamel shade composite; x final resultComposite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14
gh
ij
kl
mn
.Fig. 14.52 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
op
qr
st
uv
.Fig. 14.52 (continued)Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14 .Fig. 14.52 (continued)
wx
ab
cd
.Fig. 14.53 Trans-surgical restoration. a , b Fracture bellow the
gingival margin; c incision to provide access; d open flap; e rubber dam
isolation; f acid-etching; g application of the adhesive system; h application of the composite; i contouring of the composite surface
with a flat brush; j finished and polished restoration; k flap repositioned and stitched; l final result after 2 weeks
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
gh
i j
kl
e f
.Fig. 14.53 (continued)Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 14.54 Treatment of a fracture with pulpal and periodontal
involvement. a, b Fracture of tooth 21; c , d views of the fragment
showing the fracture below the CEJ; e fragment fitting test showing
the space loss due to the migration of the adjacent tooth; f , g
orthodontic movement with a removable orthodontic appliance to
recover the space; h open flap to perform a small osteotomy on the
lingual surface, allowing the positioning of a No. clamp below the fracture margin; i rubber dam isolation; j fitting test of a glass fiber
post; k as the fragment adaptation to the remaining tooth structure
was very poor, it was chosen to perform a direct restoration. Before
stitching the flap, the restoration was finished and polished. l flap
repositioned and stitched; m , n orthodontic extrusion to recover the
biological width; o final resultwhere a scalpel blade is used to cut the supracrestal connective tissue fibers around the tooth, avoiding the bone formation as the tooth is extruded.
When a partially erupted anterior tooth suffers a fracture,
the lesion may apparently invade the biologic width, which is
still not defined. When that happens, it can be advantageous to wait for the end of the tooth eruption and just then to
make the final restoration. Many fractures with invasion of
the biologic width, with the passing of time, become fractures without invasion. In the meantime, the tooth could be
maintained without restoration, if the patient does not present sensitivity, or with a temporary restoration, even with
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
gh
i j
kl
mn
.Fig. 14.54 (continued)Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14invasion of the biologic width. This can avoid the children
undergo unnecessary surgical procedures, which may cause
psychological traumas for the rest of the life .
> When a partially erupted anterior tooth fractures, the
lesion may apparently invade the biological width,
which is still not defined. When that happens, it can be
advantageous to wait for the end of the tooth eruption
and just then to make the final restoration. Many of
them, with the passing of time, become fractures
without invasion.
To perform the rubber dam isolation, due to the large differ -
ence in the bone crest level position between the labial and
lingual surfaces, is frequently necessary to bend the lingual
jaws of the No. clamp downward. For that, the technique
described in the . Fig. 7.12 can be followed. Although to per -
form the finishing and polishing procedures immediately
after the end of a composite restoration has its disadvantages,
and should be delayed on normal situations, it must be done
at the same appointment on the cases of trans-surgical restorations, allowing the healing of the gingival tissue. After the
end of polishing, the area must be copiously irrigated with
saline solution to remove any residues and the flap pressed in
position for 5 min. Then, the flap is stitched and the region
protected with a periodontal dressing . The patient must
receive analgesics, and an ice pack should be applied on the
surgical area (side of face) during the first 10 min.
14.6.3.6 Reattachment of Fractured Tooth
Fragments
When a dental fracture occurs, despite the involvement of
the pulp and/or periodontium, the best situation is when the
patient was capable to recover the dental fragment. This simplifies the restoration of the esthetic and function through a
reattachment procedure. It has as advantages a better esthetic
result and function, besides this treatment last longer than
direct composite restorations. In addition, the procedure is
simpler and faster than direct or indirect restorations. For the
patients, there is a positive emotional factor, since they do
not feel mutilated with the loss of part of his tooth. However, the reattachment is not indicated on the cases of largely
restored tooth and less indicated when there is a shade contrast between the fragment and the remaining tooth structure or with the adjacent teeth. The esthetic result will also
not be ideal when the remaining tooth structure suffered
color changes due to intrapulpal bleeding that happened due
to the trauma . After the traumat, the patient should be
instructed to maintain the toooth fragment inside, water to
avoid its dehydration, until the dental apointment .
The first step is to perform the prophylaxis of the dental
fragment and remaining tooth structure and do the shade
selection. This is important to choose the proper shade for
the resin cement or flowable composite that is required for
the bonding procedure . The fractures with supragingival
margins may be treated with the rubber dam or cotton roll
isolation . However, on the subgingival fractures, the use
of rubber dam isolation is mandatory . When necessary, a
No. retraction clamp can be placed, stabilized with low
fusing compound or gingival barrier to avoid its movement
during the treatment. The fragment must be fixated to the
heated tip of gutta-percha or low fusing compound stick, in a
way to allow its manipulation. The adaptation of the fragment to the remaining tooth structure must be evaluated
(. Fig. 14.55a–i ). At this moments, the correct fitting position to adapt the fragment should be memorized, training
how to place in at the moment of the bonding procedure .
It must be evaluated if any tooth movement happened in the
meantime between the trauma and the dental appointment,
which would close the space for the fragment fitting, being
required a previous orthodontic recovery of the lost space. It
must also be analyzed if the gingival tissue grown and covered the margins of the fractured area.
If there is any difficulty to correctly place the fragment in
the desired position, it is possible to prepare a positioning jig
. For that, the fragment should be provisionally stabilized
in position with composite, without adhesive application,
which is light-cured. Over the incisal edge of the fragment
and the adjacent teeth, a water-soluble lubricant is applied,
such as a glycerin gel. Self-curing acrylic resin is applied over
the lubricated area using a brush, which is first soaked in
monomer and dipped in the polymer. After the curing, a
positioning jig is obtained and can guide the definitive seating. The fragment is then removed and cleaned and receives
the adhesive procedures. The jig may also be made with a
putty viscosity silicone impression material. When a layer of
calcium hydroxide cement is applied as a liner on the remaining tooth structure, this additional volume will impair the
fragment adaptation. On this case, an internal space needs to
be created in the fragment by cutting the dentin in this
region.
In some cases, the fracture happens without any tissue
loss, and the fragment adapts perfectly to the remaining tooth
structure. On those cases, the reattachment may be performed
only with the adhesive system ( . Fig. 14.55a–i ). After prophylaxis of fragment and remaining tooth structure, the proximal
surface of the adjacent teeth must be protected with a polyester or PTFE strip. Then, the acid etching of the remaining
o
.Fig. 14.54 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
tooth structure and the fragment is performed, followed by
blot drying and application of the adhesive system. The acid is
applied first over the enamel and then over the dentin. If a
liner was applied, the acid should not be applied over it.
Preferably a total-etch two-bottle and two-step adhesive
system, with a primer and adhesive separated, should be
used. After the acid etching, the primer must be applied to
both structures (remaining tooth and fragment), followed by
gently airstream to leave thin coat and evaporate the
primer’s solvent. Then, the adhesive (which has no solvents) is applied, and the fragment is taken in position. While held
firmly, the excess of adhesive is removed with an airstream or
brush, followed by light-curing for 40 s from the labial side
and for 40 s more seconds from lingual side. The guttapercha
or compound stick is removed. If a total-etch one-bottle system is used, it would not be possible to remove the solvent
with airstream before bonding, without removing the necessary adhesive for the reattachment of the fragment, so the
solvent would be trapped inside the adhesive interface creating weak areas.
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 14.55 Fragment reattachment procedure using only an
adhesive system. a Initial aspect; b fitting test of the fragment
adaptation showing a perfect match; c prophylaxis with pumice; d
acid-etching of the remaining tooth structure; e acid-etching of the fragment; f, g application of a total-etch two-bottle and two-step
adhesive system (primer + adhesive); h reattached fragment; i final
resultComposite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14
g
ih
.Fig. 14.55 (continued)
ab
.Fig. 14.56 Fragment reattachment procedure using resin cement.
a Initial aspect; b rubber dam isolation; c fragment fixation in a low
fusing compound stick; d fitting test of the fragment showing
defective adaptation due to the loss of structure; e , f acid-etching; g , h
application of the adhesive system; i dual-cure resin cement applied (RelyX ARC, 3M/ESPE); j reattachment with resin cement; k preparation
of a double bevel on the interface with round diamond point to mask
the interface; l acid-etching on the area beveled area; m Application of
the adhesive system; n placement of a composite on fracture line; o
result after 1 week
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
gh
ij
cd
ef
.Fig. 14.56 (continued)Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14
mn
o
kl
.Fig. 14.56 (continued)
However, on most of the cases, the fragment does not fit
perfectly to the remaining tooth structure, and there is a loss of
tissue on the fracture line. On those cases, a material with
stronger mechanical properties should be used to fill the gaps,
such as resin cements ( . Fig. 14.56a–o ) or flowable composites
(. Fig. 14.57a–n ). The adhesive system selected is used following the manufacturer’s recommendations, similarly to an adhesive cementation of an indirect restoration. The adhesive
system is applied, followed by a gently airstream to promote
the solvent evaporation and leave a thin coat. In general, it
should not be light-cured, in order to not adversely affect the fragment fitting. The resin cement or the flowable composite
resin is applied on the fragment, which is taken into position.
The excess is removed with a brush and dental floss, followed
by light-curing using a high-output lightcuring unit. On most
cases, there is no need to use dual-cure resin cement, because
the labiolingual dimensions of the crowns of anterior teeth
allow proper polymerization by the light transmitted through
the tooth structure. However, depending on the fracture location, on areas where the light cannot reach, such as on subgingival fractures, dual-cure adhesive and resin cement must be
selected. On cases of large loss of tooth structure at the inter -
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
face, the cement shade may not be adequate to mask the cement
line. On those cases, the double bevel can be performed on the
interface using a round diamond point, which will simultaneously produce bevels on the fragment and the remaining tooth
structure. The groove produced is restored with a composite
with proper shade and translucency ( . Fig. 14.56j–n ).
On cases of dental trauma, when the fracture line extends
beyond the alveolar crest on the region of the proximal sur -
faces, the most indicated procedure is the orthodontic extru-sion to recover the periodontal biologic width. However, on
cases where the fragment is kept in position and holds the
gingival tissue, instead of immediately removing the fragment, it is possible to make a temporary reattachment,
according to what is shown in . Fig. 14.58a–e . This allows
maintaining the smile esthetic during the orthodontic extrusion or may reduce or eliminate the need for periodontal
surgery on the cases of partially erupted tooth, besides to
simplify endodontic treatment whenever necessary.
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 14.57 Fragment reattachment procedure using flowable
composite. a Initial aspect; b shade determination; c Rubber dam
isolation; d fitting test of the fragment; e , f acid-etching; g , h application of Solobond M (Voco) adhesive system; i flowable composite applied (GrandioSO Heavy Flow – Voco); j application of composite on
the fragment; k fragment reattachment; l light-curing; m final aspect
with the tooth dehydrated because of the isolation; n result after 1
weekComposite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14
gh
i j
kl
mn
.Fig. 14.57 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
ab
cd
e
.Fig. 14.58 Oblique fracture below the alveolar crest. A temporary
reattachment was performed before the endodontic treatment and
orthodontic extrusion. a Fractured tooth with the fragment in position;
b double bevel on the interface; c acid-etching; d application of the adhesive system with primer and adhesive separately (Solobond
Plus – Voco); e fragment reattached and composite restoration of the
lost structure
Depending on the fracture line location, an intraradicular post can be used for retention ( . Fig. 14.59a–l) . The indication of intraradicular posts is related to the dimensions of
the fractured area and the overbite. The larger is the fractured
area and/or the deeper is the overbite, the higher will be the
indication of a post to improve the retention of the fragment.
They are only indicated in the cases of large fractured areas.
Non-vital tooth with transverse fracture including the entire
clinical crown, requires retention and stabilization provided by the intraradicular post . When large fractures occur on
teeth with a deep incisor overbite and strong contacts of disocclusion guides on the incisors, it is also advisable to use a
post; while on a patients with anterior open bite or minimum
incisor overbite, the post might not be necessary. For transverse fractures located between the medium and incisal third
of the crown, the post is also not indicated. On cases of
oblique fractures, the use of a post for retention is also not
required, because there is a large surface area on the fracture Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14line available for bonding . When the fracture involves
two-thirds or more of the clinical crown and the fragment
was lost, a full-crown restoration is indicated, while on the
other situations, a direct composite restoration can be per -
formed [ 3]. It is important to remember that the post does
not increase the fracture strength of the tooth, more than the
adhesive composite restoration by itself, promoting only the
retention [3, 4]. Patients with deep incisor overbite, when the edge of the lower incisors touch the cervical third of the lingual surface of the upper incisors, as well as with sleep bruxism or clenching while awake, have not a good prognosis
when direct restorations or reattachment is performed. Large
bevels around the whole fractured area can be performed to
increase the retention, and occlusal splints are recommended
to protect the restorations during the night. The patients with
wear facets are not recommended for direct restorations or
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 14.59 Fragment reattachment procedure using intracanal glass
fiber post. a Initial aspect; b fragment fitting test; c internal cleaning of
the fragment, creating space for the glass post; d acid-etching; e
application of a dual-cure adhesive system inside the canal and on the
remaining tooth structure with a disposable applicator; f application of the adhesive on the glass fiber post (Whitepost DC, FGM); g light-curing
of the resin cement after post cementation; h fragment fitting test; i
acid-etching of the fragment; j application of the adhesive system; k the
resin cement was applied inside the crown and then it was placed in
position; l final result
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
fragment reattachment. Those signs suggest extreme function or parafunction, which will produce severe stress over
the restorations .
If the fragment is stored dry after the fracture, before the
dentist appointment, it becomes dehydrated and whiter than
the remaining tooth structure. After the reattachment, it can
rehydrate and recover its natural shade after some days.
However, some fragments take some months to recover the
original color, while others will never recover to return to the
original appearance. Therefore, the tooth must preferably be
kept immersed in water after the fracture [3 ]. After reattach-ment, the patient must be advised to avoid using this tooth for
biting and cutting hard food, as well as to avoid any habits that
may produce high level of stress over the fragment and displace it, such as tearing into packaging with teeth, pencil
chewing, chewing ice, and using tongue piercings [3 ]. Mouth
guards must be used when playing any contact sports, as well
as occlusal splints are recommended in case of bruxism. The
patient must return to the office for periodic visits after 1
week, 1 month, and then each 6 months after fragment reattachment, to analyze the pulp vitality, perform periodontal
probing, and analyze the color of the fragment and remaining
gh
ij
kl
.Fig. 14.59 (continued)Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14tooth structure, as well as of the composite or cement used in
the bonding interface [3 ]. Pulp and periodontal complications
are common after a traumatic accident and clinical evidences
can appear just after some time. The radiographic control of
the traumatized teeth is required due to the possibility of
internal and/or external root resorption, which may appear in
the radiographic image only after a long period of time.
> After reattachment, the patient must be advised to
avoid using this tooth for biting and cutting hard food,
as well as to avoid any habits that may produce high
level of stress over the fragment and displace it, such
as tearing into packaging with teeth, pencil chewing,
chewing ice, and using tongue piercings. Mouth
guards should be used when playing any contact
sports, as well as occlusal splints are recommended in
case of bruxism.
14.6.3.7 Recontouring Teeth with Direct
Composite Buildups
Some patients present anomalies of tooth formation which
results in abnormal shape or size, such as misshapen pegshaped maxillary lateral incisor, microdontia, dens in dente,
and Hutchinson’s incisors. Others have generalized diastemas due to tooth size and arch length discrepancies or localized diastemas, such as the median diastema . Despite
the reason, those disturbances may severely compromise the
esthetics of the smile. In some cases, the orthodontic treatment may completely solve the problem. However, in other
situations, only an artificial recontouring may be the solution. The adhesive direct composite restorations are an excellent alternative to the full crowns, because they are
conservatives and can reshape the teeth simply by adding
material, without requiring any cutting of the intact tooth
structure.
The median diastema, located between the central incisors, is the most frequent one. Its etiology was generally
related to the presence of enlarged labial frenum, which
could adversely affect the normal closing of the space between
the teeth. Other causes include anodontia, very small or
badly formed teeth, and tooth size discrepancy, which is a
disproportion among the sizes of upper and lower anterior
teeth (Bolton’s discrepancy), supernumerary teeth, and
hereditary factors. The diastemas may also result from other
problems such as tongue thrusting, periodontal disease, or
posterior bite collapse. The diastemas should not be closed
before to diagnose and treat its causes . The occlusion
must be carefully evaluated.
When closing diastemas is important to keep an adequate
width-to-length ratio to obtain an esthetically pleasant final
results . According to the size, the diastemas can be classified into three types, which are small (space smaller than 1
mm), medium (space from 1 to 2.5 mm), and large (space
larger than 2.5 mm). For the small diastemas, a little amount
of composite can be applied on both adjacent teeth, until the
total closing of the space, producing little interfering on the width-to-length ratio. On median diastemas, close to 2 mm,
besides adding composite to the both adjacent teeth, it may
be convenient to make enameloplasty on the distal surface
these teeth, slightly increasing the mesial surface of the other
adjacent teeth, obtaining a better distribution of the space.
Large diastemas must be treated associating orthodontic
movement with composite restorations .
When patients with large median diastemas (larger than
3 mm) are treated only with composite buildups, the restored
teeth will be larger than the natural teeth can be. For example, the central incisors are rarely larger than 9.5 mm. If a
patient with incisors of 9.5 mm has a 3 mm width diastema
and the dentist fills half of this space with composite, the final
dimensions will be 11 mm width. This will break the correct
width-to-length ratio, creating a non-esthetic result. In general, the apparent width of upper anterior teeth should not be
higher than 80% of its length. This situation would require a
reduction of at least 1 mm on the distal surface of both central incisors, which would result in dentin exposure on the
proximal surfaces. On those cases, the orthodontic treatment
is essential, promoting the redistribution of spaces, reducing
the diastemas between the central incisors, and creating
spaces between them and the lateral incisors, which could be
closed by adding the composite on the mesial surfaces of the
lateral incisors .
It is very important to measure the diastema size to plan
the final width proportion among the anterior teeth. For that,
it can be used a plaster study model and a bow compass with
two needle points, or a Chu’s Aesthetic Gauge to analyze dental proportion, as it has already been described. If the teeth
that are forming the diastema present an incorrect width-tolength ratio, with teeth narrower that could be, the diastema
closure may be performed without any problem. If the teeth
are already larger than the ideal, to increase even more its
width would result in a great esthetic problem, and it would
be better to redistribute the spaces with orthodontic treatment.
To preserve the anatomic proportions, sometimes when
the width of anterior teeth needs to be enlarged with composite buildups, it may be also necessary to increase its
length. If the occlusal relations and the facial appearance
allow (see 7 Sect. 1.3.4 in 7 Chap. 1), the adequate dental
length may be obtained adding composite on the incisal
edge. The width-to-length ratio can also be improved through
a gingival periodontal surgery, increasing the clinical crown
length . It is advisable to previously simulate the changes
making a diagnostic wax-up on a plaster model and a mockup restoration, applying the composite on the teeth without
any previous adhesive procedure. This will give the patient an
idea about how the future restoration will look like, and if
that result is pleasant to him. The bow compass with two
needle points can be used to analyze the mock-up dimension
and do any correction .
For the restorative procedure, after shade determination
and prophylaxis of the teeth surface, the rubber dam isolation can be performed. Ligatures with dental floss can be
required to provide a good retraction of the rubber dam
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
edges. As an option, cotton roll isolation with retraction cord,
associated or not with a cheek retractor, can also be per -
formed. When both teeth adjacent to the diastema will be
restored, the first restoration must be finished before starting
the second one ( . Fig. 14.60a–o ) . First of all, the adjacent tooth to the one that will receive the first restoration
must be protected with a PTFE strip. Then, the acid etching of the enamel is performed for 15 s and the surface is rinsed.
The acid etching must be extended to the middle of the labial
and lingual surfaces, from the gingival to the incisal third of
the crown. The restoration will cover about one-third of the
labial and lingual surfaces. It is important to be sure of not
covering with composite any non-etched enamel. Any etched
enamel areas that remain uncovered by adhesive and comab
cd
ef
.Fig. 14.60 Diastema closure. a Initial aspect; b shade determination; c protection of the adjacent tooth with PTFE strip and acidetching; d rinsing; e drying with airstream; f application of the adhesive
system; g light-curing; h application of enamel shade composite
(Amaris – Voco, shade TN) with the matrix in position, stabilized with
the index finger; i matrix closed over the labial surface for light-curing the increment; j measurement of the tooth dimensions with a bow
compass with two needle points; k analysis the space left for the
restoration of the adjacent tooth; l acidetching; m application of
adhesive; n application of the last composite increment, closing the
matrix over the labial surface; o final resultComposite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14
gh
ij
kl
mn
.Fig. 14.60 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
posite will remineralize after the contact with the saliva .
The enamel may be dried with an airstream, since there is no
exposed dentin, observing the white-opaque appearance,
showing it was correctly etched. If an adhesive with separated
primer and bond bottles is selected, there is no need to apply
the primer . However, if the enamel is left wet, the primer
application is important, since the bonding resin is hydrophobic. It is important to use a composite with enough physical properties to bear the masticatory forces to which the
restoration will undergo, such as the microhybrid, nanohybrid, or nanofilled. In the past, due to the insufficient polishing provided by the hybrid composite, it was recommended
to use this material to restore only the lingual side, being
covered by a microfilled material on the labial surface. This
procedure is no longer necessary with the modern composites, because they provide good polishing and esthetics associated with proper mechanical properties.
Before applying the composite, a polyester strip may be
contoured drawing it over the round back end of a clinical
tweezer and placed in position. The bow compass with two
needle points is used to measure the mesiodistal dimensions,
to guarantee the symmetry of the restored teeth. If one tooth
is larger than the other, this discrepancy can be compensated
with the restoration . The restoration must start below
the gingival margin to create a natural contour and ensure
adequate gingival embrasure and emergence profile . If
the cotton roll isolation is being used, a gauze bandage square
can be placed over the tongue to prevent undesired contamination of the area with saliva . The polyester matrix strip
must be inserted into the gingival sulcus between the inter -
dental papilla and the tooth. It is kept in position with a pad
of the index finger, pressing the lingual aspect of the strip
toward the remaining tooth structure, while the labial por -
tion is reflected away. Wedges are, generally, not recommended because they could create an inadequate emergence
profile [ 31]. The composite is applied with a hand composite
filling instrument, pressing it toward the lingual side to
ensure that it will reach the lingual surface. The matrix is
gently closed on the labial side, pulling more the gingival
edge of the strip to prevent overhangs ( . Fig. 14.60h, i ). Care should be taken not to pulling the strip too much, which may
result in the undercontoured restoration. Most of the small
diastemas may, in many cases, be successfully closed only
using enamel shade composites, which are more translucent
. However, larger diastemas require the use of an opaque
dentin shade, to block the dark background of the mouth.
On those situations, the first increment of dentin shade composite may be placed until it fills approximately half of the
labiolingual distance. The composite is light-cured, and a
new layer is applied, using enamel shade material. The matrix
is closed over the labial tooth surface, and the light-curing is
performed through the strip. The first restoration is finished
and shaped until obtaining the correct anatomical size and
shape [ 35]. The dimensions can be evaluated with a bow
compass to determine if they are correct ( . Fig. 14.60j, k ).
Tip
Wedges are not recommended when closing
diastemas with composite because they can create an
inadequate emergence profile.
After that, the restoration of the neighbor tooth is started.
The proximal contact may be obtained by displacing the
already restored tooth with the thumb and the index finger
slightly toward the distal side, while the matrix is maintained
in contact with the adjacent restoration. The polishing is only
performed after the second restoration is finished. The continuity of the cervical region of the restoration with the tooth
structure must be perfect, without overhangs. It is evaluated
by passing a dental floss embracing the tooth on the proximal
surface, moving it cervicoincisally. It should not shred and
fray, which would indicate the presence of defective contour.
Any overhang must be completely removed using abrasive
finishing strips. The occlusal contact during centric occlusion (CO) and disocclusion guides must be evaluated and
adjusted .
On the case of medium and large diastemas, the palatal
silicone index technique, as already described, may simplify
the procedure to be performed, as it can be observed in
. Fig. 14.61a–q .
. Figures 14.62a–d ′ and 14.63a–i show clinical cases of
dental recontouring of peg-shaped maxillary lateral incisor
using palatal silicone index, similarly to what was already
been described for fractured and caries-affected teeth. In
. Fig. 14.62a–d ′, the palatal silicone index was made directly
in the mouth over the old unsatisfactory restorations.
14.6.4 The Use of Color Modifiers
The color modifiers, also referred as characterization material or tints, are flowable composites with different colors and
opacities, intended to be used as an intermiediate layer
between the adhesive coat and the restorative composite or
between the composite layers ( . Fig. 14.64 ). Before its use, it
o
.Fig. 14.60 (continued)Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 14.61 Diastema closure using a diagnostic wax-up and
silicone index. a –c Initial aspect; d aspect after dental bleaching; e waxup on the plaster model; f acid-etching; g etched enamel with
white-opaque appearance after the drying with air steam; h application of the adhesive system; i silicone index fitting test; j index in position with enamel shade composite to restore the lingual surface
(Opallis – FGM, shade E-Bleach); k lingual surfaces restored; l application of the opaque dentin shade composite (Opallis shade D-Bleach);
m application of enamel shade composite; n aspect after polishing; o
final result. p , q smile before and after the treatmentshould be applied over a mixing pad and mixed with a hand
instrument with small circular movements. If it is too viscous, it can be mixed with clear liquid resin (untinted), supplied by some manufacturers, or with the adhesive of a
two-bottle (primer and bond) fourth-generation adhesive
system, which does contain solvents in the composition. It
must be applied the thinnest layer possible, enough to produce the optical effect desired, such as 0.25 mm or less, because they have fewer inorganic fillers and more pigments,
with reduced mechanical properties. It is applied with a thin
brush in a way that, at the end, it would not be possible to
observe the marks left by the bristles. That would indicate
that the material is still too viscous .
On the case of teeth with darker shades on the cervical
region, a honey yellow or light brown tint can be applied
over the adhesive coat, producing a gradient of shades,
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
gh
ij
kl
mn
.Fig. 14.61 (continued)Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14
op
q
.Fig. 14.61 (continued)
starting from the cervical area and extending 1–2 mm incisally. The tint is light-cured and covered with dentin and
enamel shade composites. After polishing, the yellow background will be seen through. The final shade of the restoration will depend on the amount and chroma of the tint
applied, as well as the thickness of the composite layer
applied over it. The tint color may be changed by mixing a
little amount of white tint or a clear liquid resin . The
white tint is generally referred to simply as opaque, because
it is used mainly to mask or cover dark backgrounds, such as
metal or sclerotic dentin.
On most cases, a highly translucent incisal edge may be
restored associating opaque and translucent shades of composite. However, if a highly translucent composite is not
available and the translucency of the incisal edge is intense,
with a grayish or bluish appearance (due to opalescence), a
gray, blue, or violet tint or a mixture of those can be applied
on the region to create the desired effect. They can be used
between the tooth and the composite, or between the layers
of the composite. First of all, it is necessary to analyze the
characteristics of the intact adjacent teeth to be recreated. It
must be done before the rubber dam isolation, because the
drying can adversely affect the observation of the details. The tint is applied as a thin layer with a brush on the desired areas
and then light-cured .
The honey yellow, light, and dark brown tints, besides
being used to recreate the cervical shade, can also be used
to replicate the dark grooves on the posterior teeth ( . Fig.
15.17 t, u ) and enamel cracks. On cases of teeth with yellow
areas due to the counter-opalescence, the yellow tint may
also be used. Hypomineralized spots may be created with
white opaque tints applied over the dentin shade layer or
between the enamel shade composite ( . Fig. 14.52a–x ).
Another possibility to simulate the hypomineralized spots
consists of making small cavities on selected areas, about
0.5 mm deep, on the already finished and polished surface
of the restoration, with a round diamond point, and applying a little amount of the opaque tint, covering it with the
same enamel shade composite previously used . The
opaque tints can also be used to recreate the opaque halo on
the incisal edge and mask a dark background, such as on
darkened teeth or metallic restorations ( . Fig. 15.16f ) and
sclerotic dentin, or reduce the translucent aspect of some
composites .
To simulate enamel cracks on the restorations, the last layer
of enamel shade composite is applied but not lightcured. A 10
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 14.62 Recontouring of peg-shaped maxillary lateral incisors
using palatal silicone index prepared over the old restorations. a
Unsatisfactory restorations on teeth 12 and 22. Shade determination; b
preparation of the silicone index using putty silicone material over the
old restorations; c old restoration removed from tooth 12; d rubber
dam isolation and test of the silicone index; e protection of the
adjacent teeth with PTFE strip and acid-etching; f rinsing; g drying with
the stream. A white-opaque appearance is observed on the etched
area; h application of the adhesive system; i light-curing of the
adhesive; j application of enamel shade composite on the index (Z350
XT – 3M/ESPE); k lingual surface restored; l restoration of the proximal
surfaces using matrix strip and wedge; m placement of opaque
composite for the incisal opaque halo; n application of opaque composite to restore the dentin lobes; o application of highly
translucent composite between the dentin lobes to reproduce the
translucency of the incisal edge; p application of a body opacity
composite over the remaining tooth structure and the dentin shade
composite; q application of enamel shade composite and contouring
with a flat brush; r immediate result; s finishing with polishing disc
(Super-Snap, Shofu); t , u preparation of grooves between the lobes
with fine grit diamond point (No. 392EF, Komet); v creation of scratches
to simulate the perikymata using a diamond point moved very slowly
mesiodistally; w polishing with felt disc (Diamond Flex, FGM) and
polishing paste (Diamond Excel, FGM); x , y final result of the tooth 12; z
initial aspect of tooth 22; a ′ initial aspect of the tooth 22; b ′, c′ final
result of the tooth 22; d ′ final aspect of both restorationsComposite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14
gh
ij
kl
mn
.Fig. 14.62 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
op
qr
st
uv
.Fig. 14.62 (continued)Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14
wx
z
a’
b’
y
d’
c’
.Fig. 14.62 (continued)
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
× 4 mm piece of thin polyester strip is cut and inserted into the
composite, following the direction of the crack that is desired to
simulate. The light-curing is performed, and the stripe is
removed, leaving a small gap. This space is filled with the
selected tint, the excess is removed, and the light-curing is per -
formed [ 27]. On the case of a dark yellow background, the blue
color tint, which is complementary color of yellow, can be
applied over to reduce the yellowish aspect . In Class IV restorations, it is possible to apply a little amount of white opaque tint between the lobules made with dentin shade composite, in
the incisal area, to highlight this detail [19, 38]. Another possibility to recreate the counteropalescence is to apply a small
amount of the white opaque tint on the end of the dentin lobules, covering them with naturally opalescent composite. There
also some opaque tints with shades following the VITA Classical
shade guide, such as the A1 and A3 from Kolor + Plus (Kerr),
which may be used to bring the background shade closer to the
desired shade for the final restoration ( . Fig. 17.6h , i).
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 14.63 Dental recontouring of peg-shaped maxillary lateral
incisors using diagnosis wax-up and palatal silicone index. a Initial
aspect; b wax-up on a plaster model; c removal of the old restoration
and placement of gingival retraction cord; d fitting test of the silicone index; e application of enamel shade composite on the index; f finished
lingual surface; g application of dentin shade composite creating the
dentin lobules; h immediate result; i final result after polishing. Clinical
case performed by Dr. Taciana M. F. Caneppele Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14
14.6.5 Finishing and Polishing
The finishing and polishing represent the last ones but
extremely important steps of a composite restoration. The
finishing is the procedure of large removal of restorative
material to eliminate excess and overhangs on the margins,
improve contour, adjust the occlusion, and produce a
reasonably smooth surface. On the other hand, the polishing is the procedure of fine removal of the restorative material,
resulting in a very smooth and glossy surface, reproducing
the texture of the natural teeth and giving comfort to the
patient.
14.6.5.1 Finishing
Ideally, no cut or grinding on the restoration should be per -
formed immediately after the light-curing of the final composite layer, because it is not fully polymerized. However, it is
sometimes hard to obtain a perfect restoration contour during
the incremental composite placement, being necessary some
type of finishing. Therefore, to provide the adequate function
and comfort for the patient, just the essential adjusts should be
performed at this moment. The “dark-curing” of the composite continues for about 24 h after light-curing, when the material reaches its maximum strength [3 ]. The friction produced
by a rotary instrument generates more aggression to a composite recently placed than after the postcuring.
Finishing is the procedure of large removal of restorative
material to eliminate excess and overhangs on the
margins, improve contour, adjust the occlusion, and
produce a reasonably smooth surface.
g
ih
.Fig. 14.63 (continued)
.Fig. 14.64 Example of color modifier (Kolor + Plus – Kerr)
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
It was proved that the polymerization shrinkage can produce marginal gaps on the tooth-restoration interface. In
addition, the use of rotary instruments can generate microfractures on the tooth and restoration margins around the
gap, and the residues may penetrate into gaps, creating white
lines on the interface. When the dentist wait for a certain
period before polishing the restoration, the composite can
suffer water sorption and undergo a certain hygroscopic
expansion, of approximately 1% by volume, reducing the
size or even closing the marginal gaps and the possibility of
white lines [3 ]. The white lines observed clinically are cor -
related with the rupture of the adhesive bonding and the
lack of restoration adaptation to the tooth structure. However, it is important to highlight that, even though the gap
may be closed by the water sorption, the adhesive interface
will remain broken, allowing marginal microleakage. Other
reasons for white lines at the interface are the traumatic finishing and polishing procedure, improper etching and/or
adhesive application, and composite polymerization using
excessively high-emmitance light-curing units, creating
excessive shrinkage stress and not only gaps but also microcracks of the enamel close to the margins [3 ]. Some studies
have shown that delaying the polishing procedure can
reduce the marginal microleakage and surface roughness,
besides increase the microhardness [18, 20, 44, 45]. However, in the cases where the gingival margin was accessed by
retraction clamps or by surgical means, the finishing and
polishing must be performed before the removal of the rubber dam [3 ].
After the isolation removal is important to perform the
occlusal adjustment of the restoration, analyzing the contacts in maximum intercuspation and during the excursive
movements of the mandible. The presence of the premature
contact or interference during the excursive movements
may lead to fracture or displacement of the restoration .
First of all, the CO contacts must be adjusted, evaluating if
the teeth adjacent to that restored are contacting the opposite teeth the same way as before the tooth preparation. The
contacts on CO must be marked with one of the two colored
sides (e.g., black) of an articulating paper, placed facing the
restoration. If only the restoration contacts the opposite
teeth and the adjacent teeth do not show any contact, the
composite must be grinded and the contact evaluated once
again. If necessary, the adjustment must be repeated until all
the adjacent teeth that had contact before the preparation
start to contact once again. Then, the second colored side
(e.g., red) is placed facing the restoration, and the patient is
asked to perform lateral and protrusive movement on the
mandible. The restored tooth may participate on the disocclusion guides but the stronger contacts should be, whenever possible, distributed on the intact neighbor teeth [3 ]. If
the anterior disocclusion guide is happening only over the
restored teeth, it must be adjusted until the adjacent teeth
start to participate.If the restored tooth does contact or participate of the disocclusion guides with the antagonist teeth on the remaining
tooth structure, no contact needs to be left on the restoration.
However, if before the restoration the tooth did not do any
contact or guides, it must be reconstructed with the restorations and adjusted for not producing interferences during
functional movements of the mandible. The stress concentration over a single restoration may result on its fracture or
displacement .
The entire marginal area of the restoration, at the toothrestoration interface, must be analyzed with an exploratory
probe. It has to be moved from the tooth surface to the restoration surface and from the restoration to the tooth, detecting
excess or lack of material. The anatomical form must also be
analyzed, evaluating the presence of over or undercontour. The
proximal surface must be evaluated with dental floss. If it shreds
and frays, that will indicate the presence of overhangs or other
marginal disadaptations . The dental floss must be placed
below the gingival cavosurface angle and pulled incisally on a
movement like the one used to polish shoes . Any abnor -
malities must be corrected by removing or adding composite.
It is important to highlight that instruments to be used
during finishing and polishing must be adequate to the shape
of the surface to be worked, which can be flat, concave, or
convex. The marginal overhangs, mainly on the proximal
surfaces, may be removed with scalpel blades, such as the No.
11, 12, or 15, moved from the tooth surface to the restoration
or following the margin, using gentle cutting movements,
keeping the blade laying on the enamel surface as a guide to
prevent an over removal . This prevents marginal fractures, cutting small portions at a time. If a large area is
intended to be removed with a blade at once, the composite
may fracture inside the cavity preparation walls, being
required to repair this region adding more material. An
irregular gap is created and may allow biofilm growing, as
well as residues deposition that can promote marginal staining and the recurrent caries lesion. The No. 12 blade is useful
on the proximal areas due to its curved shape and a thin end,
making it ideal to remove excesses on the cervical regions
(. Fig. 14.48u ) . There are also dedicated hand instruments for composite excess removal on the margins, such as
the contour carbide carver shown in . Fig. 14.48t .
Rotary instruments may also be used to remove excess on
the margins, such as the fine grit (average particle size of 25
μm) and extra fine grit (average particle size of 15 μm) diamond points, multi-bladed burs ( . Fig. 14.65a, b), or the aluminum oxide mounted stones ( . Fig. 4.28a ). The shape of the
rotary instrument must fit the surface to be worked on. The
egg (football) or pointed football-shaped instruments are
used on the lingual surfaces, which has a concave contour
(. Fig. 14.48s ) . Those instruments should be used under
air refrigeration from a three-way syringe, in reduced speed,
gently pressure, and intermittent contact [2, 3, 31]. The use of
air/water spray adversely affects the visualization of details in Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14the area to be finished. The thin tip cone-shaped rotary
instruments, such as the fine grit diamond points or the aluminum oxide mounted stones, are indicated for difficult
access regions as the cervical area and embrasures or flat sur -
faces (. Fig. 14.39t ). On the gingival margin of labial sur -
faces, the Zekrya gingival protector or similar instrument
can be used during the finishing avoiding harming the gingiva (. Fig. 6.16) .
The rotary instruments must be used with care in the
cervical region, especially on the root surface, to prevent
the incorrect and undesired removal of the tooth structure,
usually cementum and dentin. During the finishing procedure on the gingival margin, to remove excess of composite,
the restoration surface only should be touched with a bur or
diamond point, while a mesiodistal swiping movement is
being performed. The marginal adaptation must be frequently evaluated with an exploratory probe. If the rotary
instrument is activated touching the tooth/root surface
without being constantly moved, it can create a defect like a
groove on the surface that will require restoration . The
difficulty is higher when the overhang is located in a gingival margin of the preparation covered by the marginal gingiva. In an attempt to completely remove the excess, the
dentist sometimes grinds the root and creates a step
(. Fig. 14.66a, b ) . For safely finishing of the gingival
margins on that situation, 0.5 mm of the diamond coat can
be removed from the tip of the conical-shaped diamond
point. For that, the abrasive point is rotated over an abrasive
stone until the diamond particles are lost in this area
(. Fig. 14.66c ). The safe end tip instrument can be used to
contour the cervical areas of the restorations. Touching the
safe end on the root surface inside the gingival sulcus, it can
easily reshape the cervical region without harming the root
surface ( . Fig. 14.39t ) .
If the matrix band has been properly placed in the proximal area, there is almost no need to finish or polish the proximal surface of the restoration, because the composite is
capable to copy the roughness of the matrix strip. However, if
there are cervical overhangs, they must be removed without
damaging the proximal contact. For that, the abrasive strip should be used with a back-and-forth movement. The abrasive strip has two color-coded abrasive grades per strip,
sequenced from dark to light, with the center gapped for easy
interproximal insertion. One of the sides has thicker grit for
finishing and the other with a thinner grit for polishing
(. Fig. 14.67 ). Different strip widths are available on the mar -
ket. The narrow ones are indicated in short interproximal
areas to improve contour, remove excess, and polish the cer -
vical regions. The wide ones should be used carefully for not
removing the contact between the teeth . When passing
the strip through the proximal contact areas, gapped center
without abrasives can be used without abrading the contacts.
When it is necessary to grind the entire proximal surface of
the restoration, the abrasive strip must simultaneously touch
the labioproximal and linguoproximal external line angles
(. Fig. 14.48w ). However, if the grinding is required in only
one of the external line angles, the abrasive side of the strip
must touch the restoration only on that side, pressed over the
corresponding smooth surface with one of the hands, while
in the opposite side, it is moved away from the tooth with the
other hand ( . Fig. 14.48v ) .
Abrasive discs can be used on flat tooth surfaces such as
the labial surface and incisal edge ( . Figs. 4.30a and 14.62s ).
The finishing is performed with a more abrasive disc, while
the polishing is performed with a sequence of decreasing grit
size. They are used dry in low speed and intermittently . In
the labial surface of the incisors, the discs are used in the flat
area located on the incisal and medium thirds. The cervical
third is convex and can be finished with a long conicalshaped rotary instrument, such as a fine grit diamond point,
multi-bladed bur, or aluminum oxide mounted stone.
During the finishing is important to pay attention to the
fact that the contour and surface topography of the restoration must be similar to the adjacent or homologous tooth.
Y oung people present an irregular labial surface, showing the
developmental lobes. Before polishing, all those details must
be reproduced. For that, the tooth must have the essential
finishing complete, with the correct crown contour and without marginal excess. Then, diamond points with different
shapes are used, depending on the surface characteristics to
a b
.Fig. 14.65 Rotary instruments for finishing procedure. a Fine grit diamond points of different shapes; b multi-bladed burs (30 blades)
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
be reproduced. The two grooves between the developmental
lobes, on the labial surface of the adjacent intact teeth, can be
marked with a pencil and reproduced over the restorations
. The grooves may be prepared with a thin end conicalshaped diamond point, as it is shown in . Figs. 14.38s ′ and
14.62u . The perikymata may be reproduced by moving a diamond point over the labial surface in very slow speed, on the
deceleration of the handpiece rotation, with intermittent contact, as brushing strokes, trying to create scratches per -
pendicularly to the axis of the tooth. If the perikymata of the
adjacent tooth or remaining tooth structure are deep, a coarse
grit diamond point can be used, while if they are shallow, a
fine grit point should be chosen. This procedure can be per -
formed without water spray, allowing the dentist to follow
the creation of the scratches ( . Figs. 14.38t ′, u′ and 14.62v ).
14.6.5.2 Polishing
Even though it is impossible to obtain a perfectly smooth
surface of a restoration inside the mouth, the surface roughness can be gradually reduced using a sequence of abrasive
agents, with particles progressively smaller, until reaching
the texture of natural enamel. . Figure 14.68 shows the sur -
face profile of a composite, measured using a laboratory a
device called rugosimeter. It has a diamond stylus tip that
does direct contact with the surface and is moved on it, generating a graphic representation of the surface profile. In this
graph, it is possible to observe the higher points called peaks
and the lower ones called valleys. The upper graphic in
. Fig. 14.68 shows the surface roughness after the finishing
procedure, while the lower shows the roughness after polishing. It can be noticed that even after all efforts on the polishing procedure, a perfectly smooth surface is not obtained.
ab
c
.Fig. 14.66 a, b Finishing of cervical restoration with gingival
cavosurface angle covered by the marginal gingiva may result on
wrong grinding of the root surface, creating a step; c a safe end tip can be created rotating the tip of a diamond point over a mounted stone,
until complete removal of the diamond layer
.Fig. 14.67 Abrasive stripsComposite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14 However, the resulting roughness must come close to the
natural teeth, below the visual detection level, and not be
noticed when contacting soft tissues, mainly the tongue.
Polishing is the procedure of fine removal of restorative
material, resulting in a very smooth and glossy surface,
reproducing the texture of the natural teeth and giving
comfort to the patient.
The polishing must be performed keeping in mind that
surface details created by the finishing procedure should
be kept after it. On the case of elderly patients, with a worn
and smooth labial surface, the polishing of the flat surfaces
can be performed with a sequence of decreasing grit discs.
Between each disc, the surface has to be rinsed and dried to
remove the residue of the previous abrasive particles .
The discs with a smaller diameter (1/2 inch) are ideal for the
cervical region, besides accessing better the embrasures and
the marginal ridges. The discs with smaller mandrel allow
more access and larger abrasive surface, while the ones without a metal center and with elastic silicone shank mount are
easier to use. Abrasive rubber discs with a flat surface can also be used. On the other hand, on cases of young patients,
where the surfaces have been characterized with grooves or
perikymata, the use of discs for polishing would remove the
surface details. On those cases, the labial surface should be
polished only with a felt discs and polishing paste, resulting
in a smooth but not flat surface ( . Figs. 14.38v ′ and 14.62w ).
Another possibility to polish irregular surfaces is to use
abrasive silicon carbide brushes, which bristles are impregnated with abrasive particles( . Fig . 4.31a – 5 and 6) or abrasive rubber spirall wheels ( . Fig. 4.29d ).
On the cervical region, the polishing can be performed
with a thin tip abrasive rubber point or disc, taking care of
not creating a flat surface. It can also be used a felt discs with
polishing paste ( . Fig. 14.39u–w ). A study showed that additional polishing with a diamond polishing paste after initial
polishing with abrasive discs reduces the surface staining of
the composites . When a two-paste polishing system is
used, the paste with higher grit must be used first. Then, the
surface has to be washed, and then smaller grit one is
employed using a clean felt. Some felt discs already come
impregnated with abrasive particles and do not require the
associated use of a polishing paste. The blunt tips of the abrasive rubber points can be sharpened as shown in . Fig. 4.29.
The proximal surfaces can be polished with fine grit abrasive
strips (. Fig. 14.44v, w ). The lingual surface may be polished
0.200ROUGHNESS AFTER FINISHING
ROUGHNESS AFTER POLISHING–0.
0.25 mm/div
0.25 mm/div0mm
0.
–0.2000mm .Fig. 14.68 Surface profile of
a restorative composite after
finishing and polishing proce -
dures
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
using abrasive rubber points, felt points with abrasive paste,
abrasive silicon carbide brushes or abrasive rubber spirall
wheels (. Fig. 14.48y, z and 4.29d ).
If during finishing and polishing procedures hollow
spaces appear on the restoration surface, due air bubbles
entrapped in the composite or defect of adaptation between
the increments, a small round diamond point is used to
remove the defective area. The area is acid etched and the
adhesive system is applied but not light-cured. The same
composite used to do the restoration is applied and lightcured. The surface is finished and polished . It is impor -
tant that all the information regarding shades and brands of
composites and tints used for the restoration are registered
on the patient’s records. This information will be useful if any
repair is required in the future.
After ending the finishing procedure, the restorations
must be visually analyzed and the margins evaluated with
an exploratory probe. The proximal surfaces and the gingival cavosurface angle have to be evaluated with dental floss.
The presence of marginal overhangs, white lines at the
interface, defective shape and contour, lack of proximal
contact, insufficient restorative material on the cavosurface
angle, and presence of air bubbles exposed on the surface
are evaluated. If there is any problem, it should be immediately corrected [3 ].
If the restoration is considered adequate, a surface sealing procedure, also known as rebonding, can be performed
to seal microcracks on the composite surface generated by
the rotary instruments, as well as marginal gaps in the
toothrestoration interface produced by the shrinkage
stress. For that, acid etching of composite surface and
tooth structure 1–2 mm beyond margins is performed for
15 s, which is rinsed with air/water spray and dried with
the airstream. The surface sealant is applied, followed by
an airstream to produce a very thin coat, which is lightcured for 10 s. This procedure increases the marginal
integrity and reduces the composite wear. It may be
repeated at each patient return to the dental office, every 6
months or 1 year [3 ]. The product used for the surface
sealing is a dedicated material and is not related with pit
and fissure sealants.
14.7 Durability and Maintenance
of the Composite Restorations
The durability of the composite restorations depends on
three main factors: the dentist, the material, and the
patient. In relation to the dentist, the correct indication of
each restoration technique, the adequate tooth preparation, and the proper use of adhesive system and restorative
technique will guarantee a maximum quality esthetic restoration. However, technical failures during the restorative
procedure may drastically reduce the durability of the restoration, allowing premature degradation and intense
microleakage, leading to postoperative sensitivity and secondary caries lesions. The dentist is responsible to perform each operative procedure very carefully; paying attention
to the technical details . In relation to the restorative
material, good quality products correctly indicated will
match the efforts and correct technique applied by the
dentist, increasing the longevity of the restoration.
Material’s characteristics such as mechanical properties
and polishability are paramount for the correct indication
of each product on each clinical situation. In relation to
the patient, factors such as extension of the lesion, static
and dynamic occlusion patterns, the dietetic habits, and
oral hygiene are very important to determine the durability of the restoration .
The larger the preparation, the more critical is the restoration and greater are the chances of failure. People with high
consumption of acidic food and beverage, as well as high
level of chromogens, or heavy smokers may present faster
degradation of the composite organic matrix, as well as very
fast staining. The parafunctional habits may also lead to the
premature degradation of the restoration due to the great
stress they are subjected. The patients must be informed
about the etiology of the caries disease and non-carious
lesions they may have, and be motivated to practice preventive measurements, including dietary changes, good oral
hygiene practices, and periodic visits to a dental clinic.
Despite the best material and restorative technique used by
the dentist, the long lasting of the restorations will mainly
depend on the patient’s oral care.
> Despite the best material and restorative technique
used by the dentist, the durability of a dental
restorations will mainly depend on the patient’s oral
care.
Conclusion
This chapter presented all procedures necessary to restore
anterior teeth with composite-based materials. The concepts related to shade determination and esthetic analysis
were discussed and must be kept in mind, whenever this
kind of restoration is planned by the dentist. In relation to
the tooth preparation, the maximum preservation of the
remaining tooth structure must rule the clinical procedures,
but always allowing the best esthetical results to be
obtained. The stepby- step restorative techniques for all
classes of cavities were presented here, since selection of
appropriated composite, adhesive system application,
matrix placement, and incremental technique. For fractured
teeth, the diagnosis of the actual conditions and extension
of the damage is very relevant, determining the recommendations about the treatments of the pulp and periodontal
tissue, when they were involved, or the choice for a fragment
reattachment or a full composite restoration. In addition,
composites can also be used for recontouring teeth, being
an excellent alternative to indirect procedures, since no
removal of sound tissue is necessary. However, despite the
best dentist’s efforts, the durability of the restoration
depends a lot of the patients’ oral habits and hygiene, and
they need to be informed about that.Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
14References
1. Baratieri LN. Soluções Clínicas - Fundamentos e Técnicas. Florianópolis: Editora Ponto; .
2. Baratieri LN, Araujo EMJ. Caderno de Dentística: Restaurações Ade -
sivas Diretas com Resinas Compostas em Dentes Anteriores. São
Paulo: Santos; .
3. Baratieri LN, Monteiro Junior S, Andrada MA, Ritter AV. Odontologia
Restauradora: Fundamentos e Possibilidades. São Paulo: Santos;
.
4. Baratieri LN, de Andrada MAC, Arcari GM, Ritter AV. Influence of post
placement in the fracture resistance of endodontically treated incisors veneered with direct composite. J Prosthet Dent. ;84: –
4. https://doi.org/10. /mpr. . .
5. Barcellos DC, Palazon M, Pucci CR, Gomes Torres CR, de Paiva Gonçalves SE. Effects of self-etching adhesive systems used in the dental modelling technique on the cohesive strength of composite
resin. J Adhes. ;87: –61. https://doi.org/10. / .2
. .
6. Barcellos DC, Pucci CR, Torres CRG, Goto EH, Inocencio AC. Effects of
resinous monomers used in restorative dental modeling on the
cohesive strength of composite resin. J Adhes Dent. ;10: –4.
7. Barcellos DC, Torres CRG, Pucci CR, Borges AB, Goncalves SE de P ,
Limeira R, et al. Assessment of color fidelity of several composite
resins compared to their Vita Classical shade registration. Gen Dent.
58:e206–9.
8. Bowen RL. Dental filling material comprising vinyl-silane treated
fused silica and a binder consisting of the reaction product of bisphenol and glycidyl acrilate. . p. 27.
9. Breschi L, Cammelli F, Visintini E, Mazzoni A, Vita F, Carrilho M, et al.
Influence of chlorhexidine concentration on the durability of etchand-rinse dentin bonds: a 12-month in vitro study. J Adhes Dent.
;11: –8.
10. Cadenaro M, Biasotto M, Scuor N, Breschi L, Davidson CL, Di Lenarda
R. Assessment of polymerization contraction stress of three composite resins. Dent Mater. ;24: –5. https://doi.org/10. /J.
DENTAL. .06. .
11. Cox CF. Microleakage related to restorative procedures. Proc Finn
Dent Soc. ;88(Suppl 1):83–93.
12. Dietschi D. Free-hand bonding in the esthetic treatment of anterior
teeth: creating the illusion. J Esthet Dent. ;9: –64.
13. Fahl N. Predictable aesthetic reconstruction of fractured anterior
teeth with composite resins: a case report. Pract Periodontics Aesthet Dent. ;8:17–31.
14. Fradeani M. Reabilitação Estética em Prótese Fixa. São Paulo: Quintessence; .
15. Fraser T, Banks A. Color: La Guia Más Completa. Barcelona: Ever -
green; .
16. Garberoglio R, Cozzani G. In vivo effect of oral environment on
etched enamel: a scanning electron microscopic study. J Dent Res.
;58: –65. https://doi.org/10. / .
17. Güler AU, Güler E, Yücel AC, Ertaş E. Effects of polishing procedures
on color stability of composite resins. J Appl Oral Sci. ;17: –
12. https://doi.org/10. /S167877572009000200007.
18. Hansen EK, Asmussen E. Effect of postponed polishing on marginal
adaptation of resin used with dentin-bonding agent. Scand J Dent
Res. ;96: –4.
19. Ho C. Composite artistry using Premise-The new breed of nanofiller.
Dent Pract. ;5: –42.
20. Irie M, Suzuki K. Effects of delayed polishing on gap formation of
cervical restorations. Oper Dent. 27:59–65.
21. Joiner A. Tooth colour: a review of the literature. J Dent.
;32(Suppl 1):3–12. https://doi.org/10. /j.jdent. .10. .
22. Koenigswald W, Sander P . Tooth enamel microstructure. Rotterdam:
Swets; . 23. Lee Y, Lu H, Powers J. Changes in opalescence and fluorescence
properties of resin composites after accelerated aging. Dent Mater.
;22: –60. https://doi.org/10. /j.dental. .08. .
24. Li Q, Jepsen S, Albers H-K, Eberhard J. Flowable materials as an
intermediate layer could improve the marginal and internal adaptation of composite restorations in Class-V-cavities. Dent Mater.
;22: –7. https://doi.org/10. /J.DENTAL. .04. .
25. Magne P , Belser U. Restaurações Adesivas de Porcelana na Dentição
Anterior. São Paulo: Quintessence; .
26. McDonald R. Colour physics for industry. Huddersfield: Charlesworth; .
27. Mopper KW, O’Malley M. The illustrated technique guide for
renamel restorative system. Chicago: Cosmedent; .
28. Moraes RR, Gonçalves LS, Lancellotti AC, Consani S, CorrerSobrinho
L, Sinhoreti MA. Nanohybrid resin composites: nanofiller loaded
materials or traditional microhybrid resins? Oper Dent. ;34: –
7. https://doi.org/10. /08- -L.
29. Nagem Filho H, Nagem HD, Francisconi PAS, Franco EB, Mondelli
RFL, Coutinho KQ. Volumetric polymerization shrinkage of contemporary composite resins. J Appl Oral Sci. ;15: –52. https://
doi.org/10. /S1678- .
30. Osorio R, Pisani-Proenca J, Erhardt MCG, Osorio E, Aguilera FS, Tay
FR, et al. Resistance of ten contemporary adhesives to resin–dentine bond degradation. J Dent. ;36: –9. https://doi.
org/10. /J.JDENT. .12. .
31. Roberson TM, Heymann H, Swift EJ. Sturdevant’s art and science of
operative dentistry. St. Louis: Mosby/Elsevier; .
32. Roulet JF, Degrange M. Adhesion-the silent revolution in dentistry.
Chicago: Quintessence; .
33. Rüttermann S, Krüger S, Raab WH-M, Janda R. Polymerization
shrinkage and hygroscopic expansion of contemporary posterior
resin-based filling materials—a comparative study. J Dent.
;35: –13. https://doi.org/10. /J.JDENT. .07. .
34. Satou N, Khan AM, Matsumae I, Satou J, Shintani H. In vitro color
change of composite-based resins. Dent Mater. ;5: –7.
35. Schwarts RS, Summit JB, Robbins JW. Fundamentals of operative
dentistry. A contemporary approach. Chicago: Quintessence; .
36. Shafer WG, Hine MK, Levy BM. Tratado de Patologia Bucal. 4th ed.
Rio de Janeiro: Guanabara Koogan; .
37. Sterrett JD, Oliver T, Robinson F, Fortson W, Knaak B, Russell
CM. Width/length ratios of normal clinical crowns of the maxillary
anterior dentition in man. J Clin Periodontol. ;26: –7. https://
doi.org/10. /j. -051X. . .x.
38. Terry DA. Utilization of a small-particle composite resin for anterior
and posterior restorations. Pract Periodontics Aesthet Dent.
;12: –8; quiz .
39. Torres CR, Batista GR, Cesar PD, Barcellos DC, Pucci CR, Borges
AB. Efeito da elevação da temperatura pré-polimerização sobre a
microdureza superficial da resina composta. Rev da Pós Grad da
USP . ;15
40. Torres CR, Borges AB, Kubo CH, Gonçalves SE, Araújo RM, Celaschi
S. Clareamento dental com fontes híbridas LED/LASER. Santos, editor. São Paulo; .
41. Torres CR, Barcellos DC, Pucci CR, de MG LG, Rodrigues CM, Siviero
M. Influence of methods of application of self-etching adhesive systems on adhesive bond strength to enamel. J Adhes Dent.
;11: –86.
42. Turssi CP , Ferracane JL, Ferracane LL. Wear and fatigue behavior of
nano-structured dental resin composites. J Biomed Mater Res B
Appl Biomater. ;78B: – . https://doi.org/10. /
jbm.b. .
43. Vanini L. Light and color in anterior composite restorations. Pract
Periodontics Aesthet Dent. ;8: –82; quiz .
44. Yap AU, Sau CW, Lye KW. Effects of finishing/polishing time on sur -
face characteristics of tooth-coloured restoratives. J Oral Rehabil.
;25: –61. https://doi.org/10. /j. - . . .x.
C. R. G. Torres and R. F. Zanatta
14
45. Yazici AR, Tuncer D, Antonson S, Onen A, Kilinc E. Effects of delayed
finishing/polishing on surface roughness, hardness and gloss of
tooth-coloured restorative materials. Eur J Dent. ;4:50–6.
46. Yesil ZD, Alapati S, Johnston W, Seghi RR. Evaluation of the
wear resistance of new nanocomposite resin restorative materials.
J Prosthet Dent. ;99: –43. https://doi.org/10. /
S00223913(08) -5. 47. Zhang S, Kern M. The role of host-derived dentinal matrix metallo -
proteinases in reducing dentin bonding of resin adhesives. Int J
Oral Sci. ;1: –76. https://doi.org/10. /IJOS. .Composite Restoration on Anterior Teeth
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG
C. R. G. Torres (ed.), Modern Operative Dentistry, Textbooks in Contemporary Dentistry,
https://doi.org/10. / -3- - -0_15577 15
Composite Restoration
on Posterior Teeth
Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres, Marcelo Balsamo, and Satoshi Imazato
15.1 Introduction –
15.2 Bioactive Restorative Materials –
15.3 Tooth Preparation –
15.4 Restorative Techniques –
15.4.1 Occlusal Preparations (Class I or Site 1) –
15.4.2 Restoration of Proximal Lesions Through Occlusal Access
(Class II or Site 2) –
15.4.3 Restoration of Proximal Lesions through Buccal/Lingual Access –
15.4.4 Esthetic Improvement of Amalgam Restorations –
15.4.5 Repair of Ceramic or Composite Restorations –
15.5 Finishing and Polishing –
15.6 Surface Sealing –
15.7 Maintenance of Posterior Composite Restorations –
References –
15Learning Objectives
The learning objectives of this chapter are related to the following topics:
5To describe the indications and contraindication of direct
composites on posterior teeth
5To explain how the characteristic of the composite
materials can influence the restorative procedure as well
the clinical behavior of the restorations
5To teach how to perform the tooth preparation with
maximum preservation of the remaining tooth structure
5To explain how to perform the restorations of cavities
involving the occlusal and/or proximal surfaces
5The importance of the proximal contact between
neighbor teeth and how to properly restore it, using
different techniques
5How to apply the regular and the bulk-fill composites
5How to improve the esthetic or to repair old restorations
5To describe the finishing and polishing techniques for
composites in posterior region
5How to perform the maintenance of posterior composite
restorations to increase its durability
15.1 Introduction
The growing demand for esthetic dental procedures on the
past decades increased the use of composites for the restoration of posterior teeth. Every time the patients are asked by
the clinicians about which restorative material they prefer,
one of metallic shade or one with the same appearance of
natural teeth, almost everyone choose the esthetic restorations, even after being informed about the limitation of those
materials. Although they produce good esthetics results, the
composite restorations on posterior teeth present some disadvantages in relation to the amalgam ones. However, when
properly indicated and performed, they may present very
good clinical behavior. The composites are nowadays the
most used direct restorative material on posterior teeth .
They are necessarily indicated on cases where the esthetics
requirements are important, such as on situations where the
restoration will be visible in the normal interpersonal distance, during the conversation and social life.
An important advantage of composite restorations in
relation to amalgam is the bonding to the tooth structure.
That turns unnecessary to give any specific geometric form to
the tooth preparation. When performing amalgam restoration, the restorative material and remaining tooth structure
behave as two independent structures in intimate contact,
with a mechanical interaction through the interface. On the
other hand, when an adhesive restoration is done, the loads
applied over the restoration generate internal stress, which is
transmitted through the interface to the remaining tooth
structure, causing both to behave as almost as a single body.
That does the restoration to reinforce the remaining tooth
structure . The preparation is restricted to the removal of carious tissue, with maximum preservation of the healthy
remaining tooth structure . Another advantage of the
composite restorations is the fact that they can be easily
repaired, adding a new material on the old one . In addition, it is also thermal insulator due to the low thermal conductivity [ 33].
The light-curing composite seems to be easy to apply into
the tooth preparations, using a single paste which does not
cure spontaneously. However, the proper use of this material
is a little complex. Even though the tooth preparation for
composite restoration is simpler than for amalgam, the
restorative technique is much more critical and prone to failure . To produce adequate composite restorations, the
clinician must have a good understanding about the bonding
process, the shrinkage stress generated during polymerization, and the details and peculiarity about the light-curing
procedure .
When compared to the amalgam restorative technique,
the composite restoration takes 2.5 as much time to be done,
due to a more complex restorative procedure, turning it more
expensive . More steps also increase the chances of mistakes. A great difficulty occurs during the restoration on
proximal preparations, being more difficult the correct restoration of contour and the interproximal contact. Differently
from amalgam, regular composites will not push the matrix
toward the adjacent tooth during the application of the increments . In addition, composites undergo a volumetric
shrinkage during polymerization, which may lead to several
problems on the restoration ( . Fig. 15.1). Among them, gap
formation on the margins allows microleakage of pigments
and bacteria, leading to marginal staining and recurrent carious lesion ( . Fig. 15.2a, b ). In the internal walls, some debonding areas at the interface may also happen, creating internal
gaps. The shrinkage stress may also generate enamel microcracks, distributed approximately parallel to the cavity mar -
gin, besides cuspal deflection. The latter may lead to enamel
microcracks on buccal or lingual surfaces or even cuspal fracture, besides postoperative sensitivity ( . Fig. 15.1 ) .
> Composites undergo a volumetric shrinkage during
polymerization, which may lead to several problems
on the restoration, such as gap formation on the
margins, microleakage of pigments and bacteria
leading to marginal staining and recurrent carious
lesion, enamel microcracks, cuspal deflection, cuspal
fracture, and postoperative sensitivity. The effects of
volumetric shrinkage must be controlled using an
appropriate restorative technique.
In the course of time, a degradation of the hybrid layer
occurs, reducing the bond strength and increasing the mar -
ginal microleakage. This is caused by the hydrolysis of the
dentin collagen fibers, exposed by the acid etching or acidic
monomers, besides the degradation of polymers created by
hydrophilic monomers in the adhesive system formulations
. The hydrolysis of the dentin collagen is promoted by
C. R. G. Torres et al.
15
GapRecurren t
caries
Enamel
microcracks
Postoperativ e
sensitivit yInternal gapsMarginal
enamel
microcracksMarginal
stainingMicroleak age
.Fig. 15.1 Clinical problems created by the shrinkage stress during composite polymerization. (Image kindly supplied from 3 M Espe
company)
ab
Composit eComposit e
Enamel .Fig. 15.2 a SEM image of
marginal gap on composite
restorations created by shrinkage
stress (red arrow – gap); b higher
magnification of the image shown
in aComposite Restoration on Posterior Teeth
15dentin matrix metalloproteinases (MMP), which are collagenolytic enzymes released during the bonding procedure
. This bonding interface degradation is enhanced by the
mechanical stress produced by masticatory loads, and by the
stress generated due to the difference between the coefficient
of linear thermal expansion (CLTE) of the composite and
tooth structure, when exposed to hot or cold food and bever -
ages, resulting in the propagation of the interfacial defects.
The composite restorations also have higher wear than amalgam, mainly on the direct contact areas. The larger the restoration, the bigger is the concern in relation to the wear. The
composite restorations are also more susceptible to occur -
rence postoperative sensitivity, especially when the adhesive
technique was not properly performed.
It must be considered that, the more posterior is the tooth
to be restored, the harder is the isolation of the operating field
and smaller is the esthetic demands of the restoration. Both
factors reduce the indications for composite restorations on
the second and third upper molars, where the esthetic is not
critical unless the preparation extends to the buccal surface
. When the restoration is not visible during the conversation, some patients accept metallic materials, considering its
longer durability. However, many patients desire their teeth
with a natural aspect, even on areas where they cannot nor -
mally be seen . Skinner stated that “the esthetic quality of
a restoration may be as important to the mental health of the
patient, as the biological and technical qualities of the restoration are to his physical and dental health” . However,
the esthetic demands are determined by the individual per -
ception and subjected to great variation. What may please
one patient may be completely unacceptable to another. Some
people may be happy and proud of having gold restorations
on their anterior teeth, while others think those restorations
are esthetic unacceptable. It is a dentist’s duty to inform the
patients about all restorative alternatives, but it must be given
to them the opportunity to take the final decision in relation
to which alternative will be chosen .
The composite restorations on posterior teeth are only
indicated in Class I and II preparations (Sites 1 and 2) that
can be properly isolated, since the adhesive technique is not
compatible with any kind of contamination, such as saliva or
blood. They are contraindicated on cases where it is impossible to obtain correct isolation of the operating field using rubber dam or cotton rolls [34, 48]. This situation is more critical
on the mandibular molars or on preparations where the cavosurface angle of the gingival wall is located inside the gingival
sulcus [4 ]. On cases where the moisture control is extremely
hard or not possible, associated with the absence of enamel
available for bonding on the gingival margin of the preparation, an amalgam restoration should be performed . On
teeth with weakened or cracked cusps, the use of an adhesive
restorative material is recommended, because it can bond to
and reinforce the remaining tooth structure . The composite restorations are also indicated to patients allergic to
certain metals. However, in large tooth preparations, the first
choice would be an indirect adhesive restoration. > The composite restorations are only indicated in
preparations that can be properly isolated, since the
adhesive technique is not compatible with any saliva
or blood contamination.
Ideally, occlusal contacts of the restored tooth in maximum
intercuspation should occur on the remaining tooth structure, because the composite wear resistance is smaller than of
enamel. When all the contacts are left over composite, it
wears out and allows a dental extrusion, leading to occlusal
disharmony [ 4]. The wear resistance refers to the material
ability to resist to the surface loss, due to attrition with the
opposite intact tooth or restoration (two-body wear) or abrasion with the food bolus or toothbrush (three-body wear).
Clinical studies showed that the attrition wear of composite
restorations, on contact areas with the opposite tooth, may be
3–5 times higher than the abrasive wear on areas without
direct contact. For this reason, direct composite restorations
should preferably be performed on teeth which remaining
tooth structure has direct contact with the opposite tooth.
. Figure 15.3a, b shows a composite restoration with extensive abrasive wear. The material was lost by the contact with
the food bolus, exposing the preparation walls.
> Clinical studies showed that the wear of composite
restorations, on contact areas with the opposite tooth,
may be 3–5 times higher than on areas without direct
contact. For this reason, direct composite restorations
should preferably be performed on teeth which
remaining tooth structure has direct contact with the
antagonist tooth.
The fillers’ size, shape, and content in a composite affect the
restoration wear, as well as the location of the restored tooth,
dental arch, and occlusal contacts. The wear resistance of the
current composites is generally adequate for clinical use [11,
27]. Clinical studies have shown that the composite restoration wear is smaller on premolars and increases the more
distally the restored tooth it is located. Of all teeth, the first
molars are in contact with food bolus more often and receive
the larger loads. Therefore, abrasive wear happens faster on
occlusal composite restorations of those teeth. The sequence
of wear severity can be described as first molar > second
molars > second premolars > first premolars. Thus, small
composite restorations on the first premolars present little
wear risk, while large restorations on the first molars have
larger risk .
The tooth preparation size must be considered when the
restorative technique is selected. The direct composite restorations should be preferably done on small to medium size
cavities . On extensive ones, when the buccolingual
dimensions are larger than half the distance between the
cusp tips (intercuspal distance), in cases of extremely weakened teeth under heavy occlusal loads, or when one or more
cusps were lost, the ideal indication is an indirect ceramic or
composite restoration .
C. R. G. Torres et al.
15
Tips
The direct composite restorations should be performed
on small to medium size cavities. In case of large
preparations in weakened teeth, with cusp lost, indict
restorations are the best alternative.
Even though the large direct composite restorations on posterior teeth may have many disadvantages, they can be used
as an esthetic treatment alternative. Many patients cannot
afford the costs of an indirect restoration or have medical
conditions that do not allow a more complex dental treatment. On those cases, large direct composite restorations
may be used as a reasonable option, when the more longlasting treatments are not possible . The patient must be
aware about the limitations in relation to the material’s properties, attending periodic dental visits to reevaluate the restoration . The ability to reinforce the weakened remaining
tooth structure turns this procedure a good option to a nonadhesive amalgam restoration . The direct composite
restoration in large cavities may also be indicated as a temporary procedure while waiting to determine the pulp response,
when a conservative pulpal treatment was performed .
The direct composite can also be used as a base for indirect
restorations. It can fill undermined areas and undercuts to
produce the required geometry to the walls, allowing a free
path for insertion of the indirect restoration.
In patients with heavy occlusal loads, due to bruxism or
clenching, the direct composite wear can be excessive, resulting on a premature loss of the anatomical shape of the restoration, besides showing a higher risk of bulk or marginal
fracture. On those cases, a direct amalgam or indirect esthetic
or metallic restoration should be chosen [33, 48]. The antagonist tooth may also affect the wear, because a composite restoration in contact with the natural opposite tooth shows
more wear than in contact with another composite restoration . In situations where the antagonist tooth has a feldspar porcelain restoration, a direct composite should not be indicated. Due to its great hardness, the porcelain will promote unacceptable wear of the composite. In this situation, a
direct amalgam or an indirect ceramic or metal cast restoration should be chosen .
It is also relevant to have enamel on the entire cavosur -
face angle, which provides a significantly more effective
bonding and marginal sealing than when the margins are on
cement or dentin. In general, when the gingival wall of the
preparation extends to the root surface, without enamel on
the gingival cavosurface angle, a gap is formed between the
tooth and the composite. This happens because the composite shrinkage stress is greater than its initial bond strength to
the dentin . In this case an amalgam or an indirect restoration should be better indicated [4 ]. The composite may
also be used to repair defective restorations, either amalgam,
composite, or ceramic. They are also used on posterior teeth
on Class VI preparations, created by the wear on the cusp
tips .
15.2 Bioactive Restorative Materials
The traditional dental materials are designed to be biocompatible, having a passive and neutral existence in the mouth,
not reacting with the oral environment. It is expected that
the material will work properly by being well accepted and
causing no harm and injury. They are considered biomimetic, restoring the tooth function and showing a natural
appearance [2 ]. However, it loss the opportunity of positive
gains, which a material with a more dynamic behavior
could exhibit, reacting to the changes in the environment
[20, 28]. The materials with such “smart” behavior are generally called bioactive. There is not a consensus about the
meaning of the word “bioactivity” in dentistry. However, it
can be described as the capacity of the material to give to
the teeth something they need to keep its health and function, by some kind of biologic effect. That can be related to
an antimicrobial capacity, to reduce the biofilm activity and
ab
Enamel
Composit e .Fig. 15.3 a Macrofilled
chemically activated composite
restoration with extensive
abrasive wear. The tooth was
extracted due to periodontal
problems after a long time of
clinical use; b the composite wear
exposed the preparation walls
(arrow). A rough surface can be
observed due to protruding filler
particles and craters and by the
presence of air bubbles incorpo -
rated during the mixing processComposite Restoration on Posterior Teeth
15prevent demineralization of the surrounding tissues, or to
stimulate remineralization of the area previously affected by
caries disease, strengthening the tooth structure . They
may have the potential to seal marginal gaps to reduce
microleakage, preventing secondary caries under restorations and promoting a healthier tooth-restoration interface
over time. The bioactivity can also be related to healing
properties for the pulp tissue, stimulating tertiary reactional or reparative dentin formation or tubular sclerosis,
protecting the pulp vitality .
> The bioactivity of a restorative material can be related
to its antimicrobial capacity, remineralizing potential
or healing properties for the pulp tissue.
To offer those effects, the material must be able to release
ions, such as fluoride, calcium, and phosphate, or other active
substances, inhibiting biofilm formation, growing hydroxyapatite, or stimulating odontoblast cells to produce mineral
deposition. Those ions can be released by special bioactive
glasses or semipermeable resin microcapsules filled with
ionic solutions. The bioactive materials are moisture friend,
allowing a continuous ions exchange with saliva and other
oral fluids, releasing and recharging their ionic components
in response to pH changes.
Resin composites are more susceptible to bacterial colonization than other materials for direct restorations, such
as amalgam and glass ionomer cement (GIC). The
enhanced bacterial attachment and biofilm formation on
composites lead to occurrence of secondary caries, especially at proximal area where plaque control is difficult.
Therefore, many researches to provide composites with the
ability to prevent biofilm accumulation and achieve “bioactive” properties have been conducted. Less plaque accumulation on amalgam and GIC restorations are related to
the release of silver, copper, zinc, or fluoride ions, which
reduces adherence and growth of oral bacteria on their
surfaces. Therefore, to add ion release capacity to composites, with antimicrobial properties, is a promising strategy.
There are few bioactive restorative materials currently
available on the global market, containing different kind of
ion releasing glasses (e.g., ActivaTM, Pulpdent; PredictaTM
Bioactive, Parkwell; GiomerTM, Shofu) or microcapsules (BioCoatTM, Premier), associated with special monomers to
produce enough physical properties in association with its
bioactivity.
Surface pre-reacted glass-ionomer (S-PRG) filler is a
fine glass particle which has three-layered structure
(. Fig. 15.4a ) . It contains a multifunctional fluoroboro- aluminosilicate glass core that undergoes an acidbase reaction during manufacturing and is protected by a
surface modified layer. The stable glass-ionomer phase in
the middle layer allows ion release and recharge while protecting the glass core from the damaging effects of moisture. Various restorative/coating materials containing
S-PRG fillers have been developed and commercialized by
Shofu INC., Japan, and named as “Giomer” products.
S-PRG filler releases multiple ions, i.e., fluoride (F−), borate
(BO33−), aluminum (Al3+), sodium (Na+), silicate (SiO32−),
and strontium (Sr2+), from its prereacted glass-ionomer
phase (. Fig. 15.4b ). By the release of Sr2+ and Na+, S-PRG
filler incorporated in resin composites can modulate the
pH of surrounding environment, shifting it to neutral or
weak alkaline regions. The release of F− and Sr2+ can
improve acid resistance of enamel and dentin by promoting
the conversion of hydroxyapatite to fluorapatite and strontiumapatite. In addition to those protective effects against
demineralization, it can reduce bacterial adherence and
prevent plaque formation on their surfaces. The release of
BO33− and F− significantly inhibits the growth and metabolic activities of Streptococcus mutans , leading to inhibition of oral biofilm formation [21, 30]. Additionally, ions
released from S-PRG filler have the capacity to inhibit protease and gelatinase activities of Porphyromonas gingivalis
and also to prevent coaggregation of periodontal diseaserelated bacteria .
Restoration of Class II cavities with deep preparation in
the proximal box, reaching the root surface and without
enamel in the cavosurface angle of the gingival wall, is always
a concern in relation to secondary caries. A marginal gap will
occur on almost every restoration, due to the lower bond
strength and high C-factor. On those cases, “bioactive” composites with antimicrobial properties are expected to be
clinically very useful, improving the prognosis and durability
of the restorative treatment.
Surface modified laye rS-PRGabIons release
Glass-ionomer phaseFBO33-
SiO32Na+Sr2+
Al3+
Fluoro -boro -alumino -silicate glass
.Fig. 15.4 Bioactive surface pre-reacted glass-ionomer filler (S-PRG – Shofu). a Three-layered structure; b ions released from the glass-ionomer
phase
C. R. G. Torres et al.
15
15.3 Tooth Preparation
Whenever necessary, prophylaxis with brush and pumice or
airborne particle abrasion device must be performed, removing extrinsic stains and biofilm. Then shade selection and the
local anesthesia are performed. It must be verified if the
patient presents highly translucent enamel, indicating the use
of a more translucent composite on the final layer. It is also
analyzed if the adjacent teeth have any type of special characteristic, such as dark spots in the grooves or hypoplastic spots
that could be reproduced . The occlusal harmony also
must be evaluated, verifying the teeth alignment on the arch.
When an opened cavity or defective restoration remains
untreated for a long time, the extrusion of the antagonist
tooth and the mesialization of the caries affected or neighbor
tooth may occur and must also be evaluated. The cusps of the
antagonist tooth may invade the preparation to be restored
during maximum intercuspation position, requiring reduction before starting the restorative procedures. The loss of the
mesiodistal distance, necessary to the proper restoration of
the proximal contour, may occur, due to mesialization,
requiring orthodontic movement before the restoration
(. Fig. 6.21).
Before starting the tooth preparation, the occlusion evaluation must be performed with thin double-sided two-color
articulating paper (e.g., red and black), allowing a two-tone
representation of static and dynamic occlusion. The first step
is to inspect the eccentric contacts (dynamic occlusion). The
paper is placed on the Miller Articulating Paper Forceps, in a
way that the red side is facing the tooth to be restored. The
patient is asked to occlude at centric occlusion and perform
protrusive and lateral excursive movements. The patient
must open the mouth, and the presence of interferences dur -
ing disocclusion movements must be analyzed. After that,
the paper is then turned in the forceps in a way that the black
side faces the tooth to be restored. The centric contact (static
occlusion) is analyzed, asking the patient to close the mouth
in centric occlusion and open it again. The color sequence
can, of course, be altered. Whenever possible, the tooth-totooth contacts occurring during centric occlusion should not
be included in the preparation outline, remaining over the
intact tooth structure. In case it is not possible, care must be
taken so that it will not be located over the tooth-restoration
interface. Not only should the contacts on the tooth to be
restored be evaluated but also on the adjacent teeth. That can
help the dentist to know when the contacts on the restorations
were correctly adjusted .
The anatomy and the cusp angle of the intact adjacent or
contralateral teeth must be evaluated and memorized, so that
similar anatomy can be reproduced on the restoration, providing the better function and esthetic. If the proximal sur -
faces need to be restored, preoperative wedging can be
performed in the interproximal space, on such a way to
increase the tooth separation, helping the reconstruction of
the proximal contacts . For that, a wedge is placed in the
interproximal space corresponding to each proximal surface to be restored. If only one proximal surface is prepared, the
wedge is placed only on that side. If both proximal surface
will be prepared, the wedges must be placed on the mesial
and distal interproximal spaces. The wedges must be tightly
readapted during the preparation, because when pressed
again, the teeth move even more, promoting additional separation . Another way to produce a progressive dental
separation is to use a separation ring, placed on the embrasures next to the surface that will be prepared. The preparation may be performed before or after the rubber dam
isolation when it is used.
Basically, the tooth preparation for composite restoration on posterior teeth is restricted to the removal of carious
tissue, with maximum preservation of the healthy remaining tooth structure [4 ]. The opening of the cavity must be
the most conservative as possible. On primary caries lesions
located on the occlusal surface, the opening is performed
using a round diamond point until reaching intact enamel
on the preparation outline, exposing the carious dentin tissue (. Fig. 15.6a, b and . 15.7e–g ). However, if the initial
opening is not providing the necessary access for removal of
remaining carious tissue, it must be enlarged as much as
necessary to every wall can be inspected, especially on the
region of the DEJ. This enlargement is considered a convenience form. When it is predicted that the entire mesiodistal
extension of the central groove will be prepared, the opening should start on the distal area and continued mesially,
allowing a better visualization during the procedure . If
there are some separated small lesions, they do not need to
be connected during the preparation, remaining as separate
cavities. The highly infected superficial dentin must be
removed, although the more internal softened dentin can be
preserved, because it can be remineralized, as described in
7 Chap. 6. Other areas of the tooth surface that are not cavitated but present a high caries risk, due to biofilm deposition, may be sealed (more information about that is available
on 7 Chap. 16).
Tips
Basically, the tooth preparation for composite restoration
on posterior teeth is restricted to the removal of carious
tissue, with maximum preservation of the healthy
remaining tooth structure.
The outline and depth of the preparation are defined by the
lateral extension and depth of carious tissue and other
defects. The main goal of this preparation is to remove the
infected tissue in the most conservative way possible. The
retention form is obtained mainly by the bonding to the
tooth structure, instead of by the mechanical characteristics
of the preparation .
There are two situations when a composite restoration is
indicated. The first one is when there is a previous defective
amalgam or composite restoration which needs to be Composite Restoration on Posterior Teeth
15replaced, and the second is when there is a primary carious
lesion. When there is a defective restoration, it must be
removed avoiding any additional cut of the remaining tooth
structure. No modification of the preparation shape must be
done. The old restorative material must be completely
removed to evaluate the cavity walls. Leaving old amalgam
under a new composite restoration may result on poor
esthetic . To avoid an additional cut of the preparation
walls, the amalgam restoration can be sectioned and the
fragments removed with a dental exploratory probe
(. Fig. 15.8f –h). The amalgam oxide residues can be removed
with an airborne particle abrasion, followed by copious rinsing, avoiding the use of rotary instruments if no carious tissue is remaining ( . Fig. 15.8i ).
The carious dentin tissue can be removed with a round
bur at low speed, of the largest size compatible with the preparation dimensions. There is no need to remove the under -
mined enamel since the adhesive restoration will be able to
reinforce the remaining tooth structure. The same way, even
if the pulpal walls have different depths on each place, there
is no need to make it flat. In general, the vertical surrounding
walls will be convergent toward the occlusal surface, with a
concave pulpal wall. The internal angles will be round, as a
consequence of the round shape of the bur. Those character -
istics also contribute for the adaptation of the restorative
material on the region of the internal line angles of the second set. The preparation of posterior teeth for composite
with a box shape, as used for the amalgam, increases the
negative effects of the C-factor and is not recommended .
No bevel should be performed on the occlusal cavosur -
face angle, avoiding thin restoration margins, which would
fracture under the occlusal loads [4, 33]. The bevel on the
occlusal cavosurface angle also increases the restored area,
which expands the composite surface subjected to wear. The
beveling on the gingival cavosurface angle should never be
performed too, because it may completely remove the
remaining enamel on the region, resulting on bonding to
dentin or cement, which is worse than the one obtained to
enamel.
When the lesion is located on the proximal surface with
intact marginal ridge, the entry direction must be chosen. In
general, the caries lesions on the proximal surface are located
just below the contact area . If the lesion is small and
close to the occlusal surface, or if the lesion is large, but there
is a small remaining of the marginal ridge, the access must be
done from the occlusal surface. For that, the adjacent tooth
must be protected with a steel strip and the gingival papillae
with a wooden wedge ( . Fig. 15.11d ) . The preoperative
wedging is performed before starting the preparation, helping to restore the proximal contact . The preparation is
started with a round diamond point entering on the top of
the marginal ridge, opening a channel, mainly on enamel,
trying to keep a thin layer of remaining enamel between the
preparation and the adjacent tooth, avoiding to touch the bur
on the proximal surface of the neighbor tooth. The entry
should follow the DEJ. When reaching the caries lesion, it
will be noticed by the dentist a feeling of falling on a hollow space. Any remaining enamel still in contact to the neighbor
tooth can be fractured with a hand instrument or removed
with a bur. The remaining carious tissue is removed with a
round bur at low speed or dentin excavator . The preparation outline must be the most conservative as possible but
allowing enough access for removal of remaining the carious
tissue. Because of that, generally the buccal and lingual walls
will be convergent toward the occlusal surface, giving the
proximal box the pear or drop shape . No bevel is per -
formed, and any undermined enamel prisms will be left and
reinforced by the adhesive restoration. The buccolingual and
occlusogingival dimensions must be the most conservative as
possible, determined by the lesion size . The internal
angles will be round due to the shape of the rotary instrument used for preparation. The gingival wall will be concave
and extended until the gingival end of the lesion.
The contact with the adjacent tooth does not need to be
removed, since this type of restoration should only be per -
formed on patients with good oral hygiene, and the region of
the tooth-restoration interface will be frequently cleaned by
flossing. Even though keeping this contact can adversely
affect the matrix placement, to get maximum preservation of
remaining tooth structure is more relevant than any technical difficulty. Conversely, to obtain adequate proximal contact for the restoration will be easier . When the visual
and/or tactile evaluation of the gingival or axial walls is difficult, the axial wall can be prepared expulsive toward the
occlusal surface, as a convenience form for visibility. Internal
stains on the buccal or lingual walls or under the occlusal
enamel, seen through the translucent remaining enamel,
even when related to intact sclerotic dentin should be
removed, because they can be misdiagnosed in the future as
recurrent caries lesion .
When the caries lesion is more cervically located or displaced toward the buccal or lingual surfaces, the dentist can
choose to perform the access to the lesion through the buccal
or lingual embrasures, performing a horizontal slot preparation, obtaining the maximum preservation of the remaining
tooth structure ( . Fig. 15.15a –f) . This preparation is
similar to a Class III preparation on anterior teeth. The adjacent tooth must be protected with a metal strip and the access
performed with a small round diamond point. The instrument must be placed on the correct occlusogingival position,
guided by the lesion position observed on the radiography.
The entry is performed as close as possible to the adjacent
tooth. The carious dentin tissue is removed with a round bur
at low speed or with a spoon excavator . The access must
be the most conservative as possible, enough to allow the
removal of carious tissue. This way, the occlusal and gingival
walls generally will converge toward the entry surface. On
the other hand, when there is not an adjacent tooth, or there
is a preparation on the neighbor tooth that allows direct
access to the lesion, the entry direction can be strictly proximal. The final shape of the preparation will be the one that
results after the removal of the entire carious tissue. In general, this type of preparation is only possible on the mesial
tooth surface because of visibility .
C. R. G. Torres et al.
15
Tips
When the caries lesion is located on the proximal
surface, with intact marginal ridge, the best entry
direction for the preparation must be chosen, in order to
obtain the maximum preservation of the tooth structure.
If the lesion is small and close to the occlusal surface, or
if it is large, but there is a small marginal ridge remaining,
the access must be done through the occlusal surface.
However, when the lesion is more cervically located or
displaced toward the buccal or lingual surfaces, the
access through those areas is recommended.
15.4 Restorative Techniques
For restorations of posterior teeth, the light-activated nano−/
micro-hybrid or nanofilled composites should be selected,
because they present the required physical properties to
undergo the stress generated by the occlusal loads. The
microfilled composite, even though having a good wear
resistance, when used on posterior teeth may fracture due to
its low filler content. The macrofilled composites showed
high levels of wear, creating a very rough surface due to the
exposure of the large filler particles after loss of the organic
matrix. Some filler particles are plucked from the surface,
resulting in craters. The chemically activated composites
should also be avoided, because the mixing procedure can
incorporate air bubbles into the material, which would
increase the surface roughness ( . Fig. 15.3a , b).
If the prophylaxis has not been performed before the tooth
preparation, it must be done before starting the restorative
procedure. Then, the isolation of the operating field is per -
formed, and the need for additional pulpal protection is analyzed (see 7 Chap. 9). Whenever necessary, the application of
the most adequate protective material is performed. On shallow or medium depth preparation, it is not necessary any type
of lining material. On deep preparation, a layer of GIC can be
applied only on the pulpal or axial wall ( . Fig. 9.17a –d).
However, if it is noticed the presence of dark and hard sclerotic
dentin on the internal walls, no additional protection is
required. When a pink discoloration is observed on the inter -
nal walls, in the region corresponding to the pulp horn, the
preparation is considered very deep. That indicates that less
than 0.5 mm of dentin is remaining and there might exist some
clinically undetected pulp microexposures. A thin layer of calcium hydroxide cement is applied only over that area, which is
covered by a thin coat of a GIC, sealing the region and preventing that the acid used on the adhesive procedures dissolves the
calcium hydroxide liner ( . Fig. 9.18d –i) . It is recommended to cover the minimum necessary of the preparation
walls, because the liner reduces the area of dentin available for
bonding . In case of accidental pulpal exposure, the direct
pulp capping procedure can be performed ( . Fig. 9.20).
A Class I preparation has a C-factor equals five, with five
bonded and one unbonded walls (see 7 Chap. 13). Therefore, if a composite is applied in a bulk increment, there is a large
risk of bonding interface rupture during the polymerization,
due to the material shrinkage, especially along the pulpal wall
and on the marginal region. The shrinkage stress can be
reduced using a gradual curing protocol of soft start, in ramp
or step, as described in 7 Chap. 13, prolonging the pre-gel
phase during polymerization. For that, special light-curing
devices that automatically adjust the emittance (power emitted) can be used. However, it is also possible to control the
irradiance (power incident) using conventional devices, by
changing the distance between the light guide tip and the
composite surface. In addition, the incremental or layering
technique proposed by Lutz et al. can be used, where
each increment is applied over fewer walls as possible, gener -
ally two at a time, always leaving the larger amount of
unbonded surfaces, creating conditions to reduce the stress
at the interface. Oblique increments should be applied,
touching the buccal and pulpal or lingual and pulpal walls,
avoiding connecting the buccal, pulpal, and lingual walls at
the same time. Techniques for stress reduction are extremely
relevant, especially on cases of weakened cusps, that may suffer deflection of 15 μm on the first 15 min after the end of the
restoration and up to 18–30 μm after a week [7, 29]. After the
light-curing, the “dark-curing” of the composites continues
at a significant rate for about 20 min after the light-curing
and a slower rate for at least 24 h .
Some studies recommend the application of a thin layer
of flowable composite on the internal walls of the preparation, as a low-elastic modulus liner, which works as a stressabsorbing layer, before the application of a more viscous
material. This layer would reduce the stress on the toothrestoration interface, preserving its integrity . The flowable composite also fills more easily the undercuts and
irregularities on the walls and internal angles of the preparation . This is even more relevant when replacing amalgam
restorations, which preparations have more acute angles. The
more viscous is the restorative composite to be applied, the
higher are the chances of a bad adaptation of the composite
to the preparation walls, and more advantageous is to use the
flowable composite liner .
The GIC can also be used as a base under composite restorations as a stress-absorbing layer . Many studies have
shown that GIC application, under composite restorations,
reduces the total amount of shrinkage stress that the remaining tooth structure undergoes during composite polymerization. In general, the more GIC it is applied, the less stress is
generated [18, 42]. An in vitro study showed that the use of a
GIC base significantly reduced the cuspal deflection in the
MOD preparation restored with composite [1 ]. Another study
has shown that the use of a GIC base applied before the composite improves the marginal adaptation and reduces the
microleakage . This technique is called “selective bonding, ” because the adhesive system will bond only to the walls’
areas not covered by the base material. On the “total bonding”
technique, the adhesive system is applied over the whole preparation walls . Besides the low-elastic modulus of the GIC
applied, which works as a stress-absorbing layer, the favorable Composite Restoration on Posterior Teeth
15results of the selective bonding technique are certainly due to
the fact that the total volume of composite applied for the restoration is reduced, when the base material is applied. The
conventional GIC, which is the most indicated for this technique, may be associated with the previous etching of the dentin surface, to remove the smear layer, improving its bonding
to the tooth structure. A weak acid is used, such as the 10–25%
polyacrylic acid, applied on the tooth surface for 15–30 s, followed by washing and drying with a gentle airstream. After the
initial set of the conventional GIC, its surface can be etched
with a phosphoric acid gel for 5 s, before applying the adhesive
system, improving its bonding to the composite applied above
. The resin modified GIC (RMGIC) may also be used.
It should be avoided the use of sticky composites, because
this characteristic adversely affects its application into the
preparation, leading to voids on the tooth-restoration interface
or between the increments, creating weak areas where failures
can propagate, such as gaps or cracks [4 ]. They are also difficult
to be shaped for restoring the proper tooth anatomy [4 ]. In
addition, materials with excessively high viscosity shows bad
wetting properties to the preparation walls, being difficult to
adapt, leaving spaces and air bubbles at the interface [4 ].
One of the most important steps for proximal restorations
of the posterior teeth is the correct choice and placement of the
matrix band. Different from amalgam that can be condensed,
helping to create the proximal contact, the composite restoration is almost completely dependent on the contour and position of the matrix band to create the proper proximal contacts
. Before applying the composite, the matrix strip must be
firmly touching the contact area of the adjacent tooth .
Tips
One of the most important steps for proximal
restorations of the posterior teeth is the correct choice
and placement of the matrix band. The composite
restoration is almost completely dependent on the
contour and position of the matrix band to create the
proper proximal contacts. The matrix strip must be firmly
touching the contact area of the adjacent tooth.
In the past, clear plastic bands associated with reflective
wedges were recommended to restore posterior teeth with
composite, because it was considered that the composite
shrinkage occurs toward the light source, and this procedure
would improve the marginal adaptation of the restoration
. However, several studies proved that this does not happen and that the shrinkage occurs toward the bonded walls,
despite the position of the light source [4 , 44]. In addition, the
plastic matrices are hard to contour and also hard to pass
through the proximal contact, on the intact surface of the
tooth to be restored. They are generally thicker than the
metallic bands and require more dental separation [4 , 33].
Therefore, the metallic bands are nowadays the most indicated for composite restorations on posterior teeth using
occlusal access. Besides being easier to use, they work as a mirror that improves the polymerization, reflecting the light
transmitted through the composite back to the material [4 ].
The thinner strips, with about 0.03 mm (0. inches),
should be chosen, instead of the thicker ones with 0.05 mm
(0. inches) commonly used for amalgam restorations, so
less dental separation will be required. The metallic strips may
be easily contoured and suffer less distortion under forces created during the material adaptation into the preparation,
which is an important property when a more viscous composite is used, reducing the overflow through the cavosurface
angle [4 ]. Clinical studies showed that the use of clear plastic
matrix associated with reflective wedge does not improve the
clinical behavior of composite restoration in relation to the
use of the metallic bands and wooden wedges [9 , 12].
On cases where both mesial and distal surfaces were prepared, after placement of the matrix band, it is recommended
to use of the wedge alternation technique. A single wedge is
inserted, starting in one of the interproximal spaces, followed
by restoration of this corresponding proximal surface and the
contact. Then, the wedge is removed and inserted into the
other interproximal space, and the second proximal surface
is restored. This procedure can allow the maximum dental
separation by the wedge at the moment to restore each proximal box ( . Fig. 15.10i , p).
Tips
On cases where both mesial and distal surfaces were
prepared, after placement of matrix band, it is
recommended to use the wedge alternation technique,
restoring one proximal surface at a time.
15.4.1 Occlusal Preparations
(Class I or Site 1)
On teeth with more translucent enamel, to obtain the better
shade and translucency match, the enamel and dentin shade
composite layers can be applied, similarly to the original
structure, using a stratified layering technique. On
. Fig. 15.5a –f are shown the external morphological aspects
of the tooth structure of some posterior teeth, as well the
internal morphology of the dentin tissue, after the dissolution of the enamel by the immersion in an acidic solution for
some days. It can be observed that the dentin follows the
external tooth morphology. This can be reproduced during
the restorative procedure.
To obtain an esthetic reconstruction of the lost tooth
structure, simulating the natural morphology, composites
with different translucency levels are used, restoring first the
lost dentin (opaque) and then the enamel (more translucent)
(. Fig. 15.6a –g ́). The material must be applied in oblique
increments, leaving unbonded walls, avoiding connecting
more than two walls at the same time, in an attempt to reduce
the negative effects of the high C-factor. Each layer must have
a maximum thickness of 2 mm, to provide a good curing on
C. R. G. Torres et al.
15
the bottom area. If there are regions of undermined enamel,
they must be filled first and correctly light-cured. The initial
polymerization of the composite on those areas can be done
through the tooth structure, reducing the amount of light
reaching the composite at the beginning of the curing process, reducing the shrinkage stress. The curing is then complemented from the occlusal surface ( . Fig. 15.6i –o).
To simplify the placement of the increments, small
amounts of the composite can be shaped by hand as small
spheres, using dust-free gloves, and applied into the preparation using a nonstick composite filling instrument, creating a conical shape layer. The composite should be placed using
rapid shallow strokes, reducing the chance of detaching it
from the cavity wall, which can create voids. This first increment, using an opaque dentin shade composite, is applied
touching the pulpal wall and the lingual or buccal wall
(. Fig. 15.6p , q). Each increment is light-cured for at least 20
s. The next increments touch the opposite external wall and
the pulpal wall at the same time, as well as the previous increment that has already been polymerized. It should be avoided
that increments of dentin shade composite reach the cavosur -
face angle, leaving space for the external layer of enamel shade
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 15.5 External and internal morphological aspects of posterior teeth. a , c, e Intact teeth; b , d, f dentin view after the dissolution of the
enamel by the immersion in an acidic solution for some daysComposite Restoration on Posterior Teeth
15material ( . Fig. 15.6r , s) . If the dentist decides to create
effects of white spots, such as hypomineralized areas of enamel,
small portions of white opaque tint can be applied over the
dentin shade composite already cured. The last layers are placed
using translucent enamel shades, shaping the occlusal surface,
preferably restoring each cusp at a time ( . Fig. 15.6t –w). For shaping the occlusal surface, nonstick instruments with a
probeor conical-shaped nib can be used ( . Fig. 15.6u, v ).
After inserting the material into the cavity, the instrument nib
must be placed on the region of the central groove to be created, while the side rests over the remaining tooth structure of
the occlusal surface, touching the cavosurface angle. Then the
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 15.6 Restoration of Class I preparation. a Opening of the
cavitated caries lesion; b removal of the carious dentin tissue; c , d acid
etching; e blot drying; f visibly moist dentin surface; g application of
the adhesive system; h light-curing of the adhesive; i view of the
undermined buccal cusps; j , k filling the undermined areas; l lightcuring through the tooth structure; m, o filling the undermined
enamel on the lingual cusps and light-curing; p placement of oblique
increments using dentin shade composite (Grandio SO – Voco); q, r placement of dentin shade composite increments; s space left for
the application of enamel shade composite; t –w application of enamel
shade composite using nonstick instruments of conicaland probeshaped nibs; x application of brown tint to simulate darkened grooves;
y tint applied into the grooves; z clear oxygen-blocking gel; a ́ gel
application and light-curing through it; b ́ finishing with fine grit
diamond points; c ́, d ́ polishing with silicon carbide brushes;
e ́, f ́ surface sealing; g ́ final restoration
C. R. G. Torres et al.
15
.Fig. 15.6 (continued)
gh
ij
kl
mnComposite Restoration on Posterior Teeth
15
.Fig. 15.6 (continued)
op
qr
st
uv
C. R. G. Torres et al.
15
.Fig. 15.6 (continued)
wx
yz
a’
c’ d’b’Composite Restoration on Posterior Teeth
15instrument is moved mesiodistally, copying the inclination
and all the existing details of the remaining cusp inclines and
groves, which guide the shaping procedure.
The use of increments on the stratified layering technique
reduces the shrinkage stress at the interface and the cuspal
deflection. It also reduces the incorporation of air bubbles on
the interface and improves the adaptation of the material on
the walls, decreasing the marginal microleakage. In addition,
it reduces the amount of excess of restorative material at the
margins and the use of rotary instruments to remove them
later on. It allows obtaining of a polychromatic restoration
and a more complete light-curing of each increment .
On the cases of neighbor teeth with darkened grooves,
tints can be used to reproduce this characteristic on the restoration. However, it is always recommended to ask the patients
if they accept this characterization [4 ]. For that, very thin and
deep grooves can be shaped on the external layer of enamel
shade composite, using a sharp exploratory probe, followed
by light-curing. Then, a small amount of brown or ochre tint
is applied into the groove with a probe. The excess over the
surface is removed using a disposable applicator, and the tint
is light-cured ( . Fig. 15.6x , y and 15.7t, u). Only the tint on
the deepest areas of the grooves should remain. Another
option is to apply the tint in the grooves shaped with the dentin shade composite, which will be covered with a translucent
enamel shade material. With the use of the layering technique, after curing of the last layer, the restoration should have an
almost perfect shape, being required only small finishing.
The external surface of the shaped composite will directly
contact the food bolus and the antagonist tooth, being susceptible to wear. As the oxygen in the atmosphere has contact
with the composite surface, it will prevent its complete polymerization, creating an oxygen inhibition layer, making this
critical region not reaching its maximum mechanical proper -
ties. To overcome this problem, the surface can be covered
with transparent glycerin-based oxygen-blocking gel. Then,
the light-curing can be applied through it for 20 s, completely
curing the composite surface ( . Fig. 15.6z , a ́). After that, the
occlusion must be evaluated using an articulating paper. Any
premature contact and interference during the excursive
movements must be removed. The patient goes home, and the
finishing and polishing can be performed on the next appointment, after the “dark-curing” of the composite has been complete. Further details are presented at the end of this chapter.
Tips
To prevent the presence of an oxygen inhibition layer, the
last composite increment can be covered with transparent
glycerin-based blocking gel, followed by an additional
light-curing through it, creating a fully polymerized surface. .Fig. 15.6 (continued)
e’
g’f’
C. R. G. Torres et al.
15
On the cases of hidden caries lesions, when the occlusal sur -
face is intact, a direct custom-made occlusal stamp can be
prepared to help the restoration of the tooth anatomy
(. Fig. 15.7a –a ́). First, the occlusal surface is isolated with a
thin coat of petroleum jelly, and then the acrylic resin is
applied. That can be done using a brush soaked with the liquid resin monomer, which is put in contact with the polymer powder to carry it to the tooth surface ( . Fig. 15.7d ). Other
possibilities are to use light-curing transparent flexible temporary filling material (e.g., Fermit -Ivoclar Vivadent or Clip
F -Voco) or a flowable composite (Clip flow - Voco). A small
handle can be prepared for the stamp with the same material
or using a disposable adhesive applicator. The stamp is
removed and works as an index, replicating the original
a
c
b
e
d
f
.Fig. 15.7 Direct custom-made occlusal stamp and hidden carious
lesion. a–d Copy of the occlusal morphology with acrylic resin;
e, g lesion opening and outline form; g removal of the carious dentin;
h finished preparation; i –k etching and application of the adhesive
system; l, m filling undermined cusp areas with dentin shade composite GrandioSO (Voco); n restoration of lost dentin area; o application of
a separating agent on the stamp; p enamel shade composite applied; q, r stamp fitting and removal of excess; s light-curing through the
stamp; t, u application of brown tint into the grooves and excesses
removal; v application of oxygen blocking gel; w final light-curing
through the gel; x finishing with aluminum oxide mounted stone;
y polishing with diamond-embedded abrasive rubber point Dimanto –
Voco); z, a ́ final resultComposite Restoration on Posterior Teeth
15
.Fig. 15.7 (continued)
g
h
i
j
k
l
m
n
C. R. G. Torres et al.
15
.Fig. 15.7 (continued)
o
p
q
r
s
t
u
v
Composite Restoration on Posterior Teeth
15
anatomy of the tooth structure. After the operating field isolation, bonding procedure and placement of the dentin
shade composite, the stamp receives a separating agent, such
as a hydrosoluble glycerin-based gel, liquid soap, or a piece
of PVC cling film, and a single increment of enamel shade
composite is placed into the preparation but not light-cured.
Then, the stamp is taken in the original position and pressed.
The composite overflow is removed, and the initial lightcuring is performed through the stamp. Then, it is removed,
and the light-curing is complemented for more 20 s. This way the ideal original occlusal anatomy is quickly restored
(. Fig. 15.7o –s).
In cases of replacement of several defective restorations,
to simplify the restorative procedure and save clinical time
during the shaping of the occlusal surface, indirectly made
occlusal stamps can be prepared. For that a plaster model of
the teeth to be restored is previously obtained, through an
impression with alginate ( . Fig. 15.8). On the plaster model,
the area corresponding to the old restorations is cut with a
bur to create space for waxing. The shape of the new restora- .Fig. 15.7 (continued)
w
x
z
y
a'
C. R. G. Torres et al.
15
tion can be created on wax by the dentist or a laboratory technician (. Fig. 15.8b , c). An occlusal stamp can be made the
same way as already described, but now outside the mouth
(. Fig. 15.8d , e). When a flowable composite is used (e.g.,
Clip flow – Voco), the handle can be prepared by applying composite and light-curing at the same time. All the stamps
are previously prepared and then available for the dentist,
which can schedule the patient for a next appointment to per -
form the restorations, the same way that has already been
described for the stamp made directly in the mouth.
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 15.8 Indirectly made occlusal stamps. a Defective restoration;
b, c grinding of the plaster model and waxing; d , e stamp preparation
using high translucency temporary flowable material (Clip Flow –
Voco); f careful sectioning of the old amalgam restoration, separating it
in small pieces, avoiding to touch the bur on the walls; g , h removal of
amalgam pieces with an exploratory probe; i preparation after cleaning
with prophy-jet device and pressurized slurry of sodium bicarbonate, to remove the amalgam oxides, followed by thorough rinsing with air/
water spray; j removal of the remaining carious dentin tissue; k , l acidic
etching and application of the adhesive system; m placement of dentin
shade composite GrandioSO Voco); n application of enamel shade
composite; o Enamel shade composite applied but not light-cured;
p–r application of a separating agent on the stamp, fitting and
light-curing; s result without the characterization; t final result
Composite Restoration on Posterior Teeth
15
.Fig. 15.8 (continued)
gh
ij
kl
mn
C. R. G. Torres et al.
15
15.4.2 Restoration of Proximal Lesions
Through Occlusal Access
(Class II or Site 2)
On preparations involving the proximal surface in contact
with a neighbor tooth, it will always be required to use matrix
and wedge. The wedge has the purpose to separate the teeth
to compensate the thickness of the matrix strip, stabilize the
matrix band, and prevent the overhangs at the gingival mar -
gin . The application of the matrix before or after the
adhesive system depends on the clinical situation. Some dentists prefer to apply the matrix and wedge before, which can help to obtain good isolation and prevent any contamination
of the preparation walls. It also allows evaluating if any fractures occur on the cavosurface enamel margins, due to the
matrix and wedge placement, before performing the adhesive application. However, in this case, care should be taken
to avoid adhesive pooling along the preparation margins,
which would create a radiolucent area on the interface
between the composite and the wall, that may be misdiagnosed as secondary caries. The excess of adhesive must be
removed with the airstream, dry disposable applicator, or a
thin aspiration cannula before light-curing. The application
of the matrix before the adhesive can be even more beneficial .Fig. 15.8 (continued)
op
qr
st
Composite Restoration on Posterior Teeth
15when the gingival wall of the proximal box is very deep .
Other dentists prefer to apply the adhesive before placing the
matrix. The advantage for this is to avoid adhesive pooling
along the preparation margins and maximize the application
of the adhesive on the cavosurface angle. However, after
matrix application, the margins must be evaluated to see any
fracture of the marginal enamel has happened, which could
result on the composite placement over nonbonded enamel.
A frequent problem with this technique is the pooling and
curing of the adhesive beyond the margins, sometimes inside
the gingival sulcus, which adversely affects the adaptation of
the matrix to the external tooth surface. This excess of
cured adhesive must be completely removed with an explor -
atory probe before the matrix placement. Therefore, the
matrix can be placed either before or after the adhesive, since
a careful technique is performed .
Tips
The matrix band and wedge can be placed either before
or after the adhesive application, since a careful
technique is performed, avoiding pooling on the
margins, which can be misdiagnosed as secondary
caries.
The main challenge when using a composite to restore posterior teeth is to obtain proper interproximal contacts. This is
related to the viscosity of this material, which is different
from amalgam and cannot be condensed and pressed toward
the matrix during the application into the preparation. Due
to this fact, some techniques were developed to overcome
this problem, which is presented next. To restore the proximal surface of posterior teeth with composite, sectional
matrix placed in only one proximal surface or circumferential matrix surrounding both proximal surfaces can be used
during the restoration.
15.4.2.1 Sectional Matrix with a Separation
Ring
An option to help obtaining adequate proximal contacts is
the use of a pre-contoured sectional matrix associated with a
separation ring ( . Fig. 15.9a –u). It is especially advantageous
when only one proximal surface will be restored, because the
intact contact on the other proximal surface does not need to
receive the band, reducing the amount of teeth separation
necessary to compensate the thickness of the matrix. Some
in vitro studies, measuring of the contact tightness, have
shown that separation rings and sectional matrices create
tighter contacts than the circumferential matrix [23, 24, 36].
The preoperative wedging used during the preparation
is removed, the matrix band is placed, and a new wedge
is inserted . The convex matrix edge is placed cervically, while the convex side must face the adjacent
tooth (. Fig. 8.8). A matrix with occlusogingival width
compatible with the dimensions of the preparation must be
chosen ( . Fig. 15.9e ). Its height must be enough to place the gingival edge of the band 1 mm below the cavosurface angle
of the gingival wall and the occlusal edge 1 mm beyond the
marginal ridge of the adjacent tooth . The wedge is
inserted from the larger embrasure. Then, the separation
ring is placed in the embrasure regions, separating the teeth
and stabilizing the band, also helping to compensate the
thickness of the matrix strip. In addition, the ring brings the
matrix borders in contact to the remaining tooth structure,
avoiding the composite overflow at those areas. The separation ring is taken in position with a clamp forceps and must
touch the proximal surface of both teeth in each embrasure
at the same time. For that, it must be placed over the wedge.
However, on the case of teeth with short clinical crown, the
ring may not obtain adequate stability. On this case, the
wedge can be shortened in a way to not adversely affect the
ring adaptation. An option is to use special separation rings,
such as Composi-Tight 3D (Garrison) or Palodent Plus
(Dentsply), with notches on its tines, which allows the
wedge to pass through it, not interfering on the ring adaptation (. Fig. 8.9a–d).
Tips
The matrix band height must be enough to place the
gingival edge of the band 1 mm below the cavosurface
angle of the gingival wall and the occlusal edge 1 mm
beyond the marginal ridge of the adjacent tooth. The
wedge is inserted from the larger embrasure.
There are several types of separation rings. Some of them
have narrow tines with round cross section, while others
have larger and flat tines with a rectangular cross section
(. Fig. 8.8d). On the cases of preparations where the margins
of the buccal and/or lingual walls of the proximal boxes, in
the embrasure region, are too far from the proximal surface
of the adjacent teeth, the rings with larger flat tines are preferred, because they touch the external tooth surface beyond
the preparation margins ( . Fig. 8.8d 2). In this kind of situation, the ring with thin round cross-sectional tines will penetrate into the preparation, collapsing the matrix and not
promoting the required tooth separation. On the cases where
the buccal and lingual proximal extensions of the proximal
box do not extend significantly onto the buccal and lingual
surfaces, the rings with round cross-sectional tines are more
adequate, because they allow a better wrapping of the matrix
around the tooth ( . Fig. 15.9g , h). After the ring placement,
the sealing of the matrix on the margin of gingival wall is
evaluated with an exploratory probe, followed by the bur -
nishing of the strip toward the adjacent tooth using the backside of a spoon excavator blade. If pre-contoured sectional
matrices and separation rings are not available, the dentist
can prepare a custom-made sectional matrix, as described in
7 Chap. 8, using a piece of the straight band, a little longer
than the buccolingual dimensions of the preparation. It is
first burnished over a paper mixing pad using an egg shape
burnisher. Then it is placed firmly wedged, and then it is
C. R. G. Torres et al.
15
stabilized with low fusion compound or light-cured gingival
barrier on buccal and lingual embrasures. When applying the
compound, the matrix must be kept in contact with the adjacent tooth using a burnisher. If extra contouring is required
at this moment, the backside of a heated dentin spoon can be
used [ 33]. Details of this matrix technique can be seen in
. Fig. 8.7a–f.The restoration is started using enamel shade composite,
applied with the incremental technique, restoring the proximal surface. The first layer can touch the buccal and gingival
walls, being light-cure, while the next touches the lingual and
gingival walls, as well as the first already cured layer. The
preparation is filled until it reaches the marginal ridge height
of the adjacent tooth, shaping the outer incline of the
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 15.9 Use of sectional matrix and separation ring. a Initial
aspect; b–d tooth preparation; e different sectional matrix sizes and
separation rings; f placement of matrix and wedge; g use of ring with
rectangular cross-sectional tines; h better adaptation on the embrasures using a ring with narrow tines and round cross section; i , j acid
etching and application of the adhesive system; k placement of an
oblique increment restoring the proximal surface; l proximal surface completed; m proximal surface restored after matrix removal; n , o
dentin shade composite oblique increments; p placement of the first
enamel shade increment; q last increment of enamel shade composite
(GrandioSO – Voco); r surface characterization of the groove; s finishing
with multi-bladed bur; t polishing with diamond abrasive rubber point
(Dimanto – Voco); u final aspect after hydration
Composite Restoration on Posterior Teeth
15
.Fig. 15.9 (continued)
gh
ij
kl
mn
C. R. G. Torres et al.
15
.Fig. 15.9 (continued)
op
qr
st
u
Composite Restoration on Posterior Teeth
15 marginal ridge with a probe-shaped nib instrument
(. Fig. 15.9k –m). After restoring the proximal surface with a
thin layer of composite, the matrix can be removed, which
turns easier the rest of the restorative procedure. The internal
area of the preparation is restored using dentin shade composite, through oblique increments, the same way as already
described for Class I preparations. Some space should remain
to be filled with an enamel shade composite. After the final
light-curing from the occlusal surface, the polymerization
can be complemented from buccal and lingual surfaces
through the remaining tooth structure . The restorations
must be examined from different angles to analyze the final
anatomical reconstruction, the presence of hollows due to
the lack of material on the margins. The quality of the proximal contact can be evaluated by passing a dental floss between
the teeth. If corrections are required, new material can be
applied since the surface had not been contaminated. A new
layer of composite easily bonds to the oxygen-inhibited layer
of the light-cured composite . However, if any finishing
has already been performed with a bur, and more material
needs to be added, the surface must be etched with phosphoric acid, for cleaning, and an adhesive be applied before
placing more material.
On MOD preparations, the restoration should preferably
be started in the distal box, reconstructing the distal surface in
contact with the adjacent tooth. After that, the wedge and
matrix should be removed and a new band and wedge placed
on the mesial box. A band should not be reused because it is
already deformed and may not produce a proper contour to
the restoration. After reconstruction of the mesial surface, the
wedge and matrix are removed, and the restoration of the
occlusal surface can be performed like in a Class I preparation.
Despite the restorative technique, the composite should
reach its maximum polymerization; otherwise, the success
of the restoration will be compromised, risking the adhesive
interface and the strength of the restorative material. The
composite should reach its maximum of conversion degree,
which is around 60–70% . Even though the stratified
layering technique, using an enamel and dentin shade composites, may produce excellent results for most patients,
some of them have a more opaque enamel and does not
required the use of two different materials. A single shade
with medium translucency can be used, simplifying the
placement technique.
15.4.2.2 Circumferential Matrix
In general, the circumferential matrices are not the first
choice to restore posterior teeth with composite, even on
MOD preparations . If the dentist excessively tightens a
circumferential band around a tooth, a cuspal deflection of
about 10–65 μm can happen, sometimes resulting in cracks
or fractures of the remaining structure . When restoring
a single proximal surface, on MO or OD preparations, the
double thickness of band, due to the presence of the strip on the intact contact, reduces the teeth separation and makes
contact harder to achieve . Therefore, the sectional matrices have advantages. However, when properly applied, the
circumferential matrices can also be used with great success.
For that, a very thin metallic band has to be chosen, as well
as some type of matrix retainer. There are available at dental
market different kinds of circumferential matrices, such as flat
straight and flat Tofflemire strips, as well as the pre-contoured
Tofflemire ones. Because the flat straight strip is not pre-contoured, after the assembling on the retainer, the area corresponding to position of the proximal surface has to be
burnished over a paper mixing pad, using an egg shape bur -
nisher, creating a convex contour on the opposite side, similar
to the proximal tooth surface ( . Fig. 15.10d ) . Then, it is
taken in position and the wedged is inserted. The wedges must
be firmly applied using a careful technique, because the separation provided must compensate the thickness of the band
on the mesial and distal proximal surfaces .
When there are two proximal boxes to be restored, the
wedge alternation technique should be used ( . Fig. 15.11 ). It
means that a wedge is first inserted in only one interproximal
space and this proximal surface is restored. Then, the wedge
is removed and inserted into the other interproximal space,
and then this area is restored. This promotes a greater dental
separation than if both wedges were inserted simultaneously
. If both wedges are placed at the same time, they will
work one against the other, reducing the total teeth separation . After each wedge placement, the gingival seal of the
matrix is evaluated with an exploratory probe, followed by
the band burnishing toward the adjacent tooth using the
backside of a spoon excavator blade ( . Fig. 15.11f ). This
ensures that an adequate contact and contour of the band will
be obtained.
When used in association to circumferential matrices,
some accessory techniques can help to obtain a good proximal contact when making composite restoration. They are
based on the use of some contact forming instrument, to
keep the matrix pressed toward the adjacent tooth, at the
same time that a small increment of composite is light-cured,
stabilizing the band in contact with the adjacent tooth. An
in vitro study showed that a handheld contact forming
instrument resulted on a significant increase of the contact
tightness, even though its effect is smaller to the one obtained
with the use of a separation ring .
Contact Forming Instruments and Light
Conducting Tips
The handheld contact forming instruments and the contact
forming light conducting tips are designed to be pushed or
pulled toward the direction of the contact, creating dental
separating force through the matrix band, holding the composite in place during the light-curing procedure. Some
examples of handheld contact forming instrument are
Contact Pro 2 (Almore International), Trimax (AdDent), C. R. G. Torres et al.
15
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 15.10 Use of handheld contact forming instrument. a –c Tooth
preparation; d burnishing of the matrix over the paper mixing pad;
e burnishing of the matrix toward the adjacent tooth; f acid etching;
g application of the adhesive; h first increment placed on the gingival
wall; i side view of the contact forming instruments Contact Pro 2
(Almore). The arrows show the flat area of the instrument handle. j view
of the instrument tip showing the black line, which is a marginal ridge
guide (red arrow), and the flat area of the handle (blues arrow);
k light-curing of the composite holding the flat area (white arrow)
parallel to the occlusal plane and pushing it against the matrix band toward the proximal contact (red arrow). The marginal ridge guide is
lined up with the tooth’s marginal ridge (yellow arrow); l a small
impression in the composite is left on the gingival wall by the
instrument; m, n application of oblique increments to restore the
proximal surface; o matrix removal and placement of the first dentin
shade oblique increment; p second dentin shade increment; q , r place -
ment of enamel shade increments; s finishing with multi-bladed bur;
t polishing with diamond polishing paste (Diamond Excel – FGM) and
felt point (Felt FlexiPoint – Cosmedent); u final result
Composite Restoration on Posterior Teeth
15
.Fig. 15.10 (continued)
gh
ij
kl
mn
C. R. G. Torres et al.
15
.Fig. 15.10 (continued)
op
qr
st
u
Composite Restoration on Posterior Teeth
15
ab
cd
e f
.Fig. 15.11 Use of the contact forming light conducting tip in the
mesial preparation and a prepolymerized ball in the distal preparation.
a Initial aspect; b –d tooth preparation; e matrix burnishing over a
paper mixing pad; f wedge insertion on the mesial surface and
burnishing of the band toward the adjacent tooth; g , h acid etching
and application of the adhesive system; i first increment placed
touching the matrix (GrandioSO – Voco); j contact forming light
conducting tips (Light-Tip – Denbur): on the left the E-Type (truncated
with elliptical tip) and on the right the C-Type (coneshaped with a
circular tip); k light-curing using the tip, pulling the matrix toward the
mesial surface (arrow); l impression left in the composite by the
elliptical tip; m , n restoration of the proximal surface with oblique
increments; o preparation and curing of a composite ball; p , q wedge removal from the mesial interproximal space and insertion into the
distal space. Placement of a composite increment on the gingival wall;
r prepolymerized ball applied into the uncured composite layer, being
pressed toward the gingival wall; s ball in position pushing the matrix
strip toward the adjacent tooth; t restoration of the proximal surface
with oblique increments of enamel shade composite; u shaping of the
outer incline of the marginal ridge with a probe-shaped nib instrument, creating the occlusal embrasure; v finished proximal surfaces;
w, x placement of oblique dentin shade increments; y increment
corresponding to the triangular fossa on the inner incline of the
marginal ridge, z , a ́ increments of enamel shade composite; b ́ finishing with multi-bladed bur; c ́ polishing with silicon carbide brush;
d ́ final result
C. R. G. Torres et al.
15
.Fig. 15.11 (continued)
gh
ij
kl
mn
Composite Restoration on Posterior Teeth
15
.Fig. 15.11 (continued)
op
qr
st
uv
C. R. G. Torres et al.
15
.Fig. 15.11 (continued)
wx
yz
a' b'
c' d'
Composite Restoration on Posterior Teeth
15PerForm (Garrison), Forming XTS (Hu-Friedy), and
OptraContact (Vivadent) ( . Fig. 15.10h –l). The light conducting tips are clear plastic tips that are attached to the end
of the light guide, allowing the matrix to be pressed and lightcured at the same time ( . Fig. 15.11j –l). Some examples are
the Light-Tip (Denbur) and Focu Tip (Hager). For all those
options, firstly a thin steel matrix strip must be placed,
wedged, and correctly burnished, according to what has
already been described. When indicated, the wedge alternation technique should be applied. Then, a small horizontal
layer of composite is placed on the preparation gingival wall.
The handheld instrument or light conducting tip must be
inserted inside this uncured composite and pushed toward
the direction of the contact with the adjacent tooth, creating
a separating force through the matrix at the exact place of the
desired contact ( . Fig. 15.10k and 15.11 k). This layer is lightcured, creating a composite bridge that stabilized the matrix
in contact with the adjacent tooth. The handheld instruments
are available in two sizes, one for molars and other for premolars. In general, each end of the instrument is designed to
a different proximal surface.
When using the Contact Pro 2 instrument (Almore
International), the anatomy of the contact is shaped and
positioned ideally by holding the flat area of the instrument
parallel to the occlusal plane ( . Fig. 15.10j , k). At the tip of
the instrument, there is a black line which is a marginal ridge
guide (. Fig. 15.10j ). According to the manufacturer’s
instructions, this guide has to be aligned with the marginal
ridge of the adjacent tooth while creating the contact
(. Fig. 15.10k ). The instrument is pressed toward the matrix
band, applying enough force to slightly bend the instrument.
The rounded ball at the center of the handle helps of the
operator to apply force on the band. The light-curing guide of
the curing device is held flat against the convex-shaped lens,
and the light emission is started while maintaining the force.
After curing, the instrument is gently rocked mesiodistally
and lift out occlusally. Then, it can be seen the impression left
by the instrument on the composite ( . Fig. 15.10l and
. 15.11 l). The proximal wall must be finished with composite, using oblique increments. If there are two proximal boxes,
wedge alternation technique should be used, restoring one
proximal surface at each time. After finishing both proximal
surfaces, the matrix can be removed and the occlusal box
properly restored, like a Class I preparation.
On the cases where the gingival wall is too deep, it is recommended to incrementally restore the deeper area with
composite, pressing the matrix with the contact forming
instrument before each light-curing. That will allow the creating of a proper proximal contour during the application of
the composite, since the deeper regions of the preparation. A
small impression of the instrument tip should be visible on
the gingival wall after each layer, confirming contact of the
composite with the instrument. When a flowable composite
is used as the first layer, to allow a better adaptation to the
preparation irregularities and work as a stress-absorbing
layer, the contact forming instruments should also be used
before its light-curing. > The contact forming instruments are designed to be
pressed toward the direction of the contact, creating
dental separating force through the matrix band,
holding the composite in place during the light-curing
procedure, and forming a composite bridge that
stabilized the matrix in contact with the adjacent tooth.
Prepolymerized Ball Technique
The prepolymerized ball or plunging ball technique is based
on the use of a small ball of the cured composite to press the
band, creating teeth separating force through the matrix,
helping to obtain an appropriate proximal contact. For that,
the tooth to be restored must receive a previously burnished
matrix and wedge, as it has already been described. After the
application of the adhesive system, it is necessary to produce
a small composite ball, with a diameter a little bigger than the
distance between the axial wall and the proximal surface of
the adjacent tooth ( . Fig. 15.11o –v). It can be prepared using
powder-free gloves and then completely light-cured outside
the mouth. After that, a thin layer of uncured composite is
placed on the gingival wall of the preparation. The ball is then
placed over this layer and pressed toward the gingival wall,
using a hand instrument with a flat nib, such as an amalgam
plugger. It is important to be sure that the ball entered tightly
into the preparation, pressing the band toward the adjacent
tooth, creating the desired teeth separation. The excess of
composite over the ball is removed, and then a light-curing is
performed. Then, the proximal surface is restored with
oblique increments, until it reaches the height of the mar -
ginal ridge, shaping the outer incline of the marginal ridge
with a probe-shaped nib instrument. On MOD preparations,
each proximal box is restored separately, and the wedge alter -
nation technique is used. The occlusal surface is restored
using the stratified layering technique as already described.
Ceramic Inserts
The inserts are industrially prefabricated ceramic pieces with
several shapes, sizes, and colors. The technique of ceramic
inserts is a restorative procedure between the direct composite and the indirect ceramic restorations. One advantage of
the use of the inserts is to reduce the bulk of composite
needed to restore the tooth, therefore, reducing the amount
of polymerization shrinkage and the final shrinkage stress.
The inserts also reduce the thermal expansion of the restoration, since they have a CLTE lower than of composites. This
characteristic can improve the marginal adaptation of the
restoration in relation to those made only with composite. In
addition, the use of some inserts on the proximal surface can
also help the restoration of proximal contacts .
There are two basic kinds of inserts. One of them consists
of inserts without specific instruments for the tooth preparation and was introduced in the dental market in by
Bowen, the inventor of composites for tooth restorations [6 ].
They were named “megafillers” and were placed inside the
non-cured composite to reduce the total volume of resin utilized. A reduction of the final composite content in a restoraC. R. G. Torres et al.
15
tion up to 20% could be reached, through a good selection of
shapes and number of inserts. The second kind of insert is
based on the development of tooth preparation instruments
that match the shape and size of the ceramic inserts. The
preparation is performed with rotary or oscillatory instruments. After preparation, standardized inserts perfectly
adapt to the cavities, like an indirect inlay, which are luted
using flowable composite. The difference between the two
types of inserts is the amount of composite necessary to finish the restoration. The maximum reduction is obtained
when the inserts perfectly match the instruments for tooth
preparation. It must be considered that, even though the restoration using insert technique could have some advantages
in relation to the restorations only using composite, it takes
longer to be performed, can require an additional removal of
the remaining tooth structure, and is more expensive .
The SonicSys inserts (Vivadent) were made with
leucitereinforced ceramic ( . Fig. 15.12a –a ́). The preparation
system SonicSys Approx/SONICflex (Kavo) allows the preparation of symmetrical proximal cavities. The preparation
points were selectively covered with diamond and available in
three sizes, which perfectly match the ceramic inserts. They
can be used for mesial and distal surfaces. The points have an
active side covered by diamonds and a smooth side, which
touches the proximal surface of the adjacent tooth. The beginning of the tooth preparation is performed with rotary instruments, followed by the standardization of proximal
preparation with the oscillatory points of the selected size
(. Fig. 15.12e –h). Then, the adhesive system is applied, followed by the matrix and wedge. A layer of flowable composite
is applied, and the insert is placed in position; then a lightcuring is performed ( . Fig. 15.12q –u). A very similar system
called Cerana was produced by the Nordiska Dental, including conical inserts for the occlusal surface and proximal
inserts of several sizes. It also presented diamond rotary
instruments that match the shapes of the conical inserts, as
well as oscillatory instruments with selective application of
diamond for the proximal surface . Although the use of
ceramic inserts can produce very good restorations, its use has
diminished in the recent years, due to the new direct composite technology, with low costs than an insert system. Therefore,
most of the systems are no longer available on the market.
15.4.2.3 Packable Composites and Low
Shrinkage Materials
The packable or condensable composites were created in the
late 1990s, in an attempt to replace the silver amalgam as the
main restorative material for posterior teeth, using a similar
restorative technique. Those materials presented an extremely
higher viscosity than the universal composites available,
close to amalgam, to be condensed into the preparation using
an amalgam plugger, which could press the matrix toward
the adjacent tooth, helping to create the proximal contact.
Despite the material stiffness contributes in forming tight
contacts, a study showed that the matrix system applied is
more effective than the composite viscosity for the final contact tightness result .Those composites cannot be considered as really condensable as amalgam, because they do not become denser when
they are pressed into the preparation. The term packable is
preferable for describing this class of materials. Due to its high
viscosity, it was difficult to obtain perfect adaptation to the line
and point angles, being recommended the use of an initial
layer of a flowable composite . In addition, the use of horizontal increments recommended by the manufacturers, like
the ones used for the silver amalgam, was not adequate for
composites. The simultaneous bonding to the buccal, gingival/
pulpal, and lingual walls increases stress generated by the high
C-factor. Another negative aspect of the first packable composites was the higher surface roughness after polishing, in
relation to the regular ones, due to its different filler technology. For this reason, its use was significantly reduced.
Considering that shrinkage is one of the major drawbacks
of composite materials and the main reason for restoration
failures after short and long term, the researches and developments were focused on its reduction. The first attempt was
to increase the filler content. Since the organic matrix was the
responsible for the volumetric shrinkage, the lower the
resin:filler ratio in a composite, the lower the shrinkage
would be. However, the increase in the filler content also
increases the elastic modulus, creating stiffer materials.
Although the total volumetric shrinkage was reduced, the
shrinkage stress raised, impairing the marginal integrity and
increasing all the other negative consequences related. This
way, other options were attempted.
As the methacrylate resins’ intrinsic shrinkage cannot be
changed, exchanging the monomers seemed the most promising way to solve the shrinkage challenge. Therefore, low shrinkage monomers, such as the silorane (3 M Espe), were developed.
On conventional methacrylate monomers, during the curing
process, the monomers molecules have to approach their neighbours to form chemical bonds with them and create a polymer.
This reaction leads to a significant volumetric shrinkage.
According to the manufacturer, the polymerization process of
silorane occurs through a cationic ring-opening reaction. In
contrast to the linear reactive groups of methacrylates, the ringopening chemistry of the siloranes starts with the cleavage and
opening of the ring system. This process gains space and counteracts the loss of volume which occurs in the subsequent step,
when the chemical bonds are formed. In total, the ring-opening
polymerization process yields a reduced volumetric shrinkage.
According to the manufacturer, a volumetric shrinkage of about
1% and low shrinkage stress of about 2 MPa are generated,
which represents a large reduction in relation to methacrylatebased material that shrinks up to 2–3% and generates shrinkage
stress between 4 and 8 MPa. For this reason, the manufacturer
recommended the use of horizontal increments, although without significant changes in the depth of cure. Even though presented many advantages, the siloranebased materials needed a
specific and compatible adhesive system, being more difficult to
repair the old restorations. The material did not provide a great
shade options and was more expensive than the regular ones.
After some year, it was also removed from the market, being
replaced by the new bulk-fill materials.Composite Restoration on Posterior Teeth
15
a
c
b
e
d
f
.Fig. 15.12 Proximal restoration with ceramic insert (SonicSys
Approx – Vivadent). a Oscillatory instruments that match the shape
and size of the ceramic inserts; b ceramic inserts compatible with
preparation instruments; c fractured amalgam restoration; d defective
restoration removed; e , f standardization of proximal box shape with
the sonic instrument; g , h preparation shape standardized; i removal of
remaining carious dentin tissue with round bur in low speed;
j preparation completed; k -m fitting test of the insert; n insertion of the matrix and wedge; o acid etching; p application of the adhesive
system; q placement of a small layer of flowable composite on the
walls; r application of the adhesive on the insert; s –u insert placement;
v matrix and wedge removal. Proximal surface restored; w placement
of dentin shade composite in the occlusal box; x placement of enamel
shade composite; y finishing and shaping of the ceramic insert with a
fine grit diamond point; z polishing with silicon carbide brush;
a ́ restoration completed
C. R. G. Torres et al.
15
.Fig. 15.12 (continued)
g
h
i
j
k
l
m
nComposite Restoration on Posterior Teeth
15
.Fig. 15.12 (continued)
o
p
q
r
s
t
u
v
C. R. G. Torres et al.
15
.Fig. 15.12 (continued)
w
x
z
y
a'
15.4.2.4 Bulk-Fill Composites
Although the layering technique can provide very good restorations, reducing the negative effects of the shrinkage
stress, it can be a little tricky and time-consuming, especially
on deep preparations. Therefore, most dentists would like to
have a simpler way to restore posterior teeth. The more recent
researchers were focused on creating a material that could
overcome these problems, allowing a quicker restorative procedure. The two main reasons for using the layering technique are the shrinkage stress and the depth of cure of the
universal composites. The first reason makes necessary to use
oblique increments, to reduce the stress over the bond inter -face and remaining tooth structure, while the second one
obliges the use of a maximum 2 mm thick layers, for reaching
a good curing on the bottom of the material. Different strategies were created by the manufactures to modify these two
important characteristics, producing materials that can be
used in horizontal and thicker increments, which were
named bulk-fill composites.
Analyzing the organic matrix of the dental composites,
shrinkage stress is mainly determined by the total volumetric
shrinkage, the internal flowability of the material, and the
polymerization kinetics (polymerization speed). A highly
shrinking material with a small internal flowability and very Composite Restoration on Posterior Teeth
15fast curing speed will exhibit the highest shrinkage stress.
This way, manufacturers created new special monomers and
polymerization modulators for reducing the final stress. In
the Admira Fusion X-tra (Voco) restorative material, the
organically modified ceramic (Ormocer) is an oligomer with
an inorganic backbone and many polymerizable organic
groups, which reduces the volumetric shrinkage due to its
inorganic structure and the bigger molecular weight. Filtek
Bulk Fill (3 M Espe) contains an addition-fragmentation
monomer (AFM). According to the manufacturer, during
polymerization the AFM reacts to create a polymer as any
methacrylate, including the formation of crosslinks between
adjacent polymer chains. However, it contains a special reactive site that cleaves through a fragmentation process during
polymerization. This provides a mechanism for the relaxation of the developing network and subsequent stress relief.
SureFil SDR (Dentsply) has a polymerization modulator
chemically embedded in the polymerizable resin backbone
of the monomer. It reduces stress buildup on polymerization
without a reduction in the polymerization rate or conversion.
The resin forms a more relaxed network and provides significantly lower polymerization stress than the conventional
resin.
> The shrinkage stress is mainly determined by the total
volumetric shrinkage, the internal flowability of the
material, and the polymerization kinetics
(polymerization speed). A highly shrinking material
with a small internal flowability and very fast curing
speed will exhibit the highest shrinkage stress.
In relation to the depth of cure, it is determined by three different factors, which are the monomers, the initiator system,
and the opacity and shade of the composite. The bulkfill
materials are more translucent than the regular composites,
which allow higher light transmission through the material,
resulting in adequate polymerization on the bottom of
thicker layers. The depth of cure of bulk-fill materials is
around 4–5 mm, in contrast to the 2 mm of the regular composites.The bulk-fill materials can be classified into two groups.
The first is the base material, which is flowable and used to
restore the internal and proximal parts of the tooth preparation. They have lower filler content than the corresponding
universal composites and low esthetics. Therefore, the exter -
nal occlusal surface must be covered with a 2 mm capping
layer of regular composite. Some examples are SureFil SDR
(Dentsply), Filtek Bulk Fill flow (3 M), Admira Fusion X-base
(Voco), and Venus Bulk fill (Kulzer) ( . Fig. 15.13a ). The second group is the full restorative material, represented by
regular viscosity composites, indicated to completely fill the
preparation without any capping. Some examples are Admira
Fusion X-tra (Voco), Beautiful Bulk (Shofu), Ecosite Bulk Fill
(DGM), and Filtek Bulk Fill Posterior (3 M Espe)
(. Fig. 15.13b ).
> The bulk-fill composites can be classified as base or full
restorative materials. The former are flowable and used
to restore the inner parts of the preparation, being
capped with a layer of a normal composite. The latter
have regular viscosity and are indicated to completely
fill the cavity.
When performing restorations with bulk-fill materials, special attention should be given to the emittance of the lightcuring unit. The increased depth of cure of these materials,
claimed by the manufacturers, is always calculated consider -
ing certain power emitted from the light-curing unit and a
certain curing time, as described in 7 Chap. 13. The use of a
radiometer or another method to control the emittance is
advised. The instructions of each manufacturer must be followed, and an additional curing through the buccal and lingual surfaces is always recommended.
Before starting, the preparation depth should be measured using a periodontal probe, on the deepest area of the
cavity. If it is equal or smaller than the depth of cure recommended by the manufacturer, a single increment of bulk full
restorative material can be used. When the preparation depth
is deeper, the first layer can be the maximum recommended
by the manufacturer, followed by other layers until comab
.Fig. 15.13 Bulk-fill composites. a Base materials that require capping with standard composite; b restorative composites with regular
viscosity
C. R. G. Torres et al.
15
pletely fill the preparation. For the base materials, a minimum space has to be left for the capping composite.
. Figure 15.14 shows the restorative procedure using a
base bulk-fill flowable composite. The sectional matrix and
separation ring are placed, and the adhesive applied. Then,
the flowable base composite is applied directly from the
compule into the preparation using a syringe, with slow and
steady pressure. The application starts in the deepest areas, maintaining the tip close to the material surface and gradually withdrawing, as the preparation is filled, up to 4 mm
thick increment or 2 mm short of the cavosurface margin. In
case of overfill or excess on occlusal margins, a flocked applicator tip wetted with residual adhesive can be used to remove
excess. This layer is light-cured according to the manufacturer recommendations. As the base composites are more
translucent, if placed on the occlusal cavosurface margins or
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 15.14 Restoration using flowable bulk-fill base composite.
a Initial aspect; b carious tissue removed; c pulpal protection with GIC;
d, e acid etching and adhesive system application; f placement and
burnishing of sectional matrix; g , h restoration of the buccal surface on
distal box with nanohybrid composite (Esthet-X HD – Dentsply);
i Compules of SureFil SDR – Dentsply; j , k filling 4 mm of the prepara-tion with flowable composite, leaving space for the occlusal capping;
l restoration of the proximal surface with nanohybrid composite;
m placement of sectional matrix on the mesial box; n , o application of
flowable composite filling 4 mm of the preparation; p restorations of
proximal surface; q finished proximal surfaces; r finished restoration
after capping and groove characterizationComposite Restoration on Posterior Teeth
15
.Fig. 15.14 (continued)
gh
i j
kl
mn
C. R. G. Torres et al.
15
on the buccal margins of a large proximal box, the restor -
ative material will be visible while the patient is talking or
smiling, adversely affecting the esthetic result. In case a very
dark sclerotic dentin is present, an opaque tint may be
applied over the adhesive layer, previously the composite
placement. Due to the low viscosity, the flowable composites
will not press the matrix toward the adjacent tooth. This way,
the proximal contact will totally depend on the matrix and
wedge system. For this reason, the sectional matrices with
separation ring are recommended. If necessary, complementary technique as contact forming instruments or others can
be used.
15.4.3 Restoration of Proximal Lesions
through Buccal/Lingual Access
On preparations with buccal or lingual access, after isolation
of the operating field, a clear plastic matrix strip should be
placed and wedged, which allows the composite to be lightcured through the band ( . Figs.15.15 and 15.16c–f ). The pad
of the index finger is placed on the tooth surface, opposite to
the preparation access, holding the matrix in contact with the
surface and avoiding the overflow of the composite. The
material must be placed inside the preparation using a layer -
ing technique, employing a nonstick composite filling instru-ment with a flator round-shaped nib, like a plugger. On the
last layer, the matrix is pressed over the surface of access, and
the light-curing is performed through the strip.
15.4.4 Esthetic Improvement of Amalgam
Restorations
Sometimes the patients have large and old amalgam restorations in good conditions, but that are visible while talking or
smiling, negatively interfering on the esthetics. On this case,
instead of replacing the entire restoration, which can result
on the additional removal of the remaining tooth structure, a
small preparation can be performed inside the visible part of
the amalgam, and a composite veneer used to hide the metal
(. Fig. 15.16a –i). First, a prophylaxis is performed using
pumice and brush to remove extrinsic stains. The anesthesia
is not generally necessary since the preparation will be done
mainly on the metal and enamel. When the metal extends
beyond the gingival margin, the level of the gingival tissue is
marked on the restoration with a sharp probe, placing a
retraction cord inside the gingival sulcus. The preparation is
performed until the marked level. A round carbide bur or
diamond point is used to cut the amalgam, removing a
homogeneous depth layer of about 1.5 mm, entering the
embrasures only enough to hide the metal. Retentive coves .Fig. 15.14 (continued)
op
qr
Composite Restoration on Posterior Teeth
15
are prepared on the gingivoaxial angle and slots on the axial
wall inside the metal. A bevel on enamel is performed to
mask the restoration margin and improve the retention .
The preparation is acid etched to clean the surface and create
microretention on beveled enamel, and the adhesive system
applied. A thin layer of opaque tint must be applied over the
adhesive layer to mask the metal shade. The opaque is more
effective when applied in thin layers and light-cured separately. Then, an opaque dentin shade composite is applied
over the tint, helping to mask its white color, being covered
with an enamel shade composite ( . Fig. 15.16f –i).15.4.5 Repair of Ceramic or Composite
Restorations
The indirect ceramic/composite restorations or crowns, as
well as direct composite restorations, can undergo small
cracks or fractures in the oral environment due to mechanical load ( . Fig. 15.17a –i). On those cases, the composite is an
excellent option for repairing them instead of its total replacement. Before starting the repair, the dentist should determine
and control the cause of the fracture and, whenever possible,
the type of restorative material used in the restoration. The
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 15.15 Proximal restoration through buccal access. a Proximal lesion close to the buccal surface; b protection of the adjacent tooth and
tooth preparation; c , d application of acid and adhesive system; e placement of clear plastic strip and wedge; f polished restoration
C. R. G. Torres et al.
15
vitreous ceramics can be etched with hydrofluoric acid gel to
improve the composite bonding. However, the non-vitreous
ceramics, such as those based on zirconium or alumina, are
not significant affected by this etching .
First, prophylaxis has to be performed to remove stains
and biofilm. The fractured area can be removed or a small
preparation performed on the fracture line, such as double
bevel using a round diamond point. The surface of vitreous
ceramics must be etched with 10% hydrofluoric acid gel for
the time recommended by the acid manufacturer, followed by copious washing and air drying. Then, a silane coupling
agent is applied for 1 min, which also must be dried with air.
After that the adhesive system is applied and light-cured, followed by the composite application and shaping. If there is
enamel on the interface, close to the fractured area, it must
never be etched with hydrofluoric acid, because it is too
strong and the products generated by the reaction will
deposit on the etched ceramic surface, adversely affecting
the bonding. The enamel must be only etched with a phosphoric acid gel.
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 15.16 Composite veneers in old amalgam restorations. a Initial
aspect; b preparation on the buccal surface and mechanical retentions;
c bevel in enamel margin; d , e etching and application of the adhesive system; f placement of a thin layer of opaque tint over the amalgam;
g placement dentin shade composite (Z350 XT – 3 M Espe); h use of
clear matrix to shape the enamel shade composite; i final result
Composite Restoration on Posterior Teeth
15
ab
.Fig. 15.17 Repair of a fractured ceramic crown. a Initial aspect;
b removal of the fractured area; c etching with hydrofluoric acid gel;
d aspect after etching; e Application of silane; f application of the adhesive system; g ceramic ready for the composite placement;
h composite applied; i result immediately after removal of rubber dam .Fig. 15.16 (continued)
g
ih
C. R. G. Torres et al.
15
.Fig. 15.17 (continued)
g
ih
cd
efComposite Restoration on Posterior Teeth
15In case of composite restorations, the fractured area must
be roughened by abrasion, with a coarse grit diamond point
or sandblasting with aluminum oxide particles, creating
micromechanical retention . The surface is etched with
phosphoric acid for cleaning and the adhesive system applied,
followed by the composite placement. If any dentin is exposed
on the fractured area, the proper bonding technique to this
substrate must be used.
15.5 Finishing and Polishing
Ideally, no finishing and polishing should be required to a
new restoration, because the shape and surface smoothness
of the last composite layer applied should be perfect.
However, it is extremely hard to shape a perfect and functional tooth anatomy, without evaluating the patient’s occlusion. This way, almost always some adjustment will be
required, even if minimum. The friction of rotary cutting or
abrasive instrument over the composite produces mechanical and thermal aggression. This creates microcracks on the
composite surface with depth between 25 and 50 μm, which
can adversely affect the wear of the restoration [4, 8]. Every
effort must be done to avoid and/or minimize the need for
rotary instruments .
Whenever necessary to correct the restoration’s anatomy
and remove excess of composite, the finishing procedure can
be started immediately after the light-curing. It has to be per -
formed with proper instruments, requiring ability and
knowledge about the correct dental anatomy . Preferably,
the finishing of the margins should be performed before
removing the rubber dam isolation . Excess or lack of the
material can be detected with the tip of an exploratory probe
touching the surface, moving from the tooth to the restoration and vice versa, on the entire cavosurface margin. Excess
of material must be removed but avoiding undesirable wear
of the remaining tooth structure . After that, the occlusion
should be evaluated and premature contacts removed.
A double-sided two-color articulating paper (e.g., black
and red) is held with a Miller forceps, in a way that the black
side is facing the restored tooth. First, the centric contacts are
analyzed, asking the patient to close the mouth in centric
occlusion and open it again. It has to be evaluated if the contacts on adjacent teeth, which existed before the preparation,
can be seen now. If only the restoration is in contact with the
opposite tooth, just the marked contact place must be
grinded, and the articulating paper used again. Those steps
are repeated as many times as necessary, until the original
contacts of the adjacent teeth reappear, but keeping a contact
on the restored tooth. To analyze the presence of interfer -
ences during excursive movements, the paper is placed again
on the paper forceps, in a way that the red side is facing the
restored tooth. The patient is asked to occlude at centric
occlusion and perform protrusive and lateral movements of
the mandible to detect any contact. After that, the patient
opens the mouth, and the black side of the paper is turned in
the forceps. He is asked to close on centric occlusion again to mark the centric contacts once more. The presences of inter -
ferences during disocclusion movements are analyzed. All
the contacts marked in red over the composite are removed
because they represent contacts during the excursive movements, which should not happen. The centric contact in black
must not be changed. The procedure is repeated once again
to evaluate if no interferences have remained. For the occlusal adjustment and excess removal on the margins, in the
occlusal surface, roundor pear-shaped fine grit diamond
points or multi-bladed burs can be used ( . Fig. 14.65a , b)
. Aluminum oxide mounted stones can also be used
(. Fig. 4.28a ). The shape of the rotary instrument must be
compatible to the surface that is intended to be adjusted
(. Figs. 15.6b ́, 15.7x , 15.9s ).
Tips
The occlusal adjustment of the restoration must be
performed analyzing the centric contacts and those
during excursive movements of the mandible.
The rotary instruments should not remove enamel from the
margins, avoiding touching it, and the composite must not be
excessively grinded . After finishing, the restoration must
have the ideal shape to allow masticatory function, without
overhangs on the gingival margins, which may promote biofilm deposition and gingival inflammation. The evaluations
of proximal surface smoothness and contact tightness are
performed with dental floss, wrapping the proximal restored
surface with the floss, moving it gingivoocclusally. If the
matrix and wedge were correctly placed and the restoration
has not overhangs, there is no need to polish the proximal
area, because the restoration has copied the matrix strip
smoothness .
It there is gingival overhangs, they can be removed using
the coarse grit side of an abrasive strip. To avoid undesired
grinding of the proximal contact, narrow strips should be
employed. It can also be used for this purpose the stainlesssteel serrated strip saw ( . Fig. 15.18f ). The marginal ridges
and buccal/lingual/occlusal embrasures may be finished with
small abrasive disks or flame-shaped burs or points
(. Fig. 15.18c , d). On the buccal and lingual embrasures, the
contour carbide carvers or No. 12 scalpel blade are also good
options ( . Fig. 15.18a , b). A study proposed a supplemental
polymerization after the end of finishing procedures, since
the composite surface that was close to the light-guide tip,
and therefore with the best mechanical properties, was
removed .
The polishing may be performed using abrasive rubber
points or cups ( . Figs. 15.7y and . 15.9t ). There are single or
multiple steps abrasive rubber points. On the latter, the
coarse grit rubber is used first, which is gently applied over
the surface with intermittent movement, until a homogeneous surface roughness is obtained. The area must be
washed and dried to remove abrasive residues, and the fine
grit rubber is employed. The marginal ridge on occlusal
C. R. G. Torres et al.
15
a b
cd
ef
.Fig. 15.18 Instruments for finishing proximal surfaces. a Contour
carbide carver (TZC12 – Thompson/Miltex); b use of contour carbide
carver in the embrasure area; c finishing of embrasures with the
abrasive disks (Diamond PRO – FGM); d outer incline of the marginal ridge being finished with a multi-bladed bur; e abrasive strip placed
below the proximal contact; f serrated strip saws attached to the
holders (1, strip holder (Coraldent); 2, Microcut (TDV))
embrasure and buccal and lingual embrasures can be polished with the fine abrasive disk. A felt point (Felt FlexiPoint,
Cosmedent) associated with aluminum oxide or diamond
polishing paste can also be employed ( . Fig. 15.10t ). Another
possibility is the use of silicon carbide brushes, which the
abrasive particles are embedded in the bristles. As the bristles
wear down, fresh abrasive particles are released ( . Fig. 15.6c ́ ,
d ́, . 15.12z ). It has different shapes to adapt to various tooth
surfaces. The abrasive rubber spiral wheels are also a good
option, adapting to all surfaces ( . Fig. 4.29d ). The correctly finished and polished restoration must simulate the smoothness of the dental tissue and not be noticed by the patient or
cause irritations to the tongue and oral mucosa. If the proximal surface has been finished, it must be polished with the
fine grit abrasive strip.
It is large the number of composite restorations inadequately finished and polished, most times due to the fact that
the dentist and patient are tired at the end of the restorative
procedure. This way, the composite should be polished on a
later appointment, when it will be possible a more detailed Composite Restoration on Posterior Teeth
15evaluation of what must be done. In addition, the clinician
may have some difficulties to distinguish the interface
between composite and the preparation, problems of access
and visibility, and lack of know-how about the use of the
instruments, material, and techniques. A study showed that
to finish and polish a restoration on a later appointment also
improves the wear resistance of the composite . This is
related to the fact that, immediately after curing, the composite has not yet reached its maximum degree of conversion and
physical properties, important to bear the stress generated by
the rotary instruments. The called “dark-curing” phase following application of light-curing continues up to 24 h.
Tips
Whenever possible, the finishing and polishing of a
composite restoration should be postponed for the next
dental appointment.
15.6 Surface Sealing
The microcracks created on composite surface, by finishing
and polishing procedures, can work as a path for the penetration of water, acids, and other substances available in the oral
cavity, coming from the human diet and bacterial metabolism. Those substances soften the resin matrix and increase
the wear. A clinical study showed that finishing and polishing
procedures may increase up to 46% the wear rate of some
composites, in relation to when it was not performed .
The finishing and polishing may also increase the marginal
gaps formed during the polymerization .
In an attempt to control this problem, a procedure called
surface sealing, rebonding, or post-bonding was proposed. It
consists of the application of a liquid resin over the composite, like an adhesive, that penetrates and seals the microcracks
. Some studies showed that this procedure is effective to
clinically reduce the wear rate, even though its effect lasts for
only 6 months and a new application is necessary [13, 45].
Besides sealing the microcracks on the composite surface, it
can also help to seal the cracks that may occur on the enamel
surface, close to the restoration margin, due to the shrinkage
stress, as well as the marginal gaps [4, 33].
For that, acid etching of the composite surface and tooth
structure 1–2 mm beyond the margins is performed for 15 s,
followed by rinsing with air/water spray and drying with air -
stream. The surface sealant is applied, followed by an air -
stream to produce a very thin coat and light-curing for 10 s.
The product used for surface sealing is a dedicated material,
basically an unfilled solvent-free monomer blend, and not a
regular adhesive or pit and fissure sealant. The surface sealing
technique may be observed in . Fig. 15.6e ́ –g ́.Tips
The surface sealing can fill the microcracks on composite
surface, enamel cracks close to the margin and interfacial
gaps, reducing the wear and increasing the durability of
the restoration.
15.7 Maintenance of Posterior Composite
Restorations
When correctly indicated and performed, in a patient with
good oral health, composite restorations may show excellent
durability. The correct advice about restoration maintenance,
oral hygiene, dietary control, and use of fluoride must be
given to the patient during the dental treatment . In addition, composite restorations must be frequently reevaluated
by the dentist to detect any problems, such as material chips,
bulk fractures, or marginal ditching. The patient can return
to the dental office every 6 months for evaluation and surface
sealing. Patients that intake large amounts of coffee and
carbonated or alcoholic beverages must be aware of their
higher risk of restoration wear and staining .
Whenever possible, small defects on composite restorations can be repaired by adding new material, since the
remaining restoration is in good conditions. However,
before performing a repair, the factor that caused the
defect should be determined and controlled. The repair
technique was already described in this chapter. When the
defect is located on the proximal surface, a small preparation is done to allow access to new composite placement.
A matrix and wedge must be applied, like for any restoration. There are on the market some adhesives developed
specifically for composite restorations repair, such as
Ecusit (DMG). However, most adhesives can be used to
restoration repair, since the manufacturer’s instructions
are followed.
For many years, every dental composite and adhesives
were based on methacrylate monomers, which means that
they were all chemically compatible and could be used for
restoration repair. However, the silorane monomers do not
properly bond to methacrylate-based composites and vice
versa. Therefore, restorations made with this material
should be repaired with the same composite and with
silorane adhesive [5 ]. A great concern is the fact that the
dentist, who will perform the repair of an old restoration,
may not be the same to the one who originally did it and
does not know which material was used. For this reason,
the composite surface must always be roughen by abrasion,
with a coarse grit diamond point or sandblasting, creating
micromechanical retention in an attempt to increase the
bonding [3 ].
C. R. G. Torres et al.
15
Conclusion
The composite resin is the most widely used restorative mate -
rial for posterior teeth. The success of this kind of restoration
is related to the dentist’s understanding about the material’s
properties, following its indications, but respecting its limitations. The tooth preparation procedure should always focus
on the maximum preservation of the remaining tooth struc -
ture, associated with a meticulous restorative technique.
Different strategies for proper restoration of proximal contour and contact can be used, including preoperative and
alternation wedging, sectional matrix and separation rings,
contact forming instruments, prepolymerized ball, etc. The
use of layering technique is essential for regular composites;
however, the new bulk-fill materials are a quicker and viable
option. The finishing and polishing techniques are also
important for the quality and durability of the restoration,
although neglected by many clinicians. The dentist must
attempt to avoid unnecessary restoration replacement, try -
ing to repair the old ones whenever possible.
References
1. Alomari QD, Reinhardt JW, Boyer DB. Effect of liners on cusp deflec -
tion and gap formation in composite restorations. Oper Dent.
;26: –11.
2. Anusavice KJ. Phillips science of dental materials. 11th ed. St. Louis:
Elsevier; .
3. Badra VV, Faraoni JJ, Ramos RP , Palma-Dibb RG. Influence of differ -
ent beverages on the microhardness and surface roughness of resin
composites. Oper Dent. ;30: –9.
4. Baratieri LN, Monteiro Junior S, Andrada MA, Ritter AV. Odontologia
Restauradora: Fundamentos e Possibilidades. São Paulo: Santos; .
5. Barcellos D, Plefken P , Torres C, Pucci C, Pagani C. Composite repair
bond strength: Dimethacrylate-based and silorane-based composites. J Adhes Dent. ;36: –92.
6. Bowen RL, Eichmiller FC, Marjenhoff WA. Glass-ceramic inserts
anticipated for “megafilled” composite restorations. Research
moves into the office. J Am Dent Assoc. ; :71, 73, 75.
7. Causton BE, Miller B, Sefton J. The deformation of cusps by bonded
posterior composite restorations: an in vitro study. Br Dent J.
; : – .
8. Celik EU, Ergücü Z, Türkün LS, Ercan UK. Tensile bond strength of an
aged resin composite repaired with different protocols. J Adhes
Dent. ;13: –66. https://doi.org/10. /j.jad.a19651.
9. Cenci MS, Lund RG, Pereira CL, de Carvalho RM, Demarco FF. In vivo
and in vitro evaluation of Class II composite resin restorations with
different matrix systems. J Adhes Dent. ;8: –32.
10. Chen L, Suh BI, Yang J. Antibacterial dental restorative materials: a
review. Am J Dent. ;31:6B–12B.
11. Collins CJ, Bryant RW, Hodge KL. A clinical evaluation of posterior
composite resin restorations: 8-year findings. J Dent. ;26: –7.
12. Demarco FF, Cenci MS, Lima FG, Donassollo TA, André D de A, Leida
FL. Class II composite restorations with metallic and translucent
matrices: 2-year follow-up findings. J Dent. ;35: –7. https://
doi.org/10. /j.jdent. .07. .
13. Dickinson GL, Leinfelder KF, Mazer RB, Russell CM. Effect of surface
penetrating sealant on wear rate of posterior composite resins. J
Am Dent Assoc. ; : –5. 14. Federlin M, Thonemann B, Schmalz G. Inserts–megafillers in composite restorations: a literature review. Clin Oral Investig. ;4:1–8.
15. Fejerskov O, Kidd EAM. Dental caries: the disease and its clinical
management. Oxford: Blackwell Munksgaard; .
16. Glasspoole E, Erickson R. The effect of finishing time on wear resistance of composites. J Dent Res. ;68: .
17. Hood JA. Biomechanics of the intact, prepared and restored tooth:
some clinical implications. Int Dent J. ;41:25–32.
18. Ikemi T, Nemoto K. Effects of lining materials on the composite resins shrinkage stresses. Dent Mater J. ;13:1–8.
19. Imazato S, Ma S, Chen J, Xu HHK. Therapeutic polymers for dental
adhesives: loading resins with bio-active components. Dent Mater.
;30:97– . https://doi.org/10. /j.dental. .06. .
20. Jefferies SR. Bioactive and biomimetic restorative materials: a comprehensive review. Part I. J Esthet Restor Dent. ;26:14–26.
https://doi.org/10. /jerd. .
21. Kitagawa H, Miki-Oka S, Mayanagi G, Abiko Y, Takahashi N, Imazato
S. Inhibitory effect of resin composite containing S-PRG filler on
Streptococcus mutans glucose metabolism. J Dent. ;70:92–6.
https://doi.org/10. /j.jdent. .12. .
22. Lacy AM. A critical look at posterior composite restorations. J Am
Dent Assoc. ; : –62.
23. Loomans BAC, Opdam NJM, Roeters FJM, Bronkhorst EM, Burgersdijk RCW. Comparison of proximal contacts of Class II resin composite restorations in vitro. Oper Dent. ;31: –93. https://doi.
org/10. /05- .
24. Loomans BAC, Opdam NJM, Roeters JFM, Bronkhorst EM, Plasschaert AJM. Influence of composite resin consistency and place -
ment technique on proximal contact tightness of Class II
restorations. J Adhes Dent. ;8: –10.
25. Lutz E, Krejci I, Oldenburg TR. Elimination of polymerization stresses
at the margins of posterior composite resin restorations: a new
restorative technique. Quintessence Int. ;17: –84.
26. Lutz F, Krejci I, Luescher B, Oldenburg TR. Improved proximal mar -
gin adaptation of Class II composite resin restorations by use of
light-reflecting wedges. Quintessence Int. ;17: –64.
27. Mair LH. Ten-year clinical assessment of three posterior resin composites and two amalgams. Quintessence Int. ;29: –90.
28. McCabe J, Yan Z, Al Naimi O, Mahmoud G, Rolland S. Smart materials in dentistry. Aust Dent J. ;56:3–10. https://doi.org/10. /
j. - . . .x.
29. McCullock AJ, Smith BG. In vitro studies of cuspal movement pro -
duced by adhesive restorative materials. Br Dent J. ; : –9.
30. Miki S, Kitagawa H, Kitagawa R, Kiba W, Hayashi M, Imazato S. Antibacterial activity of resin composites containing surface prereacted glass-ionomer (S-PRG) filler. Dent Mater. ;32: – .
https://doi.org/10. /j.dental. .06. .
31. Mopper KW, O’Malley M. The illustrated technique guide for
renamel restorative system. Chicago: Cosmedent; .
32. Porto ICC de M, Soares LES, Martin AA, Cavalli V, Liporoni PCS. Influence of the photoinitiator system and light photoactivation units
on the degree of conversion of dental composites. Braz Oral Res.
;24: –81.
33. Roberson TM, Heymann H, Swift EJ. Sturdevant’s art and science of
operative dentistry. 5th ed. St. Louis: Mosby; .
34. Roberson T, Heymann H, Swift E. Art and science of operative dentistry. Mosby/Elsevier; St. Louis . 1. Tay FR, Hashimoto M, Pashley DH, Peters MC, Lai SCN, Yiu CKY,
et al. Aging affects two modes of nanoleakage expression in
bonded dentin. J Dent Res. ;82: –41. https://doi.
org/10. / .
42. Tolidis K, Nobecourt A, Randall RC. Effect of a resin-modified glass
ionomer liner on volumetric polymerization shrinkage of various
composites. Dent Mater. ;14: –23. 43. Torres A, Pagani C, Araujo M. Selamento de superfície em restaurações de resina composta: Avaliação clínica e de modelos de estudo.
Pós Gr Rev Fac Odontol São José Dos Campos. :3–13.
44. Versluis A, Tantbirojn D, Douglas WH. Do dental composites always
shrink toward the light? J Dent Res. ;77: . https://doi.org/1
0. / .
45. Wisniewski J, Leinfelder K, Thomas J. Effect of finishing on the
in vivo wear rate of a posterior composite resin. J Dent Res.
;69: .
46. Yoneda M, Suzuki N, Masuo Y, Fujimoto A, Iha K, Yamada K, et al.
Effect of S-PRG eluate on biofilm formation and enzyme activity of
oral bacteria. Int J Dent. ; : . https://doi.
org/10. / / .
47. Zhang S, Kern M. The role of host-derived dentinal matrix metallo -
proteinases in reducing dentin bonding of resin adhesives. Int J
Oral Sci. ;1: –76. https://doi.org/10. /IJOS. .
48. Statement on posterior resin-based composites. ADA Council on
Scientific Affairs; ADA Council on Dental Benefit Programs. J Am
Dent Assoc. ; : –8.
C. R. G. Torres et al.
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG
C. R. G. Torres (ed.), Modern Operative Dentistry, Textbooks in Contemporary Dentistry,
https://doi.org/10. / -3- - -0_16631 16
Preventive Measures
and Minimally Invasive
Restorative Procedures
Alessandra Bühler Borges, Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres, and Nadine Schlueter
16.1 Introduction –
16.2 Preventive Measures –
16.2.1 Nutrition –
16.2.2 Oral Hygiene –
16.2.3 Fluorides –
16.2.4 Additional Caries Preventive Strategies –
16.3 Pit and Fissures Sealants –
16.3.1 Type of Sealants –
16.3.2 Longevity of the Sealants and Effect on Incidence of Caries –
16.3.3 Extended Fissure Sealant and Conservative Composite
Restorations –
16.4 Enamel Caries Infiltration –
References –
16Learning Objectives
The learning objectives of this chapter are related to the following topics:
5Basic information on types of preventive measures
5The principles of prevention in dentistry
5Relevance of nutrition recommendations with respect to
caries
5Relevance of oral hygiene (mechanical plaque control)
with respect to caries
5Principles of fluoridation – effects, types, and preparations
5Measures for chemical plaque control
5Principles of fissure sealing
5Principles of caries infiltration
16.1 Introduction
The objectives of operative dentistry are to prevent, preserve,
and maintain the sound tooth structures and to minimize the
tooth structure removal required, if necessary, for restorations. The minimally invasive dentistry is part of a developmental progress, determined by the accumulation of
information from the cariology that involves the knowledge
of the caries disease, as well as the developing of techniques
and mechanisms aiming to prevent or arrest the lesion. It is
currently known that dental caries is an in part reversible disease that begins with enamel demineralization and it may,
eventually, progress up to a cavitation if the risk factors are
not controlled and if no preventive measures are implemented .
The minimally invasive dentistry involves procedures
such as pit and fissure sealants, resin infiltration, and conser -
vative composite restorations. Together with the preventive
measures, as dietary advices, regular control of biofilm, and
improvement of oral hygiene habits as well as the application
of lowly and highly concentrated fluorides to improve remineralization and to decrease demineralization, those procedures may reduce caries development and preserve the sound
tooth structure .
16.2 Preventive Measures
Prevention in dentistry is one of the keystones in the daily
practice of each dentist. The preventive strategies are traditionally divided into primary, secondary, and tertiary preventive measures [3, 4]. The primary strategies aim to reduce
the number of new cases of a disease. This is normally
achieved by health-promoting strategies. For cariology such
strategies include nutrition advices, oral hygiene recommendations, inhibition of demineralization by application of fluorides, and the application of fissure sealants. In the context
of secondary prevention, all measures are subsumed, which
aim to early detect a disease, preferably at a stage at which the
disease can be reversed or even healed. The major goal is to
avoid any additional coming down with the disease and to limit the dental hard tissue loss. These measures include
application of fluoride preparations to enhance the reminer -
alization process and the infiltration of carious lesions. The
tertiary prevention that includes all measures specifically
treating defect oriented the sequelae of the disease aiming to
prevent further damage. This includes extended fissure sealing, minimally invasive approaches as well as adequate treatment techniques, such as use of restorative materials. All
measures, preventive and restorative, should be accompanied
by the consideration of all factors potentially influencing the
disease, such as caries activity, caries risk, nutrition habits,
oral hygiene habits and devices, fluoride usage, socioeconomic status, age, etc.
The four major parts of caries prevention comprise
advices regarding “nutrition, ” “oral hygiene” (including
mechanical and chemical biofilm control), “fluorides, ” and
also the “visits to the dentist” (including the application of
fissure sealants) . These parts are substantiated by the local
legal framework for health promotion. Most evidence for
these measures exists for fluorides, followed by oral hygiene
advices and least for nutrition .
> Prevention can be divided into primary, secondary,
and tertiary prevention. The four major parts of caries
prevention comprise advices regarding “nutrition, ”
“oral hygiene” (including mechanical and chemical
biofilm control), “fluorides, ” and also the “visits to the
dentist” (including the application of fissure sealants).
16.2.1 Nutrition
Doubtlessly, short-chain carbohydrates, also named sugars,
are one promoter of the development of caries, since no car -
ies occurs if the bacteria in the dental plaque or biofilm have
no access to metabolizable carbohydrates. After a sugar
intake of even small amounts (15 mg sucrose), relevant acid
production by the bacteria in the biofilm can be measured;
after an intake of mg sucrose, the maximum of acid production is reached.
Up to now, there is no diet completely inhibiting car -
ies. However, it is meaningful to reduce the daily intake to
a minimum, since by this measure the development can be
reduced. Therefore, nutrition advices or recommendations should be given as early as possible (in kindergar -
tens, schools) but should also be given on a regular basis
during the whole lifetime by parents, dentists, and teachers and also in the later stage of life by nursing staff in care
homes.
Even if we have a decline in caries in most industrialized
countries, world consumption of sugars is still quite high
and ranges in these countries between 12.5 kg/capita and
year (China) and 71.8 kg/capita and year (Cuba) with a
mean of 39.9 kg/capita and year . That there is a decline
in caries despite the high consumption of sugars depends
most likely on the regular use of fluoride products and oral
hygiene measures (see below). The WHO recommends
A. B. Borges et al.
16
reducing the sugar consumption to a maximum of 10% of
the total calorie intake; if the effect of sugar consumption on
caries development is considered, the WHO recommends
even a maximum of 5%. Sugar includes all free monoand
disaccharides artificially added to and naturally contained
in food and beverages, including juices, honey, and syrup.
This means that in case of a kcal intake per day, a maximum of 10 kg/capita and year should be consumed .
Even the lowest consumer in the list mentioned above consumes more than allowed according to the WHO recommendations.
However, not only the absolute amount of sugar is relevant. The frequency of intake might be more important, since
it has been shown that with an increase of absolute amount
and intake frequency, the caries increment increases more
than with the increase of absolute amount alone without
increase of intake frequency . This depends most likely
on the asymptotic pattern of acid production after different
amounts of sugar consumption.
> The frequency of sugar intake might be more
important than the absolute amount of sugar
consuption alone for the caries disease.
It is not clear which type of food is of particular cariogenicity.
The content of free sugars (monoand disaccharides) is of
predominant relevance. However, also processed starch can
be metabolized by the plaque bacteria. The combination
between sugars and processed starch is highly cariogenic.
Furthermore, several other chemical and physical factors
contribute to or reduce the cariogenicity such as an increase
in saliva flow, stickiness, consistency, protein, or fat content.
Individual factors like the respond of the salivary gland on
stimulating impacts, tooth position, and bacterial composition are also relevant. Saliva flow and tooth position deter -
mine the oral clearance rate, the time between food intake,
and its elimination from the mouth.
With regard to caries, a tooth-friendly nutrition should
therefore contain low amounts of free sugars, should not be
sticky, and should have a consistency requiring chewing,
which leads to an increase of saliva flow. The frequency of
consumption at main meal or snack should be reduced to a
minimum, in order to give the saliva the chance to reminer -
alize initial carious lesions . As snack milk products,
fruits and vegetables can be recommended. However, one has
to bear in mind that teeth can be damaged by other components than sugar in the foodstuff, such as acids, which can
induce erosive tooth wear .
Nutrition advices should be given to everybody in terms
of primary prevention. In particular, if the caries risk is high,
nutrition recommendations should be an integral part of the
whole concept. Nutritional habits can best be recorded with a
nutrition protocol. Relevant food and beverages can easily be
identified, and alternatives can be recommended. In particular in the case of young children, nutrition advices are of
major importance in order to avoid the development of early
childhood caries. In this context also the effect of acidic food
and drinks should be pointed out.Tip
Nutritional habits can best be recorded with a nutrition
protocol. Relevant food and beverages can easily be
identified, and alternatives can be recommended.
The cariogenicity of food and beverages can be assessed by
standardized test procedures. One is the intraoral plaque pH
measurement; the other is the assessment of degree of demineralization of enamel samples in the oral cavity. It is measured in the plaque how deep the pH declines after a sucrose
consumption and whether the critical pH for caries is
reached. A foodstuff or beverage is defined as “tooth-friendly”
if the plaque pH does not sink below 5.7 within 30 min after
consumption .
There are alternatives to sugars, which have a sweet taste
but no cariogenicity. One can distinguish between caloric and
non-caloric sweeteners as well as between those having volume and being a substitute for sugar and those with a very
high sweetening power and without volume, which can only
be used as an additive to but not as a replacement for sugar.
The caloric ones are mainly the sugar alcohols mannitol, sor -
bitol, and xylitol. Both sorbitol and xylitol are part of plants,
from which xylitol is extracted; sorbitol is mostly produced
industrially by hydrogenation of glucose. Sorbitol can be
metabolized by Strep. mutans, however, only to a small extend,
and the pH decline is mild and ends at values higher than the
critical pH . Therefore, sorbitol is classified as non-cariogenic. There are several studies dealing with xylitol, all showing a caries-reducing effect of this sugar alcohol [17– 19].
Xylitol is not metabolized in the bacteria; rather the molecule
is transported inwards and later outwards the bacteria under
loss of energy . Several other aspects are discussed to play
a role such as the reduction of Strep. mutans in the saliva or
reduction of virulence of Strep. mutans, both playing a role in
the reduction of cariogenicity in the oral cavity . Xylitol
was at the beginning only used in chewing gums and some
oral hygiene products. Nowadays, a lot of xylitol containing
snacks, sweets, chocolate, and other foodstuff are available, as
it has been shown that xylitol is not only non-cariogenic but
also a good option for patients suffering from diabetes mellitus. A side effect of sugar alcohols is that they can lead to diar -
rhea due to slow resorption in the bowel; however, in most
cases this effect is only temporarily. Noncaloric sweeteners
include cyclamate, aspartame, and erythritol. The first two
molecules have a very high sweetening power. It is often discussed whether they have a healthharming effect, and some
countries have already forbidden the use in particular of cyclamate. Erythritol is a non-caloric sugar alcohol with nearly the
same volume as sugars but with a slightly less sweetening
power. It can therefore, at least in part, be used as a substitute.
First studies show that also erythritol has a beneficial effect on
oral health, maybe comparable to xylitol . As mentioned
for other sugar alcohols, it can induce diarrhea; in addition it
can provoke during consumption a cooling effect on the oral
mucosa and the tongue, which is not accepted by all persons.Preventive Measures and Minimally Invasive Restorative Procedures
16 > Sugar alcohols, such as xylitol, erythritol, and sorbitol,
are good alternatives to sugars, as they have a
comparable sweetening power, are voluminous, and
have a comparable taste but are not cariogenic.
16.2.2 Oral Hygiene
Oral hygiene is one of the key components of prevention. The
goal of oral hygiene measures is on the one hand the mechanical removal of the plaque from the tooth surfaces and, on the
other hand, the administration of active agents such as fluorides but also compounds for chemical plaque removal or
modification in order to maintain oral health. Plaque removal
is of major importance to avoid both caries and also periodontal disease. In this chapter only the relevance of plaque
removal in the context of caries should be discussed.
As plaque is one of the key components in the development of caries, the regular and sufficient removal of the bacterial biofilm is not only meaningful but also biologically
plausible. For most people oral hygiene is well integrated into
the daily routine and a basic element of the personal hygiene
and oral health maintenance. Different aspects in oral
hygiene contribute to success of the efforts, i.e., duration, frequency, technique, systematics, and oral hygiene aids.
16.2.2.1 Duration and Frequency
While in the middle of the last century the mean brushing
duration ranged between 30 and 60 s , nowadays the
duration in most industrialized countries lays at 2–3 min [25,
26]. These changes to durations, which have been proven to
be most effective, are a result of structured preventive programs and can be rated as one of the successes of such concepts. The recommendation to brush 2–3 min bases on the
findings that the efficacy of brushing can be enhanced by
approximately 55% by prolonging the brushing duration
from 30 s to s; as from a duration of s, a maximum of
enhancement is achieved .
It takes 24–36 h until a matured plaque has established on
the tooth surfaces. Therefore, biologically seen, it would be
enough to clean once per day the teeth to maintain their
health. However, most people are not able to remove plaque
sufficiently from all surfaces. Therefore, it is generally recommended to brush the teeth two times per day. This recommendation is supported by different studies. They have
shown that with a frequency of two times per day, the risk for
an increase of caries incidence and increment is lower than
for a frequency smaller than two times per day; a frequency
higher than two times per day has only limited additional
benefit .
> Brushing teeth two times per day for two minutes each
is effective for preventive caries. This measure is
biologically plausible and he recommendation is
supported by various studies. 16.2.2.2 Technique and Systematics
Several techniques have been developed for sufficient cleaning of teeth under various conditions. While during childhood easy motions are recommended such as circling on the
smooth surfaces and scrubbing on the occlusal surfaces
(Fones technique) , more complex techniques are recommended, which require more dexterity, as soon as the patients
are able to perform these (usually if the patients reached the
school age).
The most recommended technique is the modified Bass
technique (MBT), where the toothbrush bristles have to be
positioned at the gingival margin in a 45° angulation with the
direction of the bristles towards the sulcus. The brush has to
be moved with small jiggling motions and wiped out towards
the occlusal area including a rotating movement. With these
motions the plaque will be loosened at the margin and
removed with the wiping [30, 31]. The MBT can be used if
the periodontal structures are healthy as well as if the periodontium shows some preexisting damage. It is mostly recommended in case of intact interdental papillae and if the
gingival margin ends up at the cementoenamel border.
For the Charters technique, the bristles of the brush again
have to be positioned at a 45° angulation, however, this time
with the bristles directed towards the occlusal surface. Small
circling movements have to be done, and the bristles should
be pushed with small movements into the interdental space.
This technique is recommended to patients with residual
pockets after periodontal therapy and with free interdental
spaces.
The Stillman technique has been developed for patients
with healthy periodontal tissue but showing recessions. The
bristles of a soft toothbrush have to be positioned on the gingiva and wiped out towards the occlusal surface with a rotating movement (white to red technique).
Even if the MBT is named as the most recommended
technique, only a few persons use this complex technique
. In addition, studies have shown that it is not better than
the others with respect to plaque removal; rather, it has been
shown that none of the mentioned techniques is superior to
another [ 32, 33]. Therefore, it seems of secondary impor -
tance which technique is recommended, provided that the
oral hard and soft tissues are not damaged during the brushing process.
More important than the technique seems to be that
patients perform a systematics in order to sufficiently reach
all areas. An equal brushing of all areas most likely leads to
a better plaque removal, independent of the order of brushing. A sufficient systematics should be taught as early as
possible [34, 35].
> It seems of secondary importance which brushing
technique is recommended to the patient. More
important than the technique seems to be that
patients perform a systematics in order to sufficiently
reach all areas.
A. B. Borges et al.
16
16.2.2.3 Oral Hygiene Aids
The most commonly used tool for cleaning teeth is the toothbrush, either a manual one or a powered one. The manual
toothbrush is currently the most used form of toothbrush,
since it is cheap, easy to acquire, and usable independent of
electricity. The manual toothbrush should have a short head
(max. 2.5 cm), equipped with rounded, elastic plastic bristles,
which are arranged in tufts (multi-tufted, 20–40 bristles in
each tuft), and should have a length of 10–12 mm and a
thickness of 0.18–0.25 mm . Too hard or not rounded
bristles can lead to violation of the soft tissues. There are
brushes with different head designs available; however, studies have shown that the acceptance of the brush itself by the
patient has more impact on the cleaning efficacy than the
brush head design. The force used should not exceed g
(appr. 2 N) in order to avoid any damage of soft and hard
tissues . The brush should be changed after 4–6 weeks or
in case of bending of bristles. In order to avoid unnecessary
accumulation of bacteria, the toothbrush should be allowed
to dry in the air. If more than one brush is used in parallel,
the bristles can completely dry within 24 h. The complete
drying can on the one hand reduce numbers of germs on the
tooth brush head and can in addition increase the toothbrush’ longevity. After each infection in the mouth-throat
region brushes should also be changed to avoid any reinfection.
Tip
There are brushes with different head designs available;
however, studies have shown that the acceptance of the
brush itself by the patient is more important for cleaning
efficacy than the brush head design.
Powered toothbrushes can be divided into rotatingoscillating
brushes, wiping brushes, sonic brushes (amplitudes: ca. –
Hz), and ultrasonic brushes (amplitudes: ca. 1.5 MHz).
In principle, powered toothbrushes are highly effective and
could potentially be more effective than manual ones.
However, systematic reviews have shown that electric toothbrushes, at least the rotating-oscillating brushes, are only
marginally superior to the manual ones . For the others
there are not enough studies available to give final conclusions. That not a clear superiority of powered toothbrushes
was found might be due to lack of good designed studies, the
lack of use of a sufficient systematics , or the decrease of
“the charm of the new” in case of an electric device after a
short period. Due to the smaller brush head in case of an
oscillating-rotating model, the patients have to pay attention
on very systematic handling. Mostly, patients need more time
with the electric device than with the manual brush. Studies
have in addition shown that the force used with electric
brushes is mostly lower than with the manual ones ; this
might be an option for patients using habitually high brushing forces. (Ultra)sonic brushes are particularly technique
sensitive. They should not be used with the same contact pressure as rotating-oscillating brushes or manual brushes
and with different movements. These brushes work via the
formation of micro-flow and hydrodynamic effects in the
plaque and not by the direct removal of the plaque by the
movement of the bristles . The brushes have to be placed,
like it was described for the modified Bass technique, in a 45°
angle on the gingival margin with the bristles directing apically, however without any pressure. The brush has to be held
there for some seconds, and, optimally, afterwards the brush
has to be wiped out towards the occlusal surface. Using this
brush with normal or high pressure leads to a reduction of
efficacy. Patients have to be sufficiently taught in this special
technique; used without the correct technique but with
movements recommended for manual toothbrushes, the
benefits of the sonic technology will not be exhausted, and
the brush acts more or less like a normal manual toothbrush.
> Powered toothbrushes are only slightly superior
compared to manual toothbrushes regarding plaque
removal. Sonic brushes seem to be particularly
technique sensitive.
Common to all toothbrushes is that they cannot directly
reach the interdental spaces, even if there are some in vitro
studies showing some effect of the sonic brushes on plaque in
artificial interdental spaces ; the final evidence, however,
is lacking. Therefore, additional aids are necessary to clean
these areas, which in sum account for 30% of the whole sur -
faces of the teeth. Interdental cleaning aids are dental floss
(waxed, unwaxed, tape, super floss, or devices with fixed dental floss), medical toothpicks or interdental sticks, interdental
brushes (with metal core or metal free), and powered devices
including high-velocity microdroplet devices.
If dental floss is used, a piece of at least 50–70 cm will be
taken and winded around the middle fingers. With the
thumb and index finger, the floss will be tensioned and with
small sawing movements inserted into the proximal space.
Here, the floss will be moved up and down while cleaning
both surfaces of the adjacent teeth. If dental bridges or
blocked crowns are present, special dental floss with a stiffened end for precise insertion of the floss under the pontic
is available. This floss has a fluffy part, with which the pontic
can be cleaned from below. Waxed floss can be inserted
easier into the interdental space, whereas unwaxed floss has
a higher cleaning potential. If the interdental spaces and the
contact points are very narrow, Teflon tape can be used.
Even if the evidence for use of dental floss is low , the
use of it is biologically plausible. It has been shown that the
professional use of floss can lead to a significant reduction
of caries increment compared to use of floss at home, where
sufficient use was not guaranteed . An alternative to the
use of dental floss is the use of interdental brushes, which
seem to be slightly superior to dental floss [43, 45, 46]. In
addition, interdental brushes are often more accepted by
patients due to higher comfort; however, the brushes have
to be chosen according to the size of the interdental spaces.
In worst case different sizes have to be used, and the patient
has to identify which size fits into which space. A further Preventive Measures and Minimally Invasive Restorative Procedures
16increase in comfort with a similar cleaning power can be
achieved if metalfree interdental brushes, fabricated from
plastic or silicone, are recommended . These products
do not provoke any gingiva abrasion ; in addition they
are very small in diameter and therefore even usable at
younger age with healthy periodontal conditions. Due to its
conical form, they cover different sizes and reduce the individual fitting to each interdental space to a minimum. The
evidence on microdroplet devices is very low. There are only
few independent studies on them. It seems to be that at least
under short-term conditions, these devices have an efficacy
comparable to sufficiently used floss but are more comfortable in use .
Conclusively, the evidence for using interdental cleaning
devices with respect to reduction of caries increment is low;
however, their use is biologically plausible and should therefore be recommended.
> The evidence for using interdental cleaning devices is
low; however, their use is biologically plausible and
should therefore be recommended.
16.2.3 Fluorides
Fluoride application in caries prevention is a central measure. It has worldwide been extensively investigated, and
there is a bulk of literature and knowledge on this issue. Not
only its efficacy but also its toxicology was subject matter of
numerous studies.
Already in the beginning of the twentieth century, it has
been recognized that children in areas with high amount of
fluoride in the drinking water (0.7–1 ppm) had less caries;
concomitantly, they very often show non-cariously caused
enamel spots (mottled teeth) . Highest reductions were
found for smooth surfaces followed by proximal areas; in
the fissures on the occlusal surfaces, the effect was notably
lower. It was hypothesized that a fluoride content in drinking water of approximately 1 ppm has a caries-protective
effect. Several other epidemiologic studies have been found
in the following comparable effects of fluoride in the drinking water .
Two modes of actions of fluoride might be relevant.
The ion could either work systemically via incorporation
of the fluoride into the developing dental hard tissue (systemic fluoridation) or locally by the contact between the
fluoride ion and the erupted teeth in the oral cavity (local
fluoridation).
Basing on the early observations from the areas with fluoride in the drinking water, it has been assumed over a long
period that the systemic fluoridation plays the major role in
the caries-preventive effect of fluoride. However, it has been
turned out that not the systemic effect is of relevance but the
local effects of the fluorides . There are no indications
that the preeruptively fluoridated teeth have a lower acid
solubility than not preeruptively fluoridated teeth [53, 54].
Consequently, the preeruptive retention of fluoride does not ensure that the teeth do not develop caries: persons moving
away from an area with high amounts of fluoride in the
drinking water are at the same risk to develop caries in the
area without fluoride in the drinking water as persons never
lived in fluoride-rich areas . Different studies have clearly
shown that an impact of a systemic fluoridation with fluoride
tablets during infancy and early childhood on caries increment in permanent teeth cannot be verified . The same
applies for a fluoride supplementation during pregnancy [57,
58]. In fact, all systemically given fluorides in the form of
drinking water, fluoride tablets, or fluoridated table salt work
predominantly over the local effect during the oral ingestion
of the preparation. Therefore, the administration of fluoride
tablets should be accompanied by the clear instruction that
the tablets have to be sucked and not to be swallowed to take
advantage of the local effect. In particular those children having no access to other fluoride sources could profit from this
measure; however, the overall balance of fluoride intake has
to be considered. In case of regular use of fluoridated salt or
fluoridated mineral or drinking water, no tablets should be
used. As regularities clearly differ between various countries,
no explicit dosage of fluoride supplementation or application
should be given here; in this context, reference is made to the
local regulations.
As it has been shown that the local fluoridation is of
major efficacy, most countries nowadays prefer the local
application of fluorides. Such approaches include the regular
home use of toothpastes, mouth rinses, and gels or the professional application of highly concentrated preparations
such as varnishes or fluids. Already in the late 1890s, first
fluoride-containing oral hygiene products (rinses, toothpaste, and tooth powder) were fabricated. Mostly, hardly
soluble calcium fluoride was added, making the efficacy of
the compounds questionable. In the early 1960s first toothpastes with stannous fluoride or amine fluoride were mar -
keted and comprehensively promoted. However, only in the
1990s, it has been shown that the comprehensive usage of
fluoridated toothpastes but also of other fluoride sources was
associated with a decline in caries prevalence [59, 60]. Later
on, several systematic reviews have shown that the regular
local use of fluorides is notably effective in reducing caries [9,
10, 61–65].
> Fluorides can work systemically and locally. The
systemic effects of fluorides are very low. The major
share of fluoride effect in caries prevention depends
on the local effect of the ion after topical application.
16.2.3.1 Conventional Fluorides and Effect
of Fluoride Ions
Several fluoride compounds are used for prevention of caries.
These compounds can be divided into inorganic and organic
fluorides; the inorganic ones can be subdivided into those
having a monovalent ion as a counterion to the fluoride ion
(conventional fluorides) and those having a polyvalent metal
cation as a counterion ( 7 see 16.2.3.2 ). The conventional
A. B. Borges et al.
16
fluorides include sodium fluoride (NaF), sodium monofluorophosphate (NaMFP), and amine fluoride (AmF, such as
dectaflur and olaflur or amine fluoride ). While the fluorides AmF and NaF can be easily split in aqueous solutions
into the ions, an intraoral enzymatic or acid-driven hydrolysis process is necessary to split the fluoride ion from the
NaMFP .
Four reactions between the dental hard tissue and the
fluoride can be distinguished. (1) The enamel is slightly dissolved at the surface and forms during reprecipitation CaF2like precipitates. (2) The enamel is slightly dissolved and
forms during reprecipitation fluoridated hydroxyapatite or
fluorapatite. (3) The fluoride diffuses into the enamel and
specifically adsorbs to free binding places at the crystals such
as OH−, Ca2+, or phosphate compounds. (4) The fluoride diffuses into the enamel and binds unspecifically in the aqueous
coverage of the enamel crystals.
In particular the first mentioned mode of action, the for -
mation of calcium fluoride (CaF2)-like precipitates on the
tooth surfaces, is of major importance. The CaF2-like precipitates are stabilized intraorally on the tooth surfaces by
phosphate groups and saliva proteins. In case of a plaque
accumulation and bacteria-induced pH decline in the biofilm, parts of the CaF2-like precipitate are dissolved releasing
fluoride ions. This fluoride can diffuse into the enamel, and
the modes of action 2, 3, and 4 could take place. A sufficient
plaque removal with fluoridated toothpaste recovers the
CaF2-like precipitate, which again forms a reservoir for fluoride ions. The CaF2-like layer is insofar of major importance
as it can protect the underlying enamel against acid impacts.
If this layer is incomplete, the underlying enamel can be dissolved, even if fluoride has been incorporated into the crystals. However, the critical pH of fluoridated enamel is
decreased, which can lead to a lower solubility of the enamel
itself .
The amount of CaF2 formed on the tooth surface
depends on the concentration of fluoride in the preparation (the higher the more), the application duration (the
longer the more), the pH of the preparation (the lower the
more), and the fluoride compound . It has been shown
that AmF leads to a higher CaF2 formation than NaF as
well as the fluorides containing polyvalent metal cations
[67, 68]. All fluoride preparations lead to an enrichment of
fluoride in the upper structures of enamel ; the penetration depth is limited and depends also on the compound used. While readily dissociating fluorides easily
diffuse into the upper enamel structures, this process takes
much more time in case of NaMFP , since this compound
has to be split enzymatically , with the consequence
that after NaMFP application, the fluoride uptake is lower
than after the other compounds [70, 71]. In case of healthy
enamel, there is a chemical balance between the saliva and
the dental hard tissue, leading also to a delivery of fluoride
into the environment. In case of a carious demineralization and a fluoride application, however, the fluoride
uptake is much higher, leading to a permanent enrichment
with fluoride ions. > The formation of CaF2-like layers on the tooth surface
is of major importance for caries prevention as it
constitutes a fluoride reservoir from which fluoride can
be released during a cariogenic acid attack. The
amount of CaF2 formed on the tooth surface depends
on the concentration of fluoride in the preparation, the
application duration, the pH of the preparation, and
the type of fluoride compound.
Fluoride is also retained in the dental plaque in form of ionized, ionizable (weakly bound), and bound fluoride. The
bound fluoride is connected to organic components in the
plaque and to the bacteria. The weakly bound fluoride is the
abovementioned phosphate-stabilized fluoride. At neutral
pH, only low amounts are present as ionized fluoride; in case
of pH decline, bound fluoride will be set free, both from
plaque, CaF2-like precipitates, and dental hard tissue, and the
absolute amount of ionized fluoride increases .
The basic principles of anticariogenic effect of fluorides
are (1) reduction of acid solubility of the dental hard tissue
and (2) inhibition of demineralization as well as promotion
of remineralization. The hydroxyapatite in the dental hard
tissue is not the stoichiometric form of this compound but a
deficient one. Several crystals show deficits and imperfections. In these areas, fluoride can be incorporated during
maturation of the teeth, in both preeruptive and Posteruptive enamel maturation. By the filling of the deficiencies
with fluoride, the crystalline structure is stabilized which
modifies or reduces the solubility of hydroxyapatite. Fluoride
ions, however, do not only fill the deficiencies but also
replaces the hydroxyl ions (conversion of hydroxyapatite into
fluorapatite). This leads also to a reduced acid solubility. The
replacement is limited: during preeruptive formation of
hydroxyapatite, approximately 10% can be replaced.
Posteruptively, the surface can also be enriched with fluoride
ions by a topical application of fluoride preparations.
Comparable, the interaction between the fluoride ion and the
surface causes also a substitution of hydroxyl with fluoride
ions. However, the depth penetration is limited.
The caries inhibition can only be partly be explained by
the mentioned effect on solubility. An equally important
mode of action is the impact of fluorides on deand remineralization. The enrichment of the tooth surface by the topical application of fluorides with weakly bound fluoride
(CaF2like precipitates) allows that during a carious pH
decline, fluoride can be released into the aqueous phase.
These free fluoride ions can protect the crystals of the dental
hard tissue by forming fluorapatite and by reducing their
solubility. During the neutralization process, the fluoride
ions precipitate together with calcium ions and dissolved
hydroxyapatite, forming fluorapatite and fluoridated apatite.
These fluorideenriched minerals precipitate earlier, as the
solubility product of hydroxyapatite and fluorapatite differs.
Therefore it can be concluded that the demineralization is
reduced by the inclusion of the fluoride but also the remineralization due to the earlier precipitation [72– 74]. This
chemical and dynamic balance prevents, if a good oral Preventive Measures and Minimally Invasive Restorative Procedures
16hygiene and less sugar consumption are present, a dissolution and destruction of the teeth. However, in case of very
aggressive cariogenic demineralization, a net loss of mineral
can occur resulting in the formation of white spot lesions.
For the process of enrichment of the dental hard tissue with
fluoride ions, concentrations of 0.1 ppm fluoride in saliva
are necessary, which can be achieved by the regular application of topical fluorides.
> The basic principles of the anticariogenic effect of
fluorides are the reduction of acid solubility of the
dental hard tissue and the inhibition of
demineralization in combination with the promotion
of remineralization.
In addition to the effect on the tooth structure, fluoride has
also an effect on the bacteria in the dental biofilm. With
increasing fluoride concentration, first the metabolism of
bacteria is influenced, then the bacterial growth is inhibited,
and finally a bactericide effect can be reached, however, not
by the concentrations found in the dental plaque. The pH in
the dental plaque substantially influences the antibacterial
effect of fluoride; with decreasing pH values, distinctly lower
concentrations for inhibition of bacterial metabolism are
necessary. However, the more acid tolerant a bacterium is,
the higher is its fluoride tolerance. But luckily, in particular
those bacteria metabolizing glucose could be influenced by
fluoride. The fluoride can inhibit after uptake into the germ
an enzyme in the glycolysis, i.e., the enolase, responsible for
formation of phosphoenolpyruvate, an intermediate product
in the way from glucose to lactate . In addition, the glucose uptake can also be inhibited by fluoride. Two ways are
possible: (1) The phosphoenolpyruvate phosphotransferase
system – which is responsible for the conversion of glucose to
glucose-6-phosphate, the form necessary for uptake into the
bacteria – can indirectly be inhibited by the inhibition of the
enolase and the lack of phosphoenolpyruvate. (2) In case of
low pH in the plaque and at high concentrations of substrate,
the glucose can directly be taken up into the bacteria without
any transport systems driven by the pH-dependent proton
gradient between the outer and the inner part of the bacterium. In case of presence of fluoride, a part of the protons will
be absorbed by the fluoride, leading to hydrofluoric acid
(HF), which can be directly transported into the bacteria. In
the bacterium the HF dissociates intracellularly and sets H+
ions free, which reduces the proton gradient and follows the
driving force of the glucose uptake. In parallel the dissociation of HF in the bacterium decreases the intracellular pH,
which in turn destroys the pH optimum of the enzymes of
the glycolysis . Both the reduction of glucose uptake and
the reduction of enzyme activity inhibit the bacterial metabolism. Furthermore, the formation of intracellular storage
carbohydrates is inhibited, as well as the synthesis of lipoteichoic acid, necessary for bacterial adherence. No impact on
the degradation of intracellular storage carbohydrates as well
as on synthesis of extracellular storage carbohydrates was
found .Over time the oral microorganisms can adapt to the fluorides (development of a type of resistance), in particular, if
high fluoride concentrations are used. However, the capacity
of the germs to metabolize sugars is reduced – the pH decline
is milder and shorter. The benefit of a milder pH decline is
that the ecological shift to more acid-tolerant and acidproducing bacteria is less pronounced .
> Fluoride ions have an impact on cariogenic bacteria.
They can reduce the bacterial metabolism by inhibiting
the uptake of glucose into the bacteria, by inhibiting
of enzymes of the glycolysis, and by inhibiting the
synthesis of lipoteichoic acid, necessary for bacterial
adherence.
16.2.3.2 Fluorides with Polyvalent Metal
Cations
Besides the “conventional” fluorides, also fluoride compounds containing polyvalent metal cations are available,
such as stannous, titanium, and silver ions or zinc and copper
ions. Titanium tetrafluoride is not approved for use in oral
hygiene products and should not be described here in detail.
The other ions have already been used at the end of the nineteenth and the beginning of the twentieth century in dentistry as an antibacterial agent.
Copper and zinc are able to increase the intra-bacterial
production of peroxides and superoxides, inducing a damage
of bacterial DNA and the inhibition of growth-relevant
enzymes . Furthermore, all mentioned polyvalent metal
cations can react with sulfur compounds, such as thiols and
proteins, disturbing the protein function and the metabolism
of the bacteria. Stannous ions are able to inhibit in addition
to the enolase two further enzymes of the glycolysis, the
aldolase and the P-glycerin-aldehyde dehydrogenase, resulting in a lower pH decline in case of sugar intake . It is
speculated that the polyvalent metal ions also react with the
lipids of the bacterial cell membrane provoking an impair -
ment of the membrane function up to a disintegration of the
whole membrane structure . Often stannous ions are
used in combination with amine fluoride, which can easily
penetrate the bacterial membrane ; both compounds can
reinforce each other in effect. No development of resistance
of the bacteria against the polyvalent metal cations was
found, which is of major importance in the context of the
discussion about development of resistances due to antibiotics. In addition, the toxicological potential of these ions is
very low . Side effects could be a dull feeling on mucosa
and dental hard tissue as well as removable staining of the
dental hard tissue.
The metal cations have a high substantivity and are
retained in the oral cavity over a long period. In addition
to the effects on the bacterial metabolism, the metal cations, at least stannous ions, can be incorporated under
acidic conditions into the upper structures of the dental
hard tissue, leading to a reduced acid solubility of the dental hard tissue [84, 85]. The application of stannous in
A. B. Borges et al.
16
combination with fluoride as well as of silver ions in
the form of silver diamine fluoride leads to a higher formation of CaF2-like precipitates on the tooth surfaces, potentially promoting the anticariogenic effect. However, the
additional effect of polyvalent metal cations to fluoride on
reduction of caries increment is negligible in case of a nor -
mal caries risk. If special care, however, is necessary (manual or mental disabilities, dry mouth, root caries, early
childhood caries), the application of these fluoride compounds appears meaningful. In particular silver diamine
fluoride and stannous in combination with fluoride could
be a good option [86– 90].
> Fluoride compounds containing polyvalent metal
cations, especially stannous and silver ions, could be a
good option in particular if the caries risk is high. The
cations lead to higher retention of CaF2-like material
on the surface, a change of acid solubility of the dental
hard tissue (stannous ions), and a more pronounce
impact on bacterial metabolism than the fluoride ions
alone.
16.2.3.3 Efficacy of Fluoridated Preparations
and Toxicology
As mentioned above, several systematic reviews show that
fluoride is of notable efficacy in preventing caries [9, 10, 61–
65]. The effect of preeruptive fluoridation by systemic administration of fluorides is considered to be small; the topical
effect of both highly and lowly concentrated fluoride mainly
contributes to the anticariogenic effect . The effect of
fluorides is highest on smooth free surfaces than on proximal
surfaces and lowest on occlusal surfaces (in pit and fissures).
Here other preventive measures, in particular in case of high
caries risk, are more meaningful, such as pit and fissure sealing (see below).
> The effect of fluorides is highest on smooth free
surfaces than on proximal surfaces and lowest on
occlusal surfaces (in pit and fissures).
The efficacy of fluorides depends on the concentration and
on the form of delivery as well as on the lifetime duration of
fluoridation and on individual caries risk.
Systemic fluoridation can achieve a caries-reducing efficacy. However, one has to bear in mind that these measures
mainly work via the direct topical contact between the fluoride ion and the dental hard tissue. Drinking water fluoridation and salt fluoridation is comparably effective with caries
reduction in the range of 50–60%. The results for fluoride
tablets are less homogenous; they have an effect in the range
of 28–61% of caries reduction.
Toothpaste plays the major role in fluoride delivery. It has
been shown that toothpastes, with a fluoride content in the
range between ppm and ppm, show an increase in
efficacy with an increase in concentration with a more or less
linear dose-response relationship. However, in most countries, toothpastes with a concentration higher than ppm (in some countries even higher than ppm fluoride) are
not available as an over-the-counter product (for details
please take the local regularities into account). Toothpastes
show in various studies quite different efficacies, in particular
if used as a conventional fluoride preparation for daily oral
hygiene under unsupervised conditions. The cariesinhibiting effect most likely does not exceed 20%. In some
countries fluoride toothpastes with very high concentrations
( ppm) are available but only on prescription for adults.
These products are indicated for therapy of root caries in
order to prevent the development of new lesions and to
reduce the progression of existing lesions. They could also be
significant in case of high caries risk (xerostomia, manual
disabilities, etc.). Beneficial effects of mouth rinses are mostly
masked by the regular use of fluoride toothpastes if the
patient has a normal to low caries risk. In case of high caries
risk, the benefit of this measure might be found. According to
systematic reviews, mouth rinses with a fluoride content
between and ppm can achieve 20–45% caries reduction. Fluoride gels and fluids with concentrations up to 1.25%
show a very high variation in efficacy (3–48%). This is mainly
due to the fact that they are used at home only weekly or even
more seldom. The professional tray application two to four
times per year shows a more constant efficacy with a caries
reduction between 20% and 40%. The effect of varnishes is
given with 20–75% caries reduction [9, 10, 61–65].
There is a bulk of knowledge on the toxicology of fluorides from the dental literature but also from research on
osteoporosis. The used dosages in dentistry can be all classified as safe, and it is well-known that fluoride in oral hygiene
products and prophylaxis products is not toxic for human
being if used as intended. For sure, overdosages are possible,
if the preparations are misused. One has to distinguish
between acute and chronic overdosage. Signs of an acute
overdosage are typical signs of poisoning such as nausea,
vomiting, and stomachache. Additionally, symptoms like
sweating, headache, and increased saliva flow can occur followed by spasms and tetany. Fluoride has direct impact on
the calcium-potassium equilibrium. The calcium level will
decrease if the potassium level increases. Potassium has a
direct impact on heart activity. As a consequence, arrhythmia, low blood pressure, and reduction of breathing frequency including a respiratory acidosis can occur; finally the
patient can die. As an antidote emesis should be induced, if
there is no aspiration hazard, or calcium-rich preparations
(CaCl2, Ca-gluconate or milk) should be given in order to
complex the fluoride ions . In addition, the patient should
be hospitalized.
The acute lethal dose of fluoride ranges between 32 and
64 mg/kg body weight (certainly toxic dose, CTD). This
range is determined by the effect that different fluoride compounds, the individual resorption velocity, and the pH of the
compounds impact the toxicity. But also below this, threshold poisoning effect can occur, which can be extremely
deadly. In particular infants are at risk for probable toxic
effects. The probably toxic dose (PTD) is 5 mg fluoride/kg Preventive Measures and Minimally Invasive Restorative Procedures
16body weight. If a child has ingested this amount of fluoride,
medical measures should be arranged . This dose can be
reached in case of infant with 10 kg body weight by fluoride tablets with 0.5 mg, 50 liters of fluoridated mineral water
with 1 ppm, g fluoridated table salt, g (= 67 ml) of a
ppm fluoride toothpaste (approximately 1.25 tubes), or
50 g (= 33.5 ml) of a ppm fluoride toothpaste (approximately 0.5 tubes). Therefore, infants should not have access
to fluoride products, and oral hygiene should be performed
with supervision , preferably after meals as the resorption of fluoride is much higher if the stomach is empty than
after a meal. Higher concentrated gels (1.25% fluoride)
should be applied in children with individual trays .
Highly dosed fluoride preparations should only be applied by
professionals. Preparations which prevent any unnecessary
swallowing of fluoride should be preferred, for example, var -
nishes, which harden in case of contact with saliva. If such
preparations are used, no toxic relevant increase in plasma
levels in (pre-) school children were found . Chronic
fluoride exposure with more than 1.5 mg/day can induce
during enamel formation dental fluorosis . In particular,
if several fluoride sources are combined, the risk for fluorosis
increases, such as tablets, salts, and/or drinking water.
> The used dosages in dentistry can be classified all as
safe, and it is well-known that fluoride in oral hygiene
products, supplements, and prophylaxis products is
not toxic for the human being if used as intended.
16.2.4 Additional Caries Preventive
Strategies
16.2.4.1 Chewing Gums
Different clinical studies have shown that regular chewing of
sugar-free chewing gum can have an impact on oral health
. It increases the saliva flow during the chewing process
and also the pH of the saliva. In addition, the plaque formation and concentration of mutans streptococci and lactobacilli in saliva can possibly be reduced. Studies on children
investigating the effect of supervised chewing of sugar-free
chewing gum several times per day have shown that the car -
ies progression and the caries increment can be reduced by
this intervention. It seems that chewing gums containing the
sugar alcohol xylitol (for mode of action, see ) are of par -
ticular effectiveness . As there is some evidence on the
positive effect of chewing gums, the recommendation of its
use up to three to five times per day should be included into
the preventive concept. It should be chewed in particular
after meals in order to increase the saliva flow and saliva pH
to enhance the clearance and the neutralization of acids from
the metabolism of plaque bacteria .
16.2.4.2 Chlorhexidine
Chlorhexidine (CHX) is a positively charged molecule,
which has at lower concentrations bacteriostatic and at
higher concentrations bactericide properties . It binds intraorally to the pellicle as well as to the bacterial
cell membrane, and the integrity of which can be disturbed
by this compound . The efficacy spectrum of CHX is
broad; in particular Strep. mutans reacts very sensitively
. CHX can provoke some local side effects such as
staining of teeth and restorations, changes in taste,
increased formation of tartar, and desquamation of the
oral mucosa . CHX has a very good substantivity and
is potent in reducing the intraoral plaque level . Due
to its potential side effects, it is not intended to use CHX
permanently; however, it is suitable in phases of high car -
ies risk, such as during eruption of teeth, when a fissure
sealing is not yet possible due to inadequate moisture control and shows efficacy comparable to fluoride varnishes
. In these cases varnishes with at least 1% CHX should
be used . If there is a high caries activity, a short-term
CHX therapy could be applied. During a period of 14 days,
1% CHX gel could be applied with a tray to decrease the
absolute number of bacteria . In two clinical studies,
the caries-reducing effect of CHX application has been
shown [ , ]. There is some evidence that the application of CHX varnish during orthodontic treatment around
brackets can reduce caries increment . Some other
studies give indications that also in case of root caries, a
beneficial effect by CHX application can be achieved .
However, the evidence for these recommendations is not
very high.
16.2.4.3 Probiotics
The definition of probiotics is “live microorganisms
intended to provide health benefits when consumed”
. Such approaches have been used since several
decades for the health of the gut. The idea beyond the
application of probiotics in the context of caries is to
reduce the virulence of the bacterial flora in the oral cavity.
It is important that the ingested bacteria have no harmful
impact, for example, if they recombine with other bacteria
leading to an increase of pathogenicity. The goal is to
incorporate probiotics into the biofilm and to replace more
pathogenic bacteria by formation of specific cellular mediators, inhibition of bacterial growth, competitive displacement, or modulation of the immune system [ , ]. The
effect depends on what germ is used. Some positive effect
has been shown for lactobacillus species (L. rhamnosus , L.
reuteri) in the context of root caries. Furthermore L. reuteri
seems to have a positive effect on periodontal status.
However, even if there are some studies showing a beneficial effect, the evidence is still low. In addition, one has to
keep in mind that there is only an effect of the probiotics
expectable while they are regularly (preferably daily)
ingested. Few days after termination of use, there are no
probiotics detectable in the oral cavity [ , ]. Some
cautionary voices argue that by incorporating lactobacilli
species into the oral cavity, the number of acid-producing
bacteria could potentially be increased with the potential
effect of an increase of caries risk. However, there is no evidence for this statement.
A. B. Borges et al.
16
16.2.4.4 Ammonia-Forming Agents
Urea and arginine can both be metabolized in the oral cavity
by specific bacteria, such as S. sanguis or S. mitis. In addition,
both molecules can be split by enzymes from the saliva, i.e.,
arginine deiminase or urease. During this biochemical conversion, ammonia is released from the molecules, which has
an alkaline pH [ , ]. The increase of pH by this process
leads to a faster neutralization of cariogenic acids, and the
pathological shift to a higher occurrence of aciduric and
acidogenic bacteria can be avoided . According to the
current level of knowledge, both compounds arginine and
urea have no harmful side effects.
There are some oral hygiene products and chewing gums
containing urea; however, the evidence on their efficacy is
low. Urea-containing chewing gums have no additional effect
compared to other sugar-free chewing gums [ , ].
Arginine is split by the complex arginine deiminase system, which occurs in both the saliva and specific bacteria.
Interestingly, in the biofilm from caries-free surfaces, the
level of this enzyme system is higher than in the biofilm from
carious surfaces. The same applies for the level of ammonia
and of the arginine deiminase system in the saliva – cariesfree individuals show higher concentrations than persons
suffering from caries. Arginine is used in toothpastes in a
complex with insoluble calcium compounds in order to
increase the availability of calcium and the remineralization
potential. It is used in combination with NaMFP due to the
calcium-rich formulation in avoidance of reactions between
calcium and fluoride in the preparation. Both modes of
actions – of fluoride and of arginine – are independent, and
both compounds do not inhibit each other. There are some
studies showing a benefit of arginine in stopping caries progression and in remineralization of carious lesions [ –
]. In particular for patients with high caries risk,
argininecontaining products might be of interest.
16.2.4.5 CPP-ACP , Bioactive Glass,
Hydroxyapatite
Casein phosphopeptide-amorphous calcium phosphate
(CPP-ACP) is a synthetic colloidal complex derived from
milk. It is well-known that milk can be anticariogenic
despite its high content of sugar . Different mechanisms might be relevant. Milk is supersaturated with
respect to various calcium phosphate compounds, being
part of the dental hard tissue . Therefore, in the presence of these compounds, the acid solubility of the dental
hard tissue (enamel) is reduced, and remineralization processes are facilitated . The pH decline after milk consumption is relatively low, which is in addition in parts
buffered by the metabolism of protein compounds to alkaline end products (e.g., ). One of the milk proteins
that is of particular importance is the casein [ , ]. It
has been shown that this protein can bind to hydroxyapatite and can influence bacterial adherence and metabolism
[ , ]. On its own it cannot inhibit completely demineralization; however, it has been shown that smaller fragments in combination with phosphate (CPP , patented
as RecaldentTM) are more effective than the casein itself
. In addition it has less allergenic potential and
affects to a lesser extent the taste than casein. The CPP can
stabilize calcium and phosphate in solutions forming amor -
phous calcium phosphate (ACP); both compounds form
the colloidal complex. The complex is so small that it can
diffuse through the enlarged pores of an initial carious
lesion. As ACP is a metastable compound, the CPP acts as
a carrier for calcium and phosphate in order to increase the
concentrations of these ions in the carious lesion to promote the remineralization process.
Several products with CPP-ACP are available, such as
chewing gums, toothpastes, mouth rinses, and prophylaxis
pastes, with and without fluoride additives. There are indications in the literature that it has remineralizing potential;
however, the study situation is not fully clear. In particular,
there is no evidence that this compound is better than the
standard fluoride. There is also no clear evidence whether the
combination between fluoride and CPP-ACP shows any benefit in comparison to fluoride alone; however, it shows better
remineralization potential than CPP-ACP alone . The
use of a CPP-ACP in chewing gums seems to have no or only
little beneficial effect . In case of dental erosion, such
preparations fall short of expectation if used as an oral
hygiene product ; as an additive to acidic drinks, it can
reduce their erosivity .
Another calcium phosphate compound is the bioactive
glass, which has been used as remineralizing agent. Even if
there are some in vitro studies showing promising results, the
evidence on the efficacy of such preparations is very small, as
controlled randomized clinical studies are lacking .
Other preparations contain artificial hydroxyapatite,
which should fill submicron defects with the calcium phosphate particles in terms of a biomimetic approach. These
particles can be used at a microscale and at a nanoscale.
While minor effect was shown under in vitro conditions for
the microparticles, the nanoparticles show some effect .
The evidence for these compounds for the clinical use is very
low, as comprehensive clinical studies are lacking. In none of
the very few studies dealing with this approach, superiority
to the conventional concept using fluorides was found.
Conclusively, none of the calcium and phosphate preparations without fluoride has been investigated under clinical
conditions in a dimension that allows them to be recommended as an alternative to fluoride in caries prevention.
> None of the calcium and phosphate preparations
without fluoride has been investigated under clinical
conditions in a dimension that allows them to be
recommended as an alternative to fluoride in caries
prevention.
16.2.4.6 Ozone
Ozone is a natural molecule which contains three oxygen
atoms and has antimicrobial activity against bacteria, fungi,
and virus . The ozone therapy on carious lesions Preventive Measures and Minimally Invasive Restorative Procedures
16involves the application of the ozone gas over the tooth’s
surface aiming its decontamination . The ozone gas
can be produced from oxygen in the environment air (lowdosage principle) or from pure oxygen supplied by an oxygen bottle (high-dosage principle). The application of ozone
is usually performed through a handpiece, which has a disposable silicone cup tip, with diameter in a dimension (usually 3–10 mm), which can be firmly attached to the selected
area of the tooth. It directs the ozone and prevents the
escape of the gas into the mouth. After the application, the
ozone gas is suctioned off and again converted into oxygen
by a neutralizer.
The intention of the use of ozone is to arrest caries progression, due to a reduction of the cariogenic bacteria by oxidation processes, aiming to prevent or delay the need for a
restoration . However, the ozone therapy did not meet
all expectations and can only be classified as an additional
option for controlling dental caries. The conventional strategies, such as the dietary advice, oral hygiene instruction, and
use of fluorides, are still the primary strategies for caries control [ ].
The ozone therapy could potentially be used for disinfection of fissures prior to fissure sealant application or as a noninvasive initial caries lesion treatment. In cavitated lesions it
can be used to decontaminate the remaining infected dentin
after tooth preparation. The high-dosage ozone application
works with pressure. In this case the gas can penetrate into
the smallest pit and fissures to reduce or maybe inactivate the
bacteria . However, the ozone acts on contact; therefore,
any lesions that do not allow the access of the equipment tip
or the surface sealing with the silicon tip cannot be treated.
These include proximal lesions, hidden caries, or lesions difficult to access. Thus, ozone is mainly used on the occlusal
and free-smooth surfaces.
There is good in vitro evidence of the prophylactic application of ozone as antimicrobial treatment prior the acid
etching and placement of sealants and restorations. Positive
results have been obtained without interference on enamel
physical properties or adhesive restorative materials .
However, there is only limited information from clinical
studies, which are in addition in part contradictory.
According to manufacturer’s recommendations, the noninvasive treatment of the incipient occlusal caries lesions
should be possible. This involves the application of the ozone
directly over the lesion for 20– s, followed by the application of a remineralizing solution that contains fluoride, calcium, zinc, and phosphate to increase remineralization of the
disinfected area. They also recommend the use of a fluoridated toothpaste and mouthwash, as well oral hygiene
instructions. The ozone application should be repeated after
3 and 6 months. Even though the first studies have shown
some effects on arresting caries and preventive treatment, the
use of ozone still requires further studies . Reinfection
of the disinfected surface can rapidly occur in the oral cavity
if no sufficient sealing of the surface is performed.16.2.4.7 Further Approaches
For a long time, caries has been classified as an infectious
disease. Therefore, it has been considered to develop a vaccine against Strep. mutans. As several bacteria contribute
to the development of dental caries, this strategy appears
not promising . In addition, the resident flora in the
oral cavity is part of the immune system and cannot be
eliminated at all. It has also been proposed to avoid any
transfer of caries pathogenic germs from caries active par -
ents to the newborn baby; however, this recommendation
appears just as little meaningful. More reasonable is an
increase of preventive measures and restoration of frank
cavities in caries active parents. Such strategies are called
primary-primary prevention. Some studies give indications that the chewing of xylitolcontaining chewing gums
by the parents during the first time of life of the children
can reduce the caries incidence in children, most likely
due to the Strep. mutansreducing effects mentioned above
; however the evidence for this measure is based only
on a single study.
Another possibility to reduce the biofilm on tooth sur -
faces could potentially be the photodynamic therapy. This
approach is regularly used in dermatology for skin tumor
therapy. The intention is to reduce pathogens by application
of light in combination with a photosensitizer. This molecule
will be incorporated into the bacterial cell membrane and
activated by impact of light with a specific wavelength,
depending on the sensitizer used. From the molecule oxygen
will be split off in the form of radicals, which should destroy
the bacterial membrane. This approach is in particular used
in areas difficult to reach, such as subgingival regions, what is
of interest for periodontal treatments; however, in case of
supragingival biofilm in the context of caries, its relevance is
questionable. Furthermore, it is not clear how deep the sensitizer can penetrate into a matured biofilm and to what extent
the biofilm can be destroyed. In the context of caries, there is
no evidence for its efficacy .
Some other strategies for caries prevention have been discussed, such as the use of plant extracts, antimicrobial peptides, enzymes, biopolymers, metaphosphates, quaternary
ammonium salts, or flavonoids [ , ]. There is weak to
no evidence from clinical studies on anticariogenic efficacy
of these compounds, even if a reduction of bacteria can be
achieved. However, a reduction of bacteria does not necessarily mean that a compound is caries inhibiting. It has also
considered to modify the communication between bacteria
in the biofilm (anti-quorum sensing), though without any
evidence at this moment.
16.3 Pit and Fissures Sealants
Pits and fissures are more susceptible for development of
caries than the other surfaces due to their morphology. The
occlusal surface of the posterior teeth presents developA. B. Borges et al.
16
mental grooves separating the cusp slopes, which is called a
fissure. In some areas of the grooves’ bottom, there is no
enamel coalescence from one cusp slope to the other, creating a direct path between the oral environment and the
dentin . A pit is a located and small coalescence fault
on the tooth’s surface. It is generally found on the intersection of two fissures or at the end of a developmental groove.
The irregular anatomy of the grooves, pit, and fissures favors
food and plaque retention, being an area at high risk for
developing dental caries. Even if the occlusal surfaces constitute only 12.5% of all tooth surfaces, approximately 50%
of all caries lesions in school children occur at these sur -
faces. Regarding the distribution on the posterior teeth,
most frequently caries lesion development occurs at the
occlusal surfaces of the first and second molars, corresponding to about 90% of all lesions present on children
and teenagers ( . Fig. 16.1a ) .
It can be distinguished between different types of fissures:
flat and wide, slit-shaped, or ampoule-shaped; in particular
the latter two shapes cannot be sufficiently cleaned. As a consequence bacterial biofilm, food leftovers, and cell debris can
be retained in these areas. The neutralizing and remineralizing potential of the saliva and also the topical effect of fluoridation measures are also reduced in these areas, resulting in
a higher risk for the development of caries. Therefore, materials were developed to be applied into the grooves, closely
sealing the pits and fissures, reducing its irregularities, and
smoothing the surface. Those materials create a physical bar -
rier between the occlusal surface and oral environment,
hampering the deposition of bacteria and its nutrients, as
well as the progression of caries lesions ( . Fig. 16.1b ) [ ,
].
During many years, it was generally accepted that the best
way to maintain the molars sound is applying sealants right
after the eruption. However, with the reduction of caries
prevalence in the industrialized countries, resulting from the
progressive increase of the knowledge about the caries dis-ease etiology and prevention, the caries risk assessment has
become evident for sealant indication . Many occlusal
surfaces remained sound during the entire patient’s life without any sealant. This way, the indiscriminate use of sealants is
nothing more than a modern version of the classic concept of
“extension for prevention. ” This means that sealing all occlusal surfaces to hinder the caries development is considered
nowadays as unacceptable and may be considered an over -
treatment, since by using other preventive measures caries
risk can be decreased and the disease can be controlled .
Therefore, monitoring of the etiological determinant factors
of caries disease is of major importance, as well as the correct
and sufficient preventive use of fluorides.
The operatory approach of the occlusal sites varies
according to its health and anatomical conditions, as well as
the patient’s risk of developing caries lesions. The latter one is
the most important factor to be considered when sealants are
indicated. Among the clinical parameters that are available to
evaluate the caries risk, the previous caries experience seems
to be the most accurate criteria . Other factors that indicate caries susceptibility are the retentive macro-morphology
of the occlusal surface ( . Fig. 16.2a , b), frequent sugar intake,
inadequate exposure to fluoride, and poor oral hygiene .
In addition, people with hypomineralized teeth, fixed orthodontic appliances, general health problems, manual disabilities, and xerostomia, the use of medication that reduces
salivary flow or the frequent intake of medication with high
sugar levels is potentially considered a high risk [ , ].
Based on that, occlusal surface sealing is, in general, indicated for patients at high caries risk and/or presenting teeth
with active occlusal incipient lesion, which show progression
during the treatment ( . Fig. 3.5g, h ). In addition, it can be
used in patients who are not responding to a treatment based
on the control of the disease . It can also be recommended, in case of high caries risk, to apply fissure sealant
on deciduous molars or at the palatal pits of incisors or
canines.
ab
.Fig. 16.1 a Occlusal surface of molars with biofilm deposits; b mesiodistal cross section of a molar with a sealant applied on the occlusal
groovePreventive Measures and Minimally Invasive Restorative Procedures
16 > The indiscriminate use of sealants is unacceptable and
may be considered an overtreatment. Its indication
must be done only after the caries risk assessment. It is
recommended for patients at high caries risk and/or
presenting teeth with active occlusal incipient lesion.
Fissure sealing should always be accompanied by
other preventive measures, i.e., nutrition
recommendations, oral hygiene education, and
fluoride application.
The patient’s caries risk has to be periodically evaluated, since
it can change with time. In particular during the period necessary for the eruption of molar teeth (12–18 months), the
risk for developing occlusal caries is high due to the lack of
chewing friction and natural cleaning mechanisms, as well as
due to difficulties to sufficiently reach the occlusal area with
mechanical oral hygiene devices. Immediately after eruption
the enamel does not have its maximum degree of mineralization. During a period of approximately 2 years after eruption,
the enamel undergoes a secondary mineralization process
(Post-eruptive enamel maturation), in which minerals, such
as calcium, magnesium, and phosphate, from the saliva are
incorporated into the dental hard tissue. This complementation of the mineralization is supported by the application of
fluorides. These processes result in a reduction of the enamel
permeability, which can decrease the caries risk [ , ].
However, this does not necessarily mean that the matured
tooth will be caries-free during the whole life span.
All in all, the sealants indication has to be based on the
caries risk assessment in different periods of patient’s life,
because the tooth can be at low risk immediately after eruption, but due to changes in patient’s behavior or habits at high
risk at a later stage of one’s life, and vice versa . To
achieve the maximum benefits of the sealants, these materials should be applied only to those teeth judged as high caries
risk [ , ].
Sealants are considered a valuable and low-cost
preventive measure, and it is an adequate strategy for car -
ies prevention, if correctly indicated and made .
However, it has to be ideally used in combination with patient education, effective personal oral hygiene, rational
use of fluorides, and regular dental visits . As fissure
sealants are normally applied during age of childhood, the
parents have to be informed about necessary preventive
measures and the need of regular controls of sealants in the
dental practice.
Tip
As fissure sealants are normally applied during age of
childhood, the parents have to be informed about
necessary preventive measures and the need of
regular controls of sealants in the dental practice.
Sealants can also be applied over active incipient lesions on
the occlusal surface since it has been shown to be effective in
inhibiting the progression of demineralization confined to
enamel [ – ]. However, enamel demineralization can
be associated with the presence of dentin lesions, in particular if the fissure is very deep and close to the dentin enamel
junction. If there is no visible cavitation, such dentin lesions
can be sealed. Studies have shown that it can significantly
reduce the number of viable bacteria inside the lesion and
lead to caries arrestment [ – ]. In fact, there is a trend
towards noninvasive approaches, aiming the prevention,
arrestment, or management of caries. Following this, sealants can be used both as a preventive measure in at-risk teeth
and as a therapeutic measure when applied over an incipient
noncavitated caries lesion [ , ]. In case of cavitation,
however, an invasive treatment is not avoidable. In such
cases a minimally invasive procedures should be per -
formed in order to avoid any unnecessary substance loss.
If one decides in favor of sealing a non-cavitated lesion,
the material used for the sealing is of major importance,
since a tight closure of all parts of the fissure is a prerequisite.
Resin-based material is recommended ; glass ionomers should not be used as a tight sealing cannot be ensured
ab
.Fig. 16.2 a Posterior teeth with a smooth occlusal morphology and with shallow grooves; b molars presenting irregular morphology, with
deep grooves favoring the biofilm deposition
A. B. Borges et al.
16
. The sealing of carious deciduous molars is also possible and not worse in comparison to invasive measures .
In all cases of sealing carious lesions, a periodic evaluation is
essential, both in relation to lesion progression and to sealant
integrity and retention. A total or partial loss of the sealant
applied over a dentin lesion will open again the entrance for
bacteria and for the substrate for the bacteria in the resting
carious lesion, favoring the activation of the caries process
[ , ]. One has to keep in mind that sealants placed over
dentin lesions, even in combination with adhesive systems,
present more micro-leakage and less retention than sealants
in sound fissures. Carious fissures are often surrounded by
demineralized enamel, which presents reduced adhesive
properties adversely affecting the proper adaptation of the
sealant in the fissure .
Except for a proven allergy, there are no absolute contraindications for a fissure sealant. The presence of a cavitation
into dentin, an inadequate moisture control, and deciduous
teeth, which will exfoliate soon, can be judged as a relative
contraindication.
> Non-cavitated dentin caries lesion can be sealed and
arrested. However, periodic evaluation is essential,
both in relation to lesion progression and to sealant
integrity and retention.16.3.1 Type of Sealants
Different materials can be used as a sealant. Mostly resinbased sealants are recommended, either as unfilled resin for -
mulations or flowable composites. Glass ionomer cements
(GIC) are also a possibility; however, this material is in some
countries’ guidelines classified as a material to be used only
as an interim solution.
16.3.1.1 Resin-Based Sealants
These sealants are based on fluid resins associated or not with
filler particles. They contain traditional monomers, such as
BisGMA and UDMA, which are diluted with low molecular
weight molecules, such as TEGDMA, to obtain a proper viscosity for clinical use. In addition, some products also have
white pigments such as titanium dioxide, to differentiate the
sealant from enamel, aiming to facilitate the application and
its later control during the clinical examination ( . Fig. 16.3a ,
b). Clear sealants, however, allow controlling the underlying
fissure system. There is also a sealant available with a thermochromic pigment. This pigment is transparent at the oral
temperature, but at temperatures below 31 °C, induced by the
use of air or water stream, it becomes bluish, which should
facilitate the identification of the sealant in the fissure system
(. Fig. 16.3c , d). To facilitate the application of the sealant,
ab
cd
.Fig. 16.3 a, b Sealants with white pigment applied on the molars occlusal surface; c sealants with thermochromic pigment after the
polymerization; d bluish aspect of the sealant with a thermochromic pigment after receiving a water spray (Defense Chroma-Angelus)Preventive Measures and Minimally Invasive Restorative Procedures
16companies developed materials which change the color from
the non-cured (other color than white or clear) to the cured
condition.
Resin-based sealants are normally light-curing, but
chemically curing materials are also available, both presenting comparable retention rates in long-term evaluations
[ , ]. Some preparations contain fluoride; however,
studies have shown that fluoride release by the resin-based
sealants is minimal and there is no advantage over the sealants without fluoride. Thus, it seems to be more of a marketing strategy than a real clinical benefit [ , , ].
The addition of filler particles to the sealants aims to
improve surface hardness and reduce wear. Although they
present improved mechanical properties, they are more viscous, and consequently, the penetration into the etched fissures is more difficult. As the layer thickness is higher after
application, they mostly require occlusal adjustment after
application . However, there is no evidence for superiority of filled over unfilled sealants in relation to retention
rates and caries prevention [ , ].
Tip
There is no evidence for superiority of filled over unfilled
sealants in relation to retention rates and caries
prevention. The same holds true for the presence or not
of fluoride in the composition and the use of lightor
chemical-curing materials.
The sealant application technique, which will be exemplarily
presented, does not require the use of an adhesive system
after the acid etching step, as it is possible to get similar retention rates with or without an application of a bonding agent,
in particular if the moisture management is excellent .
Thus, adequate isolation is an essential part of the technique,
and the use of rubber dam is strongly recommended.
Sometimes it is not possible to use rubber dam, and the cotton rolls isolation has to be performed. Studies have shown
than when properly done, results similar to rubber dam can
be achieved by cotton rolls isolation. However, if this cannot
be ensured, such is the case in partially erupted teeth, glass
ionomer cement as sealant should be used instead of resinbased materials (for details see below). Salivary contamination during sealant placement is the most common cause of
failure of the technique [ , , ].
Most problems associated with retention loss of a sealant
do not occur when it is totally lost. That exposes the fissures
system to the oral environment, allowing mechanical removal
of the biofilm and contact with saliva and fluoridated oral
hygiene products. However, in case of a partial loss and insufficient retention of the remaining sealant, the areas below the
partially retained material will hardly come into contact with
saliva and fluorides, which can increase the risk for caries
development. Furthermore, in particular if dyed sealants are
used, the visual diagnosis is impaired .The outer surface of enamel is prismless ( . Fig. 6.1d),
which shows smaller porosities after acid etching and
impairs the retention of the fissure sealant. Besides, the solubility of prismless enamel is smaller than of prismatic
enamel. A minimum etching time of 30 s is required. A
reduced etching time leads in most studies to a more heterogeneous retention behavior. It is important to highlight that
the acid etching has to reach a larger area than the sealant
will cover. The material should never be applied beyond the
etched enamel because no bonding would be obtained. After
etching and rinsing and drying, the surface should have a
chalky/frosty-white appearance as a result of the acidinduced demineralization. The application of self-etching
adhesives before sealant application could be used as an
alternative to phosphoric acid etching before sealant application; however, the retention rates do not reach those after
conventional acid etching . The same applies for laser
or air abrasion conditioning . The latter three methods
(self-conditioning, laser, air abrasion) cannot be recommended without reservations.
To maximize the longevity, the retention, and the durability of the sealants, the application has to follow a standardized protocol:
5Proper isolation of teeth, preferably with rubber dam
(. Fig. 16.4a ).
5Cleaning of tooth surface with pumice and prophylaxis
brush or with sodium bicarbonate Prophy-Jet to remove
the biofilm and debris from the occlusal surface, that
adversely affects the adequate enamel etching
(. Fig. 16.4b ). The surface can also be cleaned with the
patient’s toothbrush without toothpaste . Oily or
fluoridated prophylaxis pastes have to be avoided since
they may hinder the enamel acid etching.
5Thoroughly rinsing with air/water spray and drying with
airstream.
5A dental probe should gently be passed through the
bottom of the grooves to remove pumice residues and
debris.
5Etching of the surface with 35–37% phosphoric acid gel
for at least 30 s ( . Fig. 16.4c ).
5Thorough rinsing with air/water spray until complete
removal of the acid for at least 20 s ( . Fig. 16.4d ).
5Drying of the surface with airstream ( . Fig. 16.4e ).
5Applying of the sealant using a dental probe or the
applicator tip provided by the manufacturer, directing it
towards the center of the pits and grooves and taking
care not to incorporate bubbles into the sealant material
(. Fig. 16.4f ).
5Note: If it is a self-curing sealant, it is presented in two
bottles. One drop of each bottle has to be dispensed,
mixed, and applied to tooth surface. The curing time is
about 3 min. If it is a light-curing material, the sealant
has to be applied directly to the tooth surface and then
light-cured for 20–40 s according to manufacturer’s
instructions ( . Fig. 16.4g ).
5Evaluating of the entire surface of the sealant with a
dental probe to ensure its integrity and to verify the
A. B. Borges et al.
16
homogeneity of the material and the absence of
bubbles as well as whether the sealant covers the entire
extension of pits and fissures ( . Fig. 16.4h , i). If
necessary, the sealant can be reapplied if no contamination with saliva has happened. If contamination was
the case, the acid etching procedure including rinsing
and drying has to be repeated before applying additional material. 5Removal of rubber dam and evaluation of the occlusion
using an occlusion foil.
5If there is any occlusal interference, the occlusion has to
be adjusted using a fine-grain diamond point, a multibladed finishing bur, or an Arkansas stone.
5If it is recommended in the respective home country,
application of a highly concentrated fluoride preparation
(varnish or fluid).
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 16.4 Light-curing resinous sealant application technique. a
Teeth after rubber dam isolation; b prophylaxis with pumice and water;
c phosphoric acid etching; d rinsing; e opaque aspect of the etched enamel; f application of the sealant using the tip of an exploratory
probe; g light-curing; h evaluating the sealed surface using the probe
tip; i final aspect before evaluating the occlusal contactsPreventive Measures and Minimally Invasive Restorative Procedures
.3.1.2 Flowable Composite Resins
Flowable composites, especially those with very low viscosity, can be used as pit and fissure sealants. They present good
wetting properties and adequate wear and fracture resistance
. Clinically, the results of flowable composites, if used
with an adhesive system, are comparable to those obtained
with unfilled resin-based sealants [ – ]. The use of an
adhesive system after etching is a prerequisite in case of the
usage of a flowable composite for occlusal sealing. Except for
this additional step, the application technique is similar to
the application of resin-based sealants. There is no need to
use the primer of the adhesive system, if a three-step adhesive system is used (etching, primer, and adhesive), since
only enamel is involved; it is of major importance that in this
case the etched enamel is completely dry, to avoid any contact between water and the hydrophobic bonding material.
For enamel bonding, the use of etch and rinse systems is
always the preferred choice, to achieve a stable and effective
bonding . Self-etching adhesive does not lead to a sufficient etching patter, in particular in the prismless enamel,
since the pH value of the self-etching primer is higher. As a
consequence, its application results in the formation of
shorter resin tags compared to the etch and rinse systems.
All in all, the selfetching approach results in lower bonding
performance and a poor sealant retention [ , ]. Thus, the use of selfetching adhesive systems is not recommended.
After polymerization, the finishing and polishing steps are
performed as in case of any regular composite restoration.
16.3.1.3 Glass Ionomer Cement
The use of GIC to seal pit and fissures is a controversial topic
in the literature. Some authors believe that they are not adequate for occlusal sealing, because they show high wear and
low fracture resistance, as well as poor retention rates [ ,
, ]. However, other studies showed success rates with
regard to occlusal caries prevention similar to the resin-based
ones . Two reasons for this effect have been discussed.
On the one hand, even when the sealants apparently are lost,
residual material remains in the bottom of the fissures and
still protects against caries lesions. On the other hand, they
can act as a fluoride reservoir, reducing the caries progression [ , , ]. The latter aspect is often subject for a
discussion, since it is not clear whether the fluoride effect is
measurable in case of the regular use of fluoride containing
oral hygiene products.
GICs are generally used in terms of a temporary treatment, in particular in situations where sealants are indicated, but adequate isolation cannot be achieved. Typical
clinical situations are partially erupted teeth with active
white spot lesions and/or patients with high caries risk and
gh
i
.Fig. 16.4 (continued)
A. B. Borges et al.
16
previous history of caries lesions ( . Fig. 16.5a , b) [ , ,
]. Even if they can be used in cases where an adequate
isolation cannot be guaranteed, GICs are technique sensitive against desiccation on the one hand and high amounts
of saliva in the fissures on the other hand. Moisture control
is therefore also for GIC sealants an important factor.
Besides conventional GICs, the resin-modified glass iono-mer cements (RMGIC) can be used. They have to be lightcured but are less sensible to desiccation and water
absorption and have better physical properties and retention rates to enamel [ , ].
The application of the conventional GIC as pit and fissure
sealant should be performed according to the following protocol (. Fig. 16.6a –d):
ab
.Fig. 16.5 Mandibular second molar erupting into the oral cavity. a Initial clinical situation; b immediately after the application of the GIC as pit
and fissure sealant
ab
cd
.Fig. 16.6 Application technique of the GIC used as sealant. a Initial
case – maxillary second molar erupting in the mouth of a caries high
risk patient; b application of polyacrylic acid after the prophylaxis; c application of the GIC with the tip of an exploratory probe; d case after
6 months, showing the retention of the GIC on the pit and fissures. The
first molar also received the same treatment Preventive Measures and Minimally Invasive Restorative Procedures
16 5Cleaning of the tooth surface with pumice and prophylaxis brush or with sodium bicarbonate Prophy-Jet or
the patient’s toothbrush without toothpaste.
5Thoroughly rinsing with air/water spray and drying with
airstream.
5A dental probe should gently be passed through the
bottom of the grooves to remove pumice residues and
additional debris.
5Isolation of the teeth using cotton rolls.
5Application of the polyacrylic acid conditioner to
enamel, according to manufacturer’s instructions
(. Fig. 16.6b ).
5Note: The surface energy is increased by applying the
conditioner, which enhances the wettability and penetration of the GIC into the grooves.
5Thoroughly rinsing with air/water spray to remove the
acid, for at least 20 s, avoiding saliva contamination.
5Change of cotton rolls.
5Note: This step is critical because unexpected saliva
contamination of the surface will negatively influence
the adhesion of the GIC to the tooth.
5Gentle drying of the tooth surface with airstream. An
absolute drying of the tooth surface has to be avoided.
5Note: The enamel surface will not show the frosty-white
appearance observed after the phosphoric acid etching.
5GIC will be mixed from two components. The mixture
should be homogeneous, fluid, and shiny; if manual
mixing is performed, the incorporation of air bubbles
by strong mixing procedures has to be avoided.
Application of the cement using the tip of the dental
probe or the application syringe, directing it into the pit
and fissures, with care (avoid air bubbles; . Fig. 16.6c ).
Pressure can be applied with a petroleum jelly-coated
index finger to improve the penetration of the material
into the pit and fissures . During the initial setting
reaction, which takes about 5 min, the surface should
not be touched; any saliva contamination has to be
avoided.
5Protect the surface with cavity varnish or bonding agent
to avoid syneresis and imbibition processes until the
final hardening, which would adversely affect the
materials’ physical properties.
5Checking for bubbles and whether the GIC is correctly
applied to all pit and fissures.
5Removal of the cotton rolls and evaluating of occlusion
with articulating paper.
5If there is excess, manual shaping instruments should be
used to remove it.
5Application of a coating (fluid resin) to protect the
surface.
If a resin-modified GIC is used, a tooth conditioner or a specific primer has to be applied following the manufacturer’s
instructions. Afterwards, the material is placed over the fissures and light-cured. It is usually not necessary to protect
the surface of this material, since the resin component avoids desiccation and water absorption. Finishing and occlusion
adjustment steps are similar to the conventional sealant technique presented above.
16.3.2 Longevity of the Sealants and Effect
on Incidence of Caries
The longevity of the sealants has been proven by clinical
studies, which have shown that the retention of the sealant is
the most important factor for occlusal caries prevention,
since it blocks the bacteria and/or its nutrients .
The survival rate of the resin-based sealants according to a
systematic review study was up to 90% after 1 year, 80–93%
after 2 years, 41–87% after 3 years, 70% after 4 years, and 39%
after 9 years . A reduction of the sealant retention is
observed over the time. Therefore, periodic visits to the dentist are important so that the sealant margins and integrity
can be re-evaluated. If there is any fracture or loss
(. Fig. 16.7a –d), it should be repaired or replaced if necessary, in particular when the patient still presents high caries
risk or when the sealant was applied on teeth with enamel
demineralization. Regarding the effect of fissure sealants on
caries incidence, it was reported that sealed permanent
molars presented up to 73–84% less caries lesions after 2
years compared to the non-sealed molars .
> A reduction of the sealant retention is observed over time.
Therefore, periodic visits to the dentist are important.
16.3.3 Extended Fissure Sealant
and Conservative Composite
Restorations
In , when the extension for prevention principles was
still the state of the art for the invasive therapy of dental car -
ies, Simonsen and Stallard wrote the first reports about minimally invasive or conservative preparations. They used
No.1/4 round burs to widen those pit and fissures affected by
incipient carious lesions (selective enameloplasty of the fissures), which was followed by sealing with self-cure composite dissolved in fluid resin (extended fissure sealant) .
Later, the term “preventive resin restorations” was given to
small composite restorations, which were made after conser -
vative preparations of small lesions that extend up to the dentin. The preparation was defect oriented, and only the
caries-affected area was prepared. The small restoration was
associated with a sealant application on the adjacent pit and
fissures . Today this kind of procedure is called a “conservative composite restoration” and still includes the same
steps: small preparation with minimum removal of tooth
structure, restoration with composite material, and sealing of
the pit and fissure on the healthy adjacent fissure system, in
particular if there is a high risk for new caries lesion developA. B. Borges et al.
16
ment in this area . Instead of the combination of regular
composites with sealants, a flowable composite can be used
both for restoring the prepared cavity and for sealing the
occlusal pit and fissures .
The conservative composite restoration technique
includes the following steps:
5The preparation has to involve only the carious tissue,
using an ultraconservative diamond point, a small
diameter round diamond point, or a very small tapered
carbide bur, in high-speed handpiece, to allow access to
the underneath carious dentin ( . Fig. 16.8a , b).
5The caries-infected dentin is removed using a round
carbide bur, with diameter compatible to the cavity size,
in the low-speed handpiece. Attention has to be directed
to the dentin, to maintain the caries-affected demineralized but not infected dentin, capable of remineralization,
according to what is described in 7 Chap. 6
(. Fig. 16.8c –e). The rubber dam is placed, and the
surface is cleaned using pumice and prophylaxis brush
or sodium bicarbonate Prophy-Jet ( . Fig. 16.8f ). After
that, the tooth is thoroughly rinsed and dried with air.
5Etching is performed with 37% phosphoric acid for 15 s
in dentin and for 30 s in enamel margins and the entire
fissure system adjacent to the cavity ( . Fig. 16.8g ). Surface is thoroughly rinsed for at least 20 s until the
entire acid has been removed. Afterwards the area will
be gently dried.
5The adhesive system is applied according to the manufacturers’ instructions ( . Fig. 16.8h ).
5Afterwards, the composite is placed ( . Fig. 16.8i ). Both
conventional and flowable composite resins can be used.
If the depth of the preparation is more than 2 mm, the
incremental technique has to be used, and light-curing
will be performed on each increment for 20 s.
5As a final step of filling, the sealant is applied on the
entire adjacent pit and fissure system, according the
procedure described above ( . Fig. 16.8j ). If flowable
composite is used, it can be placed both into the
prepared cavity and on the grooves.
5The surface has to be evaluated for voids or bubbles.
5The rubber dam is removed, and the occlusion has to
be evaluated using articulating paper ( . Fig. 16.8k ). If
an adjustment is necessary, fine-grain diamond points,
a multibladed finishing bur, or an Arkansas stones can
be used to remove it. Finally, polishing has to be
performed with abrasive rubber points or polishing
pastes with felt points or polishing brushes
(. Fig. 16.8l ).
ab
cd
.Fig. 16.7 a Partially retained sealant on the distal groove of the
occlusal surface of the maxillary first molar; b fractured sealant on the
mandibular second molar, with presence of a carious lesion; c partially retained sealant on the mandibular first molar; d fracture of sealant of
the mandibular second premolar, with presence of carious lesionPreventive Measures and Minimally Invasive Restorative Procedures
.4 Enamel Caries Infiltration
Every dentist regularly comes across incipient enamel carious lesions or white spot lesions in the daily clinical practice.
They are characterized by the presence of a pseudo-intact
mineralized surface (superficial zone) followed by a demineralized subsurface lesion, also called as lesion body, as
described in 7 Chap. 3 (. Fig. 3.4a–d). If a progression of the
mineral loss is not stopped by adequate preventive measures, enamel prisms collapse, the pseudo-intact surface layer will
be destroyed, and a cavitation process begins.
The treatment of proximal caries lesions generally involves
two approaches: the noninvasive (preventive) and the invasive
(restorative) treatment. When there is no enamel cavitation,
noninvasive remineralizing measures involving fluoridation
associated to dietary control and oral hygiene counseling represent the first option [ , ]. However, this approach is
not always successful, as it requires compliance and change of
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 16.8 Conservative composite restoration technique. a
Ultraconservative diamond point (on the left) and round diamond
point (on the right); b minimum tissue removal to access the carious
lesion; c, d removal of the caries-infected dentin; e conservative
preparation completed; f prophylaxis with pumice and brush; g acid etching; h adhesive system application on enamel and dentin; i
composite resin application into the preparation; j occlusal surface
with composite restoration and sealant on the adjacent grooves; k
evaluation of the occlusal contacts; l final aspect of the conservative
composite restoration
A. B. Borges et al.
16
patient’s habits. Many patients do not follow the recommendations and give up the treatment prematurely. As a consequence, the lesion can progress, in particular if a high caries
risk exists. Cavitation can be the result, requiring an invasive
treatment including tooth preparation and restoration.
Especially in case of proximal lesions, the preparation of the
access cavity is associated with the loss of large amounts of
healthy dental tissue .
The caries infiltration technique, using very low-viscous
resin material, is a new alternative approach in minimally
invasive dentistry. As it is not associated with any preparatory measures, it could also be classified as microinvasive. Different from the pit and fissure sealants that cover the
enamel surface with a resin barrier to avoid carious deminer -
alization, this technique aims to fill the pores within the
carious lesion with liquid resin material, by penetration of
this material into the lesion body, in order to reinforce its
weakened structure. This makes the lesion on the one hand
more stable against mechanical impacts, in order to avoid
the breakdown of the surface layer, and, on the other hand,
the dental structure becomes more acid resistant. Both
mechanisms should lead to an arrest of its progression to a
cavitation stage. Resin infiltration technique represents an
intermediate treatment between the prevention and restoragh
ij
kl
.Fig. 16.8 (continued)Preventive Measures and Minimally Invasive Restorative Procedures
16tion [ , ]. This procedure, however, does not supersede
the well-established preventive strategies. Like any dental
treatment, it has to be performed in combination with educational procedures, such as oral hygiene and diet counseling, as well as fluoride application aiming the prevention and
control of the caries disease.
> Different from the pit and fissure sealants that cover
the enamel surface with a resin barrier to avoid carious
demineralization, the resin infiltration technique aims
to fill the pores within the carious lesion with liquid
resin material, by penetration of this material into the
lesion body, in order to reinforce its weakened
structure.
The infiltration of a carious lesion is not a trivial process, as
the superficial layer of the incipient carious lesion is characterized by precipitation of minerals from saliva on the
enamel surface and low porosity, blocking the penetration
of the resin into the lesion body. Thus, to allow the resin
penetration, the superficial zone has to be removed through
an erosive procedure using a strong acid. Different acids
were tested; however, the sole one able to sufficiently remove
the surface layer is 15% hydrochloric acid, applied for 2
min, followed by rinsing with water. To allow the infiltration of the hydrophobic monomers into the lesion, the
etched surface has to be thoroughly dried. For this reason,
after drying with airstream, absolute ethanol is applied and
has to be dried completely in order to remove the remaining water. This procedure improves the low-viscosity resin
(infiltrant) penetration, driven by capillary forces, into the
lesion body .
The infiltration technique is indicated only to those
lesions without cavitation implying that no bacterial contamination within the lesion body has happened. The
indication for using it on smooth surfaces of free access
can be easily made. However, in the proximal area, the
clinical diagnosis of cavitation is quite complex.
. Figure 16.9 shows a scheme of the different depths of
carious lesions in the proximal area according to the radiographic image with the respective treatment option.
When nothing is seen, the score E0 is applied. The enamel
layer is divided into outer (E1) and inner halves (E2),
while dentin between the dentin enamel junction and the
pulp is divided into three thirds (outer, D1; middle, D2;
and, inner, D3) . Studies comparing the radiographic
images with the actual presence of cavitation showed that
E1 lesions never had cavitation, while E2 is cavitated in
10–19.3% of the cases [ , ]. However, 32% D1
lesions were cavitated, while 72% of lesions extending into
the inner 2/3 (D2 and D3) of the dentin also showed cavitation . In addition, some studies observed that when
the radiolucency reaches the inner third of dentin (D3),
cavitation was present in % of the cases [ , ].
The resin infiltration technique is indicated for caries
lesions in the proximal region with radiographic image up
to external third of the dentin (D1), expecting that more
than 2/3 of the cases are free of cavitation . However,
some studies showed a high prevalence of cavitation even
in D1 lesions [ , ]. This way, regular radiographic
examination is recommended on cases where the infiltration technique has been performed, mainly on situation
where the radiolucency reaches the dentin. The best way
to have a more predictable evaluation of presence of cavitation is to perform a temporary elective tooth separation,
followed by impression with a silicone material , as
described on 7 Chap. 3. In each case when a cavitation is
present, this technique is not indicated, and a restoration
is required, since at that stage, bacterial penetration into
the lesion has already occurred.
> Infiltration technique can be used only in case of
non-cavitated lesions. The deeper a proximal lesion is,
the higher the probability that a cavitation is present.
In case of cavitation, an infiltration is not indicated,
and a restoration has to be placed.
To allow the resin application in the proximal lesion, a small
tooth separation is required using wedges in the proximal
space. Then, a special applicator device, a foil matrix delivery
.Fig. 16.9 Different depths of carious lesions according to the radiographic image and the treatment indications. E0, no lesion; E1, outer
enamel; E2, inner enamel; D1, outer third of dentin; D2, middle third of dentin; D3, inner third of dentin
A. B. Borges et al.
16
system that contains micro-perforations, has to be put into
the proximal space. The perforations point towards one of
the sides. This allows the product application only to the
affected proximal region, protecting the sound adjacent sur -
face (. Fig. 16.10a , b).
The treatment protocol for proximal surfaces includes the
following steps ( . Fig. 16.11a –o):
5Making of bitewing radiography for lesion diagnosis
(. Fig. 16.11a , b)
5Cleaning of the teeth with prophylaxis paste and brush
and of the proximal surfaces with dental floss
5Isolation of teeth with rubber dam in order to avoid any
harm by use of the strong hydrochloric acid
5Separation of teeth using a wedge, which allows the
placement of the delivery device into the proximal
region (. Fig. 16.11c )
5Connection of the applicator with the hydrochloric acid
syringe, insertion of foil matrix between the teeth, and
application of the acid for 2 min ( . Fig. 16.11d , e)
5Removal of the applicator and rinsing with water for at
least 30 s; drying with air ( . Fig. 16.11f )
5Connection of a new applicator with the ethanol syringe,
placement of it into the interproximal space, application
of the ethanol onto the lesion and incubation for 30 s;
drying with air ( . Fig. 16.11g )
5Connection of a new applicator with the infiltrant
syringe, placement into the proximal space, application
of the infiltrant, and incubation for 3 min. Removal of
the applicator and of any excess of the infiltrant with
dental floss. Light-curing of the infiltrant for 40 s from
all sides (occlusal, buccal, and lingual) ( . Fig. 16.11h –k)
5Rerunning of the last step, incubation for 1 min, and
light-curing from all sides for 40 s ( . Fig. 16.11l )
5Polishing with fine grit polishing strips ( . Fig. 16.11m , n)
One has to bear in mind that the infiltrant is not radiopaque;
therefore, a radiographic observation of the infiltrant penetration into the lesion is not possible ( . Fig. 16.11o ). This is
even more important if the patient changes the dentist. Furthermore, any follow-up can only be done indirectly via
the estimation whether there is a lesion progression on periodically made bitewing radiographs. It is very important for
monitoring that the radiographs have always the same direction. A recent systematic review revealed that proximal caries
lesion progression was less likely to occur in permanent teeth
being infiltrated with resin material as compared to noninvasive methods, provided that oral hygiene instructions and
measures were performed [ , ]. The evidence is at this
moment moderate to low, due to lack of high number of
studies. However, further newer studies not included in the
review show also quite positive results, in particular in
patients with high risk .
A second indication of the infiltration technique is the
color masking of initial carious lesions on smooth surfaces.
If an initial carious lesion occurs, the teeth get a whitish or
chalky appearance (white spot lesion). The whitish color is
due to the increase of the intercrystalline spaces of the
demineralized enamel and creation of a high porous area,
which changes its the refractive index (RI). While the sound
enamel has a RI of 1.65, the lesion pores will be filled with
water, which has a RI of 1.33, or air (RI of 1.00). In this case,
the light waves reach multiples interfaces between the fluid
and the mineral phase, with different refractive indices. At
each interface the light is deviated and reflected, becoming
imprisoned in an “optical maze” that is over-luminous and
therefore perceived as white [ , ]. The infiltrant has a
refractive index of 1. , closer to sound enamel, resulting
in a masking effect of the white spot lesion, if deeply penetrated into the micropores, and in an improvement of the
esthetics [ – ].
Typically, white spot lesions on the smooth surfaces occur
due to inadequate oral hygiene, e.g., during an orthodontic
treatment with brackets. The brackets are biofilm retention
sites; however, white spots can also occur without orthodontic treatment in case of insufficient general oral hygiene.
Usually, oral hygiene education and the application of fluorides are recommended to enhance remineralization of white
spot lesions. However, this procedure is not successful in
ab
.Fig. 16.10 a Proximal tip foil matrix delivery system with micro-perforations in only one of the sides; b hydrochloric acid gel passing through
the perforations of the matrixPreventive Measures and Minimally Invasive Restorative Procedures
16
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 16.11 Resin infiltration protocol for incipient proximal caries
lesion. a Initial case without clinical evidence of cavitation; b radio -
graphic image suggesting enamel carious lesion on distal surface of
maxillary first premolar; c rubber dam isolation and tooth separation
with the plastic wedge; d placement of the proximal-tip foil matrix
applicator in the proximal region, with the perforations directed to the
affected tooth surface; e application of the hydrochloric acid; f rinsing and drying; g application of ethanol; h application of the infiltrant
resin; i–k light-curing from occlusal, buccal, and lingual sides; l
reapplication of the infiltrant resin, followed by light-curing;
m polishing with fine-grain abrasive strip; n final case; o absence of
radiographic evidence of the infiltrant resin, since the material is not
radiopaque
A. B. Borges et al.
16
gh
ij
kl
.Fig. 16.11 (continued)Preventive Measures and Minimally Invasive Restorative Procedures
16all cases and is dependent on the patients’ compliance. The
infiltration technique is a possible alternative. However, in
cases of inactive but still visible lesions, in which the surface
layer is thick and the lesion is in parts remineralized, the success is often limited, most likely due to an incomplete infiltration of the lesion. This is the case if the surface of the white
spot has a glossy instead of a frosty appearance or shows even
a discoloration.
The technique for application is comparable to that of
proximal lesions except for the application device. Isolation
of the teeth is, as mentioned for the proximal lesions, a prerequisite. Both a conventional rubber dam and a liquid dam
are possible, depending on the extension of the lesion. The
patient should be informed about potential changes in color
and about the possibility of failure.
. Figure 16.12a –i shows a clinical case of infiltration of
white spot lesions as a sequela of bad hygine during orthodontic treatment ( . Fig. 16.12a ). The following steps have
been performed: isolation of the teeth using a light-curing
liquid dam, application of the hydrochloric acid for 2 min
(. Fig. 16.12b ), and rinsing for 20 s ( . Fig. 16.12c ). The step
was followed by air-drying, ethanol application, and drying
for 30 s each ( . Fig. 16.12d , e). Afterwards, the infiltrant was applied for 3 min ( . Fig. 16.12e ). Excess was removed, and
the infiltred surfaces were light-cured for 40 s. The infiltrant
application was repeated for 1 min and light-cured again for
40 s (. Fig. 16.12f ). Finally, the surfaces were polished with
abrasive discs to remove any excess and create a smooth sur -
face. After these procedures, it was observed that the white
spot lesions’ masking was effective ( . Fig. 16.12g –i)
Due to histological structural similarities between carious white spot lesions and fluorotic enamel, the infiltration
procedure can also be used in such cases. First clinical studies
showed good results , and it appears to be a promising
strategy . In case of other hypomineralization such as in
case of molar incisor hypomineralization (MIH), the results
are less promising, mainly due to differences in histological
structure.
Tip
Besides arresting proximal caries lesion, the resin
infiltration can promote a color-masking effect of carious
white spot lesions and fluorotic enamel, on labial surface
of anterior teeth, resulting in esthetic improvement.
m
on
.Fig. 16.11 (continued)
A. B. Borges et al.
16
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 16.12 a Initial situation showing white spot lesions; b isolation
with light-curing gingival barrier and application of the etching gel; c
rinsed teeth after etching with wet surface; d dried teeth, showing the
frosty-white appearance of the enamel; e application of ethanol using a smooth surface tip; f application of the infiltrant resin; g aspect
immediately after the infiltrant application; h final resultPreventive Measures and Minimally Invasive Restorative Procedures
16 Conclusion
In modern preventive dentistry, microand minimally invasive
strategies are the key components, superseding the traditional
dentistry, which was based on the restorative-surgical model. The
reestablishment of the shape, function, and esthetics of the lost
tooth structures has been forced back, and approaches that
emphasize health promotion and disease prevention, represent -
ing a great advance in direction to the oral health maintenance,
are paramount. Contemporary preventive strategies comprise
caries risk identification, prevention of development and progression of incipient lesion, remineralization of initial lesions, sealing
of fissures to avoid biofilm accumulation in the retentive occlusal
area, minimally invasive (conservative) preparation for fillings,
and repair of the defective restorations instead of its replacement.
To reach this goal, the dentist must be proficient in the etiology,
pathogenesis, and development of caries as a disease, as well as in
the early diagnosis of carious lesions. That will allow the imple -
mentation of reasonable individual-based preventive and minimally invasive strategies, together with measures that reduce or
eliminate the causes of the caries disease, reducing their recur -
rence with the goal to optimally preserve the dental structures.References
1. Wolff MS, Allen K, Kaim J. A -year journey from GV Black to
minimal surgical intervention. Compend Contin Educ Dent Jamesburg NJ . ;28: –4, .
2. Terry DA. Restoring the interproximal zone using the proximal
adaptation technique--part 1. Compend Contin Educ Dent.
;25: –6, , – - .
3. Ali A, Katz DL. Disease prevention and health promotion: how inte -
grative medicine fits. Am J Prev Med. ;49:S230–40. https://doi.
org/10. /j.amepre. .07. .
4. Wagner Y, Heinrich-Weltzien R. Risk factors for dental problems: rec -
ommendations for oral health in infancy. Early Hum Dev.
; :16–21. https://doi.org/10. /j.earlhumdev. .09. .
5. Rugg-Gunn A. Dental caries: strategies to control this preventable
disease. Acta Medica Acad. ;42: –30. https://doi.
org/10. /ama2006- .80.
6. Bratthall D, Hänsel-Petersson G, Sundberg H. Reasons for the car -
ies decline: what do the experts believe? Eur J Oral Sci.
; : – - , –2.
7. Cooper AM, O’Malley LA, Elison SN, Armstrong R, Burnside G, Adair
P , et al. Primary school-based behavioural interventions for pre -
venting caries. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. :CD009378.
https://doi.org/10. / .CD009378.pub2.
gh
i
.Fig. 16.12 (continued)
A. B. Borges et al.
16
8. Kay E, Locker D. A systematic review of the effectiveness of health
promotion aimed at improving oral health. Community Dent
Health. ;15: –44.
9. Marinho VCC. Cochrane reviews of randomized trials of fluoride
therapies for preventing dental caries. Eur Arch Paediatr Dent.
;10: –91.
10. de Silva AM, Hegde S, Akudo Nwagbara B, Calache H, Gussy MG,
Nasser M, et al. Community-based population-level interventions
for promoting child oral health. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
;9:CD009837. https://doi.org/10. / .CD009837.
pub2.
11. Licht FO. Per capita consumption of sugar in selected countries
worldwide in the years between / and / (in kilo -
gram) [Pro-Kopf-Konsum von Zucker in ausgewählten Ländern welt -
weit von / bis / (in Kilogramm)]. Statista .
https://de. statista. com/statistik/daten/studie/ /umfrage/ver -
brauch-von-zucker-in-ausgewaehlten-regionen-weltweit/
(Accessed 29 March ).
12. World Health Organization. Guideline: augars intake for adults and
children. Geneva; .
13. van Loveren C. Sugar restriction for caries prevention: amount and
frequency. which is more important? Caries Res. ;53: –75.
https://doi.org/10. / .
14. Lussi A, Megert B, Shellis RP , Wang X. Analysis of the erosive effect
of different dietary substances and medications. Br J Nutr.
; : –62.
15. Stösser L, Tietze W, Künzel W, Limberger K. Intraoral pH measure -
ment by determination of acidogenic potentials of dietary materials. Oralprophylaxe. ;12: –53.
16. Takahashi N. Oral microbiome metabolism: from “Who Are They?”
to “What Are They Doing?” . J Dent Res. ;94: –37. https://
doi.org/10. / .
17. Soderling E, Makinen KK, Chen CY, Pape HR, Loesche W, Makinen
PL. Effect of sorbitol, xylitol, and xylitol/sorbitol chewing gums on
dental plaque. Caries Res. ;23: –84.
18. Soderling E, Rekola M, Makinen KK, Scheinin A. Turku sugar studies
XXI. Xylitol, sorbitol-, fructoseand sucrose-induced physicochemical changes in saliva. Acta Odontol Scand. ;34: – .
19. Soderling E, Talonpoika J, Makinen KK. Effect of xylitol-containing
carbohydrate mixtures on acid and ammonia production in suspensions of salivary sediment. Scand J Dent Res. ;95: –10.
20. Zhan L. Rebalancing the caries microbiome dysbiosis: targeted
treatment and sugar alcohols. Adv Dent Res. ;29: –6.
https://doi.org/10. / .
21. de Cock P . Erythritol functional roles in oral-systemic health. Adv Dent
Res. ;29: –9. https://doi.org/10. / .
22. Macgregor ID, Rugg-Gunn AJ. Toothbrushing duration in 60 uninstructed young adults. Community Dent Oral Epidemiol.
;13: –2.
23. Robinson HB. Toothbrushing habits of persons. J Am Dent
Assoc. ;33: –7.
24. Rugg-Gunn AJ, Macgregor ID. A survey of toothbrushing behaviour
in children and young adults. J Periodontal Res. ;13: –8.
25. Sandström A, Cressey J, Stecksén-Blicks C. Tooth-brushing behav -
iour in 6–12 year olds. Int J Paediatr Dent. ;21:43–9. https://
doi.org/10. /j. -263X. . .x.
26. Winterfeld T, Schlueter N, Harnacke D, Illig J, Margraf-Stiksrud J,
Deinzer R, et al. Toothbrushing and flossing behaviour in young
adults-a video observation. Clin Oral Investig. ;19: –8.
27. Creeth JE, Gallagher A, Sowinski J, Bowman J, Barrett K, Lowe S,
et al. The effect of brushing time and dentifrice on dental plaque
removal in vivo. J Dent Hyg. ;83: –6.
28. Kumar S, Tadakamadla J, Johnson NW. Effect of toothbrushing fre -
quency on incidence and increment of dental caries: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. J Dent Res. ; https://doi.
org/10. / .
29. Fones AC. In: Fones AC, editor. Dental prophylaxis, vol. 2. Philadelphia/New York: Lea & Febiger; . p. –6. 30. Bass CC. An effective method of personal oral hygiene. J State Med
Soc. ; :57–73.
31. Bass CC. The necessary personal oral hygiene for prevention of
caries and periodontoclasia. New Orleans Med Surg J. ; :
52–70.
32. Schlueter N, Klimek J, Saleschke G, Ganss C. Adoption of a toothbrushing technique: a controlled, randomised clinical trial. Clin
Oral Invest. ;14:99– .
33. Wainwright J, Sheiham A. An analysis of methods of toothbrushing
recommended by dental associations, toothpaste and toothbrush
companies and in dental texts. Br Dent J. ; :E5.
34. Schlueter N, Winterfeld K, Quera V, Winterfeld T, Ganss C. Toothbrushing Systematics Index (TSI) - A new tool for quantifying systematics in toothbrushing behaviour. PloS One. ;13:e0196497.
https://doi.org/10. /journal.pone. .
35. Van der Sluijs E, Slot DE, Hennequin-Hoenderdos NL, Van der Weijden GA. A specific brushing sequence and plaque removal efficacy: a randomized split-mouth design. Int J Dent Hyg. ;
https://doi.org/10. /idh. .
36. American Dental Association. Brushing your teeth (Cleaning Your
Teeth & Gums). http://www. ada. org/ . aspx?currentTab=1
; Accessed 04 November .
37. Wiegand A, Schlueter N. The role of oral hygiene: does toothbrushing harm? Monogr Oral Sci. ;25: –9.
38. Yaacob M, Worthington HV, Deacon SA, Deery C, Walmsley AD,
Robinson PG, et al. Powered versus manual toothbrushing for oral
health. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. ;6:CD002281.
39. Ganss C, Duran R, Winterfeld T, Schlueter N. Tooth brushing motion
patterns with manual and powered toothbrushes—a randomised
video observation study. Clin Oral Investig. ; https://doi.
org/10. /s00784- - -7.
40. Wiegand A, Burkhard JPM, Eggmann F, Attin T. Brushing force of
manual and sonic toothbrushes affects dental hard tissue abrasion. Clin Oral Investig. ;17: –22. https://doi.org/10. /
s00784012- -z.
41. Schmidt JC, Zaugg C, Weiger R, Walter C. Brushing without
brushing?--a review of the efficacy of powered toothbrushes in
noncontact biofilm removal. Clin Oral Investig. ;17: – .
https://doi.org/10. /s00784- - -8.
42. Schmidt JC, Astasov-Frauenhoffer M, Waltimo T, Weiger R, Walter
C. Efficacy of various side-to-side toothbrushes and impact of
brushing parameters on noncontact biofilm removal in an inter -
dental space model. Clin Oral Investig. ;21: –77. https://
doi.org/10. /s00784- - -y .
43. Poklepovic T, Worthington HV, Johnson TM, Sambunjak D, Imai P ,
Clarkson JE, et al. Interdental brushing for the prevention and control of periodontal diseases and dental caries in adults. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. ;12:CD009857.
44. Hujoel PP , Cunha-Cruz J, Banting DW, Loesche WJ. Dental flossing
and interproximal caries: a systematic review. J Dent Res.
;85: – .
45. Imai P , Yu X, Macdonald D. Comparison of interdental brush to
dental floss for reduction of clinical parameters of periodontal disease: a systematic review. Can J Dent Hyg. ;
46. Slot DE, Dörfer CE, Van der Weijden G. The efficacy of interdental
brushes on plaque and parameters of periodontal inflammation: a
systematic review. Int J Dent Hyg. ;6: –64.
47. Abouassi T, Woelber JP , Holst K, Stampf S, Doerfer CE, Hellwig E,
et al. Clinical efficacy and patients’ acceptance of a rubber inter -
dental bristle. A randomized controlled trial. Clin Oral Investig.
;18: –80. https://doi.org/10. /s00784- - -3.
48. Graziani F, Palazzolo A, Gennai S, Karapetsa D, Giuca MR, Cei S,
et al. Interdental plaque reduction after use of different devices in
young subjects with intact papilla: a randomized clinical trial. Int J
Dent Hyg. ; https://doi.org/10. /idh. .
49. Stauff I, Derman S, Barbe AG, Hoefer KC, Bizhang M, Zimmer S,
et al. Efficacy and acceptance of a high-velocity microdroplet
device for interdental cleaning in gingivitis patients-A monitored, Preventive Measures and Minimally Invasive Restorative Procedures
16randomized controlled trial. Int J Dent Hyg. ; https://doi.
org/10. /idh. .
50. Black GV, McKay FS. Mottled teeth: an endemic developmental
imperfection of enamel of the teeth, heretofore unknown in the
literature of dentistry. Dent Cosmos. ;
51. Dean HT. Endemic fluorosis and its relation to dental caries. .
Nutr Burbank Los Angel Cty Calif. ;6: –45.
52. Featherstone JD. Prevention and reversal of dental caries: role of
low level fluoride. Community Dent Oral Epidemiol. ;27:
31–40.
53. Ogaard B. Effects of fluoride on caries development and progression in vivo. J Dent Res. ;69 Spec No: –9; discussion –3.
https://doi.org/10. /00220345900690S155.
54. Ogaard B, Rölla G, Dijkman T, Ruben J, Arends J. Effect of fluoride
mouth rinsing on caries lesion development in shark enamel: an in
situ caries model study. Scand J Dent Res. ;99: –7.
55. Lemke CW, Doherty JM, Arra MC. Controlled fluoridation: the dental effects of discontinuation in Antigo, Wisconsin. J Am Dent
Assoc. ; (80): –6.
56. Wang NJ, Riordan PJ. Fluoride supplements and caries in a nonfluoridated child population. Community Dent Oral Epidemiol.
;27: –23.
57. Leverett DH, Adair SM, Vaughan BW, Proskin HM, Moss ME. Randomized clinical trial of the effect of prenatal fluoride supple -
ments in preventing dental caries. Caries Res. ;31: –9.
https://doi.org/10. / .
58. Takahashi R, Ota E, Hoshi K, Naito T, Toyoshima Y, Yuasa H, et al.
Fluoride supplementation (with tablets, drops, lozenges or chew -
ing gum) in pregnant women for preventing dental caries in the
primary teeth of their children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
;10:CD011850. https://doi.org/10. / .CD011850.
pub2.
59. Marthaler TM. Changes in the prevalence of dental caries: how
much can be attributed to changes in diet? Caries Res. ;24(Suppl
1):3–15; discussion 16-25. https://doi.org/10. / .
60. Marthaler TM. Cariostatic efficacy of the combined use of fluo -
rides. J Dent Res. ;69 Spec No: – ; discussion -3.
https://doi.org/10. /00220345900690S152.
61. Benson PE, Parkin N, Dyer F, Millett DT, Furness S, Germain P . Fluo -
rides for the prevention of early tooth decay (demineralised white
lesions) during fixed brace treatment. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. ;12:CD003809.
62. Marinho VC, Higgins JP , Sheiham A, Logan S. Combinations of
topical fluoride (toothpastes, mouth rinses, gels, varnishes) versus
single topical fluoride for preventing dental caries in children and
adolescents. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. :CD002781.
63. Marinho VC, Higgins JP , Sheiham A, Logan S. Fluoride toothpastes for
preventing dental caries in children and adolescents. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. :CD002278. https://doi.org/10. / .
CD002278.
64. Marinho VCC, Chong LY, Worthington HV, Walsh T. Fluoride mouth
rinses for preventing dental caries in children and adolescents.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. ;7:CD002284. https://doi.
org/10. / .CD002284.pub2.
65. Walsh T, Worthington HV, Glenny AM, Appelbe P , Marinho VC, Shi
X. Fluoride toothpastes of different concentrations for preventing
dental caries in children and adolescents. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. :CD007868.
66. Arends J, Christoffersen MR. Nature and role of loosely bound fluo -
ride in dental caries. J Dent Res. ;69: –6.
67. Petzold M. The influence of different fluoride compounds and
treatment conditions on dental enamel: a descriptive in vitro
study of the CaF(2) precipitation and microstructure. Caries Res.
;35:45–51.
68. Wegehaupt FJ, Taubock TT, Sener B, Attin T. Retention of KOHsoluble fluoride formed after application of a SnCl(2)/AmF/NaF
containing mouth rinse under erosive conditions. Acta Odontol
Scand. ;70: –8. 69. Altenburger MJ, Schirrmeister JF, Lussi A, Klasser M, Hellwig E. In situ
fluoride retention and remineralization of incipient carious lesions
after the application of different concentrations of fluoride. Eur J Oral
Sci. ; :58–63. https://doi.org/10. /j. - . . .x.
70. Zero DT, Lippert F, Hara AT, Creeth JE, Newby EE, Butler A, et al. In situ
anticaries efficacy of dentifrices with different formulations - A
pooled analysis of results from three randomized clinical trials. J
Dent. ;77:93– . https://doi.org/10. /j.jdent. .07. .
71. Nelson DG, Coote GE, Shariati M, Featherstone JD. High resolution
fluoride profiles of artificial in vitro lesions treated with fluoride
dentifrices and mouth rinses during pH cycling conditions. Caries
Res. ;26: –62. https://doi.org/10. / .
72. ten Cate JM. Review on fluoride, with special emphasis on calcium
fluoride mechanisms in caries prevention. Eur J Oral Sci.
; : –5.
73. Featherstone JD. The science and practice of caries prevention. J
Am Dent Assoc . ; : –99.
74. Ogaard B, Rølla G, Ruben J, Arends J. Relative cariostatic effects of
KOH-soluble and KOH-insoluble fluoride in situ. J Dent Res.
;69: –7. https://doi.org/10. / .
75. Van Loveren C. The antimicrobial action of fluoride and its role in
caries inhibition. J Dent Res. ;69 Spec No: –81; discussion
-3. https://doi.org/10. /00220345900690S131.
76. Guha-Chowdhury N, Iwami Y, Yamada T. Effect of low levels of fluo -
ride on proton excretion and intracellular pH in glycolysing strep -
tococcal cells under strictly anaerobic conditions. Caries Res.
;31: –8. https://doi.org/10. / .
77. Wunder D, Bowen WH. Action of agents on glucosyltransferases
from Streptococcus mutans in solution and adsorbed to experimental pellicle. Arch Oral Biol. ;44: –14.
78. Camosci DA, Tinanoff N. Anti-bacterial determinants of stannous
fluoride. J Dent Res. ;63: –5.
79. Ellingsen JE, Svatun B, Rolla G. The effects of stannous and stannic
ions on the formation and acidogenicity of dental plaque in vivo.
Acta Odontol Scand. ;38: –22.
80. Svatun B, Attramadal A. The effect of stannous fluoride on human
plaque acidogenicity in situ (Stephan curve). Acta Odontol Scand.
;36: –8.
81. Lemire JA, Harrison JJ, Turner RJ. Antimicrobial activity of metals:
mechanisms, molecular targets and applications. Nat Rev Micro -
biol. ;11: –84.
82. Shani S, Friedman M, Steinberg D. The anticariogenic effect of
amine fluorides on Streptococcus sobrinus and glucosyltransfer -
ase in biofilms. Caries Res. ;34: –7. https://doi.
org/10. / .
83. Peng JJ, Botelho MG, Matinlinna JP . Silver compounds used in dentistry for caries management: a review. J Dent. ;40:
–41.
84. Ganss C, Hardt M, Lussi A, Cocks A-K, Klimek J, Schlueter N. Mechanism of action of tin-containing fluoride solutions as anti-erosive
agents in dentine - an in vitro tin-uptake, tissue loss and SEMstudy. Eur J Oral Sci. ; : –84.
85. Schlueter N, Hardt M, Lussi A, Engelmann F, Klimek J, Ganss C. Tincontaining fluoride solutions as anti-erosive agents in enamel: an
in vitro tin-uptake, tissue-loss, and scanning electron micrograph
study. Eur J Oral Sci. ; : –34.
86. Banoczy J, Nemes J. Effect of amine fluoride (AmF)/stannous fluo -
ride (SnF2) toothpaste and mouthwashes on dental plaque accumulation, gingivitis and root-surface caries. Proc Finn Dent Soc.
;87: –9.
87. Chu CH, Lo EC, Lin HC. Effectiveness of silver diamine fluoride and
sodium fluoride varnish in arresting dentin caries in Chinese preschool children. J Dent Res. ;81: –70.
88. Ogaard B, Alm AA, Larsson E, Adolfsson U. A prospective, randomized clinical study on the effects of an amine fluoride/stannous
fluoride toothpaste/mouth rinse on plaque, gingivitis and initial
caries lesion development in orthodontic patients. EurJ Orthod.
;28:8–12.
A. B. Borges et al.
16
89. Stookey GK, Mau MS, Isaacs RL, Gonzalez-Gierbolini C, Bartizek RD,
Biesbrock AR. The relative anticaries effectiveness of three fluoridecontaining dentifrices in Puerto Rico. Caries Res. ;38: –50.
90. Wellock WD, Maitland A, Brudevold F. Caries increments, tooth discoloration, and state of oral hygiene in children given single
annual applications of acid phosphate-fluoride and stannous fluo -
ride. Arch Oral Biol. ;10: –60.
91. Fejerskov O, Larsen MJ, Richards A, Baelum V. Dental tissue effects
of fluoride. Adv Dent Res. ;8:15–31. https://doi.org/10. /0
.
92. Heifetz SB, Horowitz HS. The amounts of fluoride in current fluo -
ride therapies: safety considerations for children. ASDC J Dent
Child. ;51: –69.
93. Whitford GM. The physiological and toxicological characteristics of
fluoride. J Dent Res. ;69 Spec No: –49; discussion –7.
https://doi.org/10. /00220345900690S108.
94. Ekstrand J, Koch G. Systemic fluoride absorption following fluoride
gel application. J Dent Res. ;59: . https://doi.org/10. /
.
95. Ekstrand J, Koch G, Petersson LG. Plasma fluoride concentration
and urinary fluoride excretion in children following application of
the fluoride-containing varnish Duraphat. Caries Res. ;14: –
9. https://doi.org/10. / .
96. Forsman B. Early supply of fluoride and enamel fluorosis. Scand J
Dent Res. ;85:22–30.
97. Rethman MP , Beltrán-Aguilar ED, Billings RJ, Hujoel PP , Katz BP , Milgrom P , et al. Nonfluoride caries-preventive agents: executive summary of evidence-based clinical recommendations. J Am Dent
Assoc . ; : –71.
98. Cocco F, Carta G, Cagetti MG, Strohmenger L, Lingström P , Campus
G. The caries preventive effect of 1-year use of low-dose xylitol
chewing gum. A randomized placebo-controlled clinical trial in
high-caries-risk adults. Clin Oral Investig. ;21: –40.
https://doi.org/10. /s00784- - -5.
99. Dodds MWJ. The oral health benefits of chewing gum. J Ir Dent
Assoc. ;58: –61.
. Hugo WB, Longworth AR. Some aspects of the mode of action of
chlorhexidine. J Pharm Pharmacol. ;16: –62.
. Rolla G, Loe H, Schiott CR. Retention of chlorhexidine in the human
oral cavity. Arch Oral Biol. ;16: –16.
. Emilson CG, Gisselsson H, Birkhed D. Recolonisation pattern of
mutans streptococci after suppression by three different modes of
chlorhexidine gel application. EurJ Oral Sci. ; : –5.
. Van Strydonck DA, Slot DE, van der Velden U, Van der Weijden
F. Effect of a chlorhexidine mouth rinse on plaque, gingival inflammation and staining in gingivitis patients: a systematic review. J
Clin Periodontol. ;39: –55.
. Flamee S, Gizani S, Caroni C, Papagiannoulis L, Twetman S. Effect of
a chlorhexidine/thymol and a fluoride varnish on caries develop -
ment in erupting permanent molars: a comparative study. Eur
Arch Paediatr Dent. ;16: –54. https://doi.org/10. /
s40368- - -x.
. Gisselsson H, Emilson C-G, Birkhed D, Björn A-L. Approximal caries
increment in two cohorts of schoolchildren after discontinuation
of a professional flossing program with chlorhexidine gel. Caries
Res. ;39: –6. https://doi.org/10. / .
. Lindquist B, Gisselsson H, Wennerholm K. Effect of chlorhexidine
gel on approximal caries increment in adolescents with high caries
risk using professional flossing compared to individual trays. Swed
Dent J. ;34:17–25.
. Okada EMP , Ribeiro LNS, Stuani MBS, Borsatto MC, Fidalgo TK d S,
de Paula-Silva FWG, et al. Effects of chlorhexidine varnish on
caries during orthodontic treatment: a systematic review and
metaanalysis. Braz Oral Res. ;30:e115. https://doi.
org/10. /18073107BOR- .vol30. .
. Slot DE, Vaandrager NC, van LC, Van Palenstein Helderman WH,
Van der Weijden GA. The effect of chlorhexidine varnish on root
caries: a systematic review. Caries Res. ;45: –73. . World Gastroenterology Organisation. WGO practice guideline –
probiotics and prebiotics; .
. Allaker RP , Douglas CW. Novel anti-microbial therapies for dental
plaque-related diseases. Int J Antimicrob Agents. ;33:8–13.
. Reid G, Younes JA, van der Mei HC, Gloor GB, Knight R, Busscher
HJ. Microbiota restoration: natural and supplemented recovery of
human microbial communities. NatRev Microbiol. ;9:
27–38.
. Ravn I, Dige I, Meyer RL, Nyvad B. Colonization of the oral cavity by
probiotic bacteria. Caries Res. ;46: –12.
. Yli-Knuuttila H, Snall J, Kari K, Meurman JH. Colonization of Lacto -
bacillus rhamnosus GG in the oral cavity. Oral MicrobiolImmunol.
;21: –31.
. Imfeld T, Birkhed D, Lingstrom P . Effect of urea in sugar-free chew -
ing gums on pH recovery in human dental plaque evaluated with
three different methods. Caries Res. ;29: –80.
. Kleinberg I. Effect of urea concentration on human plaque pH lev -
els in situ. Arch Oral Biol. ;12: –84.
. Van Wuyckhuyse BC, Perinpanayagam HE, Bevacqua D, Raubertas
RF, Billings RJ, Bowen WH, et al. Association of free arginine and
lysine concentrations in human parotid saliva with caries experience. J Dent Res. ;74: –90.
. Hu DY, Yin W, Li X, Feng Y, Zhang YP , Cummins D, et al. A clinical
investigation of the efficacy of a dentifrice containing 1.5% arginine and ppm fluoride, as sodium monofluorophosphate in a
calcium base, on primary root caries. J Clin Dent. ;24 Spec no
A:A23–A31.
. Souza ML, Cury JA, Tenuta LM, Zhang YP , Mateo LR, Cummins D,
et al. Comparing the efficacy of a dentifrice containing 1.5% arginine and ppm fluoride to a dentifrice containing ppm
fluoride alone in the management of primary root caries. J Dent.
;41(Suppl 2):S35–41.
. Srisilapanan P , Korwanich N, Yin W, Chuensuwonkul C, Mateo LR,
Zhang YP , et al. Comparison of the efficacy of a dentifrice containing 1.5% arginine and ppm fluoride to a dentifrice containing
ppm fluoride alone in the management of early coronal car -
ies as assessed using Quantitative Light-induced Fluorescence. J
Dent. ;41(Suppl 2):S29–34.
. Yin W, Hu DY, Li X, Fan X, Zhang YP , Pretty IA, et al. The anticaries
efficacy of a dentifrice containing 1.5% arginine and ppm
fluoride as sodium monofluorophosphate assessed using Quantitative Light-induced Fluorescence (QLF). J Dent. ;41(Suppl
2):S22–8.
. Guggenheim B, Schmid R, Aeschlimann JM, Berrocal R, Neeser
JR. Powdered milk micellar casein prevents oral colonization by
Streptococcus sobrinus and dental caries in rats: a basis for the
caries-protective effect of dairy products. Caries Res. ;33: –
54. https://doi.org/10. / .
. Reynolds EC, Storey E. A review on the effect of milk and dental
caries. Aust J Dairy Technol. ;34: –80.
. Reynolds EC, Riley PF, Storey E. Phosphoprotein inhibition of
hydroxyapatite dissolution. Calcif Tissue Int. ;34(Suppl
2):S52–6.
. Rugg-Gunn AJ, Roberts GJ, Wright WG. Effect of human milk on
plaque pH in situ and enamel dissolution in vitro compared with
bovine milk, lactose, and sucrose. Caries Res. ;19: –34.
https://doi.org/10. / .
. Schweigert BS, Ports E, Shaw JH, Zepplin M, Phillips PH. Dental car -
ies in the cotton rat. VIII. Further studies on the dietary effects of
carbohydrate, protein and fat on the incidence and extent of carious lesions. J Nutr. ;32: –12.
. Schweigert BS, Shaw JH, Zepplin M, Elvehjem CH. Dental caries in
the cotton rat. VI. The effect of the amount of protein, fat and car -
bohydrate in the diet on the incidence and extent of carious
lesions. J Nutr. ;31: –47.
. Vacca-Smith AM, Bowen WH. The effect of milk and kappa casein
on streptococcal glucosyltransferase. Caries Res. ;29: – .
https://doi.org/10. / .Preventive Measures and Minimally Invasive Restorative Procedures
16 . Vacca-Smith AM, Van Wuyckhuyse BC, Tabak LA, Bowen WH. The
effect of milk and casein proteins on the adherence of Streptococ -
cus mutans to saliva-coated hydroxyapatite. Arch Oral Biol.
;39: –9.
. Ametani A, Kaminogawa S, Shimizu M, Yamauchi K. Rapid screening of antigenically reactive fragments of alpha s1-casein using
HPLC and ELISA. J Biochem (Tokyo). ; : –5.
. Cochrane NJ, Saranathan S, Cai F, Cross KJ, Reynolds EC. Enamel
subsurface lesion remineralisation with casein phosphopeptide
stabilised solutions of calcium, phosphate and fluoride. Caries Res.
;42:88–97. https://doi.org/10. / .
. Schirrmeister JF, Seger RK, Altenburger MJ, Lussi A, Hellwig
E. Effects of various forms of calcium added to chewing gum on
initial enamel carious lesions in situ. Caries Res. ;41: –14.
https://doi.org/10. / .
. Lennon AM, Pfeffer M, Buchalla W, Becker K, Lennon S, Attin
T. Effect of a casein/calcium phosphate-containing tooth cream
and fluoride on enamel erosion in vitro. Caries Res. ;40: –7.
. Manton DJ, Cai F, Yuan Y, Walker GD, Cochrane NJ, Reynolds C, et al.
Effect of casein phosphopeptide-amorphous calcium phosphate
added to acidic beverages on enamel erosion in vitro. Aust Dent J.
;55: –9. https://doi.org/10. /j. - . . .x.
. Taha AA, Patel MP , Hill RG, Fleming PS. The effect of bioactive
glasses on enamel remineralization: a systematic review. J Dent.
;67:9–17. https://doi.org/10. /j.jdent. .09. .
. Haghgoo R, Ahmadvand M, Moshaverinia S. Remineralizing effect
of topical NovaMin and Nano-hydroxyapatite on caries-like lesions
in primary teeth. J Contemp Dent Pract. ;17: –9.
. Nagayoshi M, Kitamura C, Fukuizumi T, Nishihara T, Terashita
M. Antimicrobial effect of ozonated water on bacteria invading
dentinal tubules. J Endod. ;30: –81.
. Baysan A, Beighton D. Assessment of the ozone-mediated killing
of bacteria in infected dentine associated with non-cavitated
occlusal carious lesions. Caries Res. ;41: –41.
. Lynch E. Evidence-based caries reversal using ozone. J Esthet
Restor Dent. ;20: –22. https://doi. org/10. / j. . . .x.
. Azarpazhooh A, Limeback H. The application of ozone in dentistry:
a systematic review of literature. J Dent. ;36: –16. https://
doi.org/10. /j.jdent. .11. .
. Brazzelli M, McKenzie L, Fielding S, Fraser C, Clarkson J, Kilonzo M,
et al. Systematic review of the effectiveness and costeffectiveness
of HealOzone for the treatment of occlusal pit/fissure caries and
root caries. Health Technol Assess. ;10:iii-80.
. Sun J, Yang X, Xu QA, Bian Z, Chen Z, Fan M. Protective efficacy of
two new anti-caries DNA vaccines. Vaccine. ;27: –66.
. Soderling E, Isokangas P , Pienihakkinen K, Tenovuo J, Alanen
P . Influence of maternal xylitol consumption on mother-child
transmission of mutans streptococci: 6-year follow-up. Caries Res.
;35: –7.
. Santin GC, Oliveira DS, Galo R, Borsatto MC, Corona SA. Antimicro -
bial photodynamic therapy and dental plaque: a systematic review
of the literature. Scientific World J. ; : .
. Santos A. Evidence-based control of plaque and gingivitis. J Clin
Periodontol. ;30(Suppl 5):13–6.
. Roberson TM, Heymann HO, Ritter AV, Pereira PN. Class I, II and VI
direct composite and other tooth-colored restoration. In: Rober -
son TM, Heymann HO, Swift Jr EJ, editors. Sturdevants Art Sci.
Oper. Dent. Mosby: Elsevier; . p. –99.
. Feigal RJ, Donly KJ. The use of pit and fissure sealants. Pediatr
Dent. ;28: –50; .
. Fejerskov O, Kidd EA. Dental caries: the disease and its clinical
management, vol. 4. Munksgaard: Wiley-Blackwell; .
. Simonsen RJ. Pit and fissure sealant: review of the literature.
Pediatr Dent. ;24: – .
. Bekes K. Pit and fissure sealants: Springer International Publishing;
. . Kidd E, Joyston-Bechal S. Essentials of dental caries. Oxford:
New York; .
. Rethman J. Trends in preventive care: caries risk assessment and
indications for sealants. J Am Dent Assoc. ; :8S–12S.
. Axelsson P . Preventive materials, methods and programs. Berlin:
Quintessence Publishing; .
. Kotsanos N, Darling AI. Influence of posteruptive age of enamel on
its susceptibility to artificial caries. Caries Res. ;25: –50.
https://doi.org/10. / .
. Simonsen RJ. Pit and fissure sealant: Then, now, and next steps. J
Public Health Dent. ;64:17–22.
. Wright JT, Tampi MP , Graham L, Estrich C, Crall JJ, Fontana M, et al.
Sealants for preventing and arresting pit-and-fissure occlusal caries
in primary and permanent molars. Pediatr Dent. ;38: – .
. Griffin SO, Oong E, Kohn W, Vidakovic B, Gooch BF, CDC Dental
Sealant Systematic Review Work Group, et al. The effectiveness of
sealants in managing caries lesions. J Dent Res. ;87: – .
https://doi.org/10. / .
. Handelman SL. Therapeutic use of sealants for incipient or early
carious lesions in children and young adults. Proc Finn Dent Soc
Suom Hammaslaakariseuran Toim. ;87: –75.
. Handelman SL, Leverett DH, Espeland MA, Curzon JA. Clinical
radiographic evaluation of sealed carious and sound tooth sur -
faces. J Am Dent Assoc . ; : –4.
. Going RE, Loesche WJ, Grainger DA, Syed SA. The viability of micro -
organisms in carious lesions five years after covering with a fissure
sealant. J Am Dent Assoc . ;97: –62.
. Handelman SL, Washburn F, Wopperer P . Two-year report of sealant effect on bacteria in dental caries. J Am Dent Assoc.
; (93): –70.
. Oong EM, Griffin SO, Kohn WG, Gooch BF, Caufield PW. The effect of
dental sealants on bacteria levels in caries lesions: a review of the
evidence. J Am Dent Assoc . ; : –8; quiz -8.
. Wright JT, Crall JJ, Fontana M, Gillette EJ, Nový BB, Dhar V, et al.
Evidence-based clinical practice guideline for the use of pitand-
fissure sealants: a report of the American Dental Association and
the American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry. J Am Dent Assoc
. ; : – .e12. https://doi.org/10. /j.
adaj. .06. .
. Bakhshandeh A, Qvist V, Ekstrand KR. Sealing occlusal caries
lesions in adults referred for restorative treatment: 2-3 years of
followup. Clin Oral Investig. ;16: –9. https://doi.
org/10. /s00784- - -4.
. Borges BC, Campos GB, da Silveira AD, de Lima KC, Pinheiro IV. Efficacy of a pit and fissure sealant in arresting dentin noncavitated
caries: a 1-year follow-up, randomized, single-blind, controlled
clinical trial. AmJ Dent. ;23: –6.
. Borges BCD, de Souza Borges J, Braz R, Montes MAJR, de Assunção Pinheiro IV. Arrest of non-cavitated dentinal occlusal caries by sealing pits
and fissures: a 36-month, randomised controlled clinical trial. Int Dent
J. ;62: –5. https://doi.org/10. /j. -595X. . .x.
. da Silveira ADS, Borges BCD, de Almeida Varela H, de Lima KC, Pinheiro IV de A. Progression of non-cavitated lesions in dentin
through a nonsurgical approach: a preliminary 12-month clinical
observation. Eur J Dent. ;6:34–42.
. Borges BCD, De Souza Bezerra Araújo RF, Dantas RF, De Araújo LA,
De Assunção Pinheiro IV. Efficacy of a non-drilling approach to
manage non-cavitated dentin occlusal caries in primary molars: a
12-month randomized controlled clinical trial. Int J Paediatr Dent.
;22:44–51. https://doi.org/10. /j. -263X. . .x.
. Davis RD. Patient evaluation and problem-oriented treatment
planning. In: Schwartz RS, Summitt JB, Robbins JW, editors. Fundam. Oper. Dent. Contemp. Approach. Illinois: Quintessence Pub -
lishing; . p. 27–50.
. Hevinga MA, Opdam NJM, Frencken JE, Bronkhorst EM, Truin GJ. Can
caries fissures be sealed as adequately as sound fissures? J Dent Res.
;87: –8. https://doi.org/10. / .
A. B. Borges et al.
16
. Houpt M, Fuks A, Shapira J, Chosack A, Eidelman E. Autopolymer -
ized versus light-polymerized fissure sealant. J Am Dent Assoc
. ; :55–6.
. Shapira J, Fuks A, Chosack A, Houpt M, Eidelman E. Comparative
clinical study of autopolymerized and light-polymerized fissure
sealants: five-year results. Pediatr Dent. ;12: –9.
. Lobo MM, Pecharki GD, Tengan C, da Silva DD, da Tagliaferro EPS,
Napimoga MH. Fluoride-releasing capacity and cariostatic effect
provided by sealants. J Oral Sci. ;47:35–41.
. Yildiz E, Dörter C, Efes B, Koray F. A comparative study of two fissure
sealants: a 2-year clinical follow-up. J Oral Rehabil. ;31: –84.
https://doi.org/10. /j. - . . .x.
. Lygidakis NA, Oulis KI. A comparison of Fluroshield with Delton fissure sealant: four year results. Pediatr Dent. ;21: –31.
. Mascarenhas AK, Nazar H, Al-Mutawaa S, Soparkar P . Effectiveness
of primer and bond in sealant retention and caries prevention.
Pediatr Dent. ;30:25–8.
. Feigal RJ, Musherure P , Gillespie B, Levy-Polack M, Quelhas I,
Hebling J. Improved sealant retention with bonding agents: a clinical study of two-bottle and single-bottle systems. J Dent Res.
;79: –6. https://doi.org/10. / .
. Hebling J, Feigal RJ. Use of one-bottle adhesive as an intermediate
bonding layer to reduce sealant microleakage on salivacontaminated enamel. Am J Dent. ;13: –91.
. Yazici AR, Bayazit EO, Kutuk ZB, Ozgunaltay G, Ergin E, Berber
A. Clinical follow-up of a fissure sealant placed using different
adhesive protocols: a 24-month Split-mouth study. Oper Dent.
;43: –71. https://doi.org/10. /17- -C.
. Fumes AC, Longo DL, De Rossi A, Fidalgo TK d S, de Paula E, Silva
FWG, Borsatto MC, et al. Microleakage of sealants after phosphoric
acid, Er: YAG laser and air abrasion enamel conditioning: systematic review and meta-analysis. J Clin Pediatr Dent. ;41: –72.
https://doi.org/10. / - -41.3. .
. Gillcrist JA, Vaughan MP , Plumlee GN, Wade G. Clinical sealant
retention following two different tooth-cleaning techniques. J
Public Health Dent. ;58: –6.
. Autio-Gold JT. Clinical evaluation of a medium-filled flowable
restorative material as a pit and fissure sealant. Oper Dent.
;27: –9.
. Corona SA, Borsatto MC, Garcia L, Ramos RP , Palma-Dibb RG. Randomized, controlled trial comparing the retention of a flowable
restorative system with a conventional resin sealant: one-year follow up. Int J Paediatr Dent. ;15:44–50. https://doi.org/10. /
j. -263X. . .x.
. Dukic W, Glavina D. Clinical evaluation of three fissure sealants: 24
month follow-up. Eur Arch Paediatr Dent. ;8: –6.
. Papacchini F, Goracci C, Sadek FT, Monticelli F, Garcia-Godoy F, Fer -
rari M. Microtensile bond strength to ground enamel by glassionomers, resin-modified glass-ionomers, and resin composites
used as pit and fissure sealants. J Dent. ;33: –67. https://
doi.org/10. /j.jdent. .11. .
. Van Meerbeek B, Yoshihara K, Yoshida Y, Mine A, De Munck J, Van
Landuyt KL. State of the art of self-etch adhesives. Dent Mater.
;27:17–28. https://doi.org/10. /j.dental. .10. .
. Burbridge L, Nugent Z, Deery C. A randomized controlled trial of
the effectiveness of a one-step conditioning agent in fissure sealant placement: 12 month results. Eur Arch Paediatr Dent.
;8:49–54.
. dos Santos KT, Sundfeld RH, Garbin CAS, de Alexandre RS, Sunde -
feld MLMM, Ceolim BN. Length of resin tags in pit-and-fissure sealants: all-in-one self-etching adhesive vs phosphoric acid etching.
Compend Contin Educ Dent Jamesburg NJ . ;29: –92.
. Poulsen S, Beiruti N, Sadat N. A comparison of retention and the
effect on caries of fissure sealing with a glass-ionomer and a resinbased sealant. Community Dent Oral Epidemiol. ;29: – .
. Mickenautsch S, Yengopal V. Caries-preventive effect of highviscosity glass ionomer and resin-based fissure sealants on perma-nent teeth: a systematic review of clinical trials. PloS One.
;11:e0146512. https://doi.org/10. /journal.pone. .
. Forss H, Saarni UM, Seppä L. Comparison of glass-ionomer and
resin-based fissure sealants: a 2-year clinical trial. Community Dent
Oral Epidemiol. ;22:21–4.
. Torppa-Saarinen E, Seppä L. Short-term retention of glassionomer
fissure sealants. Proc Finn Dent Soc Suom Hammaslaakariseuran
Toim. ;86:83–8.
. Antonson SA, Antonson DE, Brener S, Crutchfield J, Larumbe J,
Michaud C, et al. Twenty-four month clinical evaluation of fissure
sealants on partially erupted permanent first molars: glass iono -
mer versus resin-based sealant. J Am Dent Assoc .
; : –22.
. Pardi V, Pereira AC, Ambrosano GMB, Meneghim Mde C. Clinical
evaluation of three different materials used as pit and fissure sealant: 24-months results. J Clin Pediatr Dent. ;29: –7.
. Dewji HR, Drummond JL, Fadavi S, Punwani I. Bond strength of BisGMA and glass ionomer pit and fissure sealants using cyclic
fatigue. Eur J Oral Sci. ; : –9.
. Smales RJ, Gao W, Ho FT. In vitro evaluation of sealing pits and fissures with newer glass-ionomer cements developed for the ART
technique. J Clin Pediatr Dent. ;21: –3.
. Simonsen RJ. Retention and effectiveness of dental sealant after
15 years. J Am Dent Assoc . ; :34–42.
. Wendt LK, Koch G. Fissure sealant in permanent first molars after
10 years. Swed Dent J. ;12: –5.
. Wendt LK, Koch G, Birkhed D. On the retention and effectiveness of
fissure sealant in permanent molars after 15–20 years: a cohort
study. Community Dent Oral Epidemiol. ;29: –7.
. Ahovuo-Saloranta A, Forss H, Walsh T, Nordblad A, Mäkelä M,
Worthington HV. Pit and fissure sealants for preventing dental
decay in permanent teeth. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
;7:CD001830. https://doi.org/10. / .CD001830.
pub5.
. Simonsen RJ, Stallard RE. Sealant-restorations utilizing a diluted
filled composite resin: one year results. Quintessence Int Dent Dig.
;8:77–84.
. Simonsen RJ. The preventive resin restoration: a minimally invasive, nonmetallic restoration. Compend Newtown Pa. ;8: –
30, .
. Qin M, Liu H. Clinical evaluation of a flowable resin composite and
flowable compomer for preventive resin restorations. Oper Dent.
;30: –7.
. Yamazaki H, Litman A, Margolis HC. Effect of fluoride on artificial
caries lesion progression and repair in human enamel: regulation
of mineral deposition and dissolution under in vivo-like conditions. Arch Oral Biol. ;52: –20. https://doi.org/10. /j.
archoralbio. .08. .
. Young DA, Kutsch VK, Whitehouse J. A clinician’s guide to CAMBRA:
a simple approach. Compend Contin Educ Dent Jamesburg NJ
;30:92–94, 96, 98, passim.
. Phark J-H, Duarte S, Meyer-Lueckel H, Paris S. Caries infiltration
with resins: a novel treatment option for interproximal caries.
Compend Contin Educ Dent. ;30 Spec No 3:13–7.
. Paris S, Meyer-Lueckel H. Inhibition of caries progression by resin
infiltration in situ. Caries Res. ;44:47–54. https://doi.
org/10. / .
. Meyer-Lueckel H, Paris S. Progression of artificial enamel caries
lesions after infiltration with experimental light curing resins. Car -
ies Res. ;42: –24. https://doi.org/10. / .
. Anusavice KJ. Present and future approaches for the control of car -
ies. J Dent Educ. ;69: –54.
. Akpata ES, Farid MR, al-Saif K, Roberts EA. Cavitation at radiolucent
areas on proximal surfaces of posterior teeth. Caries Res.
;30: –6. https://doi.org/10. / .
. Pitts NB, Rimmer PA. An in vivo comparison of radiographic and
directly assessed clinical caries status of posterior approximal sur -Preventive Measures and Minimally Invasive Restorative Procedures
16faces in primary and permanent teeth. Caries Res. ;26: –52.
https://doi.org/10. / .
. Hintze H, Wenzel A, Danielsen B, Nyvad B. Reliability of visual
examination, fibre-optic transillumination, and bite-wing radiography, and reproducibility of direct visual examination following
tooth separation for the identification of cavitated carious lesions
in contacting approximal surfaces. Caries Res. ;32: –9.
https://doi.org/10. / .
. Kielbassa AM, Paris S, Lussi A, Meyer-Lueckel H. Evaluation of cavitations in proximal caries lesions at various magnification levels
in vitro. J Dent. ;34: –22. https://doi.org/10. /j.
jdent. .04. .
. Sansare K, Raghav M, Sontakke S, Karjodkar F, Wenzel A. Clinical
cavitation and radiographic lesion depth in proximal surfaces in
an Indian population. Acta Odontol Scand. ;72: –8.
https://doi.org/10. / . . .
. Seddon RP . The detection of cavitation in carious approximal sur -
faces in vivo by tooth separation, impression and scanning elec -
tron microscopy. J Dent. ;17: –20.
. Chatzimarkou S, Koletsi D, Kavvadia K. The effect of resin infiltration on proximal caries lesions in primary and permanent teeth. A
systematic review and meta-analysis of clinical trials. J Dent.
;77:8–17. https://doi.org/10. /j.jdent. .08. .
. Dorri M, Dunne SM, Walsh T, Schwendicke F. Micro-invasive inter -
ventions for managing proximal dental decay in primary and per -
manent teeth. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. :CD010431.
https://doi.org/10. / .CD010431.pub2. . Peters MC, Hopkins AR, Yu Q. Resin infiltration: an effective adjunct
strategy for managing high caries risk-A within-person randomized controlled clinical trial. J Dent. ;79:24–30. https://doi.
org/10. /j.jdent. .09. .
. Brodbelt RH, O’Brien WJ, Fan PL, Frazer-Dib JG, Yu R. Translucency
of human dental enamel. J Dent Res. ;60: –53. https://doi.
org/10. / .
. Houwink B. The index of refraction of dental enamel apatite. Br
Dent J. ; : –5. https://doi.org/10. /sj.bdj. .
. Kielbassa AM, Hinkelbein W, Hellwig E, Meyer-Lückel H. Radiationrelated damage to dentition. Lancet Oncol. ;7: –35. https://
doi.org/10. /S1470- (06) -1.
. Paris S, Meyer-Lueckel H. Masking of labial enamel white spot
lesions by resin infiltration--a clinical report. Quintessence Int Berl
Ger . ;40: –8.
. Rocha Gomes Torres C, Borges AB, Torres LMS, Gomes IS, de
Oliveira RS. Effect of caries infiltration technique and fluoride
therapy on the colour masking of white spot lesions. J Dent.
;39: –7. https://doi.org/10. /j.jdent. .12. .
. Gençer MDG, Kirzioğ lu Z. A comparison of the effectiveness of
resin infiltration and microabrasion treatments applied to developmental enamel defects in color masking. Dent Mater J.
;38: – . https://doi.org/10. /dmj. - .
. Di Giovanni T, Eliades T, Papageorgiou SN. Interventions for dental
fluorosis: a systematic review. J Esthet Restor Dent. ;30: –8.
https://doi.org/10. /jerd. .
A. B. Borges et al.
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG
C. R. G. Torres (ed.), Modern Operative Dentistry, Textbooks in Contemporary Dentistry,
https://doi.org/10. / -3- - -0_17667 17
Aesthetic Veneers: What Are
They and How to Handle Them?
Maria Filomena Rocha Lima Huhtala, Clovis Pagani,
Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres, Pekka Kalevi Vallittu,
and Jukka Pekka Matinlinna
17.1 Introduction –
17.2 Basic Principles for Veneer Preparation –
17.3 Sequence of Tooth Preparation –
17.4 Direct Veneer Restoration –
17.5 Indirect Veneers –
17.5.1 Dental Ceramics –
17.5.2 Impression/Scanning of the Tooth Preparation –
17.5.3 Provisional Restoration –
17.5.4 Extraoral Phase for Indirect Restoration –
17.5.5 Try-in Procedure –
17.5.6 Pretreatment of Veneers –
17.5.7 Cementation of Indirect Veneers –
17.5.8 Finishing and Polishing –
17.6 Changes of the Apparent Tooth Dimension by Optical
Illusions –
17.6.1 Flat Area –
17.6.2 Embrasures –
References –
17Learning Objectives
The learning objectives of this chapter are related to the following topics:
5Indications and contraindications for veneers
5Clinical steps for tooth preparation
5Direct resin composite veneers
5Mock-ups and impressions for indirect veneers
5Ceramics used as an indirect veneering material
5Pretreatment, silanization of veneers, and luting
5Changes of the apparent tooth dimension by optical
illusions
17.1 Introduction
Facial aesthetics plays an important role on an individual’s
well-being, self-esteem, emotional condition, social success,
and even chances to get a job. The smile is primordial in the
search for an optimum dentofacial aesthetic standard. An
aesthetic smile depends on the harmony of shapes and shades
of anterior teeth. In addition, the alignment of these teeth
and their harmonic positioning on the arch are the basics to
obtain this aesthetic balance . However, teeth are not
always distributed on a harmonic way on the dental arch.
This lack of harmony may have different origins, such as
genetic or developmental tooth anomalies, structural changes
caused by caries, and chromatic changes or injuries in the
dental structure due to traumas.
When these alterations take place on the labial surface of
anterior teeth, or even on the buccal surface of premolars,
one treatment option can be the total covering of the surface
using a restoration called a laminate, veneer, or facet. This
restoration is used to cover an unsightly area by bonding to
the facial surface of the prepared tooth .
By and large, veneers can be made either by a direct technique, using resin composite, or by an indirect technique
using composite or dental ceramic. In dentistry, composites
are indicated for direct and indirect restorations or as a luting
cement, due to its lightcuring of self-curing mechanism,
while ceramics are used to prepare indirect restorations,
because require a laboratorial firing step for its manufactur -
ing. Resin composite materials consist of five key components: (a) organic monomer (resinous) matrix, (b) Sibased
glass fillers (for strength and X-ray opacity), (c) a silane coupling agent (for adhesion promotion), (d) pigments (for aesthetics), and (e) activators, inhibitors, and stabilizers (for
setting reactions) [5, 6].
Veneering doesn’t aim only aesthetic recovery but also
preservation of tooth structure, limiting the periodontal and
pulp involvement that may result from more invasive procedures, such as full crown preparations. However, the clinical
success of a dental restorations will depend on several clinical steps, such as the tooth preparation, bonding procedures
and cementation (for the indirect ones). It is noteworthy that
adhesion takes places (at least) in two levels: on the one hand,
between prepared tooth tissue and, on the other hand,
between resin composite cement and dental indirect restor -ative materials (of which the laminate is prepared). Adhesion
can be of chemical or retentive nature (macromechanical or
micromechanical retention). Chemical adhesion takes place
when the two dissimilar materials are close in a molecular
level and contact to form chemical bonds [7, 8]. Dentin
bonding is understood to be based predominantly on micromechanical retention and is beyond the scope of this chapter
[9, 10].
At the chairside, the preparation for laminate veneers
starts with structural reduction of facial surfaces and must
generally be made only on enamel, even though in several
situations, they also involve the superficial layer of dentin.
However, those preparations must avoid unnecessary
removal of dentin, not only due to pulpal damage but also
because the bonding to etched enamel is always better than
to dentin. Aesthetic results with this technique are very good,
due to the reproduction of the original shade and translucency [11, 12].
The concept of coverage of the labial surface of anterior
teeth due to aesthetic reasons started back in the 1930s,
when Dr. Charles Pincus introduced the technique of
ceramic veneers, to attend aesthetic demands of Hollywood
artists . It is well-known that the American cinema
played an important role on culture and people behavior
worldwide, and this demand had the merit to call the attention of dentists, who until then had the aim to restore mainly
function and occlusion of teeth than to restore the aesthetics. However, those labial surface coverages with a very thin
layer of ceramic bonded to teeth were very expensive, and
only a few people had access to it. On an attempt to reduce
cost, clinicians start to cover the labial surfaces of teeth with
direct composite resin veneers. However, results were limited due to the aesthetic quality of restorative materials available at that time and the little retention that adhesive systems
provided. After the 1980s, the development led to new bonding techniques, including the so-called adhesive resin composite cements [14, 15]. The further development on the
composite sicience become possible to obtain direct restorations that are very similar to tooth structure with esthetic
results close to those obtained with the ceramics, leading to
a even broader use of the technique of labial coverage of
teeth [2 , 16, 17].
Direct aesthetic veneers can be a very practical intervention and the tooth preparation is usually limited to the labial
surface of the teeth. However, for indirect veneers, the preparation generally goes further than this surface and additional
steps are necessary, such as impression of the prepared area,
temporary restorations, and laboratorial procedures [1, 18].
The tooth preparation for direct venners is generally more
conservative and, in some specific situations, the restorations
can be done even without the need of any preparation, e.g.,
lingually positioned teeth in relation to the adjacent ones.
Direct veneer restoration is therefore a faster technique and
can be finished in a single appointment.
Among the indications for veneers are the teeth with discoloration, such as those affected by amelogenesis imperfecta,
physiological aging, trauma, fluorosis, or stains caused by
M. F. R. L. Huhtala et al.
17
tetracycline intake. However, it is vital to note that dental
bleaching should always be the first treatment choice in those
cases, because it is much more conservative and does not
require any cutting of tooth structure. Therefore, only teeth
that do not show a satisfactory response to bleaching should
receive veneers. Other indications include teeth with extensive caries lesions or fractures, presence of multiple restorations with unsatisfactory shade, rotated or inclined teeth,
necessity of reduction and closing of diastemas, short teeth
which require increasing of its length, misshapen peg-shaped
maxillary lateral incisor, microdontia and Hutchinson’s incisors, aesthetic transformation (canines into lateral incisors
and lateral into central incisors), alignment of teeth on the
dental arch, and, finally, anterior or premolar teeth with
extensive non-carious lesions. The contraindications for
veneers are patients with bruxism, parafunctional oral habit,
edge-to-edge occlusion of the anterior teeth, anterior teeth
with large destruction of the crown, when there is not enough
remaining tooth structure to support the veneer, high car -
ies disease activity associated with bad oral hygiene, periodontal disease, and teeth with excessive labial inclination. In
this last situation, a preparation would likely result in exposure of the pulp.
Veneers allow very good aesthetical results because the
entire coverage of the tooth labial surface produces harmony
of shade and shape of the teeth. Veneers also allow the adjustment of individual aesthetic parameters using characterization colored materials. The large variety of resin
composites and resin cements, with different shades and
translucency, allow to achieve adequate aesthetic standards
in relation to the adjacent teeth [1, 11, 16, 19, 20].
Indirect ceramic veneers have greater durability and
color stability and do not suffer abrasion or discoloration.
Conversely, for direct resin composite veneers, this color stability depends on factors inherent not only to the composite
used but also to some patient’s habits. Frequent consumption of food and/or beverages with dyes, as well as smoking
habit diminishes the veneer durability. Another disadvantage of the direct veneers is the need of the clinician’s skills to
create the aesthetic characteristics, such as shape, texture,
contour, and shade. Thus, direct procedure takes more time
and is less indicated when all anterior teeth need to be covered by a veneer. There is also the possibility of incorporation of air bubbles during the composite layer application,
therefore creating areas even more susceptible to staining
and degradation.
In the case of highly discolored teeth, it is hard to obtain
adequate color match and natural translucency with direct
veneers, because the slight depth of tooth preparation does
not allow enough composite thickness to mask the dark
background. Opaque masking agents can be used to hide the
dark background under the restoration. However, the thickness of the composite layer applied over it will hardly be
enough to allow recovering the natural translucence of the
tooth.
A complete cosmetic change of all anterior teeth can be
accomplished using veneers. Not only the color but the shape, size, position within the arch, and surface characteristics can
be modified. Before that, a treatment simulation can be per -
formed with a diagnostic wax-up in a plaster model, quickly
previewing the effects of the laminates, allowing the analysis
of the intended treatment by the patient. Another option is to
perform a digital smile design, using a picture of the patient’s
teeth or a previous intraoral scanning. In the latter case, a 3D
printing can be performed, obtaining a resin model which is
shown to the patient.
Using the wax-up or 3D model of the proposed treatment, an intraoral mock-up can be produced. For that a trayless impression of the wax-up or resin model is performed
using a putty silicone impression material. The labial side of
the matrix is trimmed in the interproximal regions to allow
the excess material overflow. A bis-acryl composite is applied
inside the matrix and seated. After curing, an intraoral mockup will allow the patient previewing of the final treatment
outcome. That can also be used as a guide during the tooth
preparation [21, 22].
> It is necessary for the clinician to identify when direct
resin composite veneers are the option and when
indirect ceramic veneers are preferable. This should be
based on a comprehensive evaluation of the patient,
bearing in mind indications and contraindications and
the anticipated aesthetic outcome.
17.2 Basic Principles for Veneer Preparation
The preparation for direct veneers is very conservative as
only a thin layer of the labial tooth surface is removed. The
depth of the preparation will depend on the area of the tooth,
intensity of chromatic alteration, shape, and position. In relation to the area of the tooth, because the preparation should
be preferably performed only on enamel, it should be kept in
mind the enamel thickness on each part of the crown, thus
avoiding reaching dentin. It is known that the thickness of
the enamel in the cervical region on the upper central incisors ranges from 0.5 to 0.7 mm, on the medium third from
1.1 to 1.4 mm, and from 1.2 to 1.8 mm on the incisal third.
The thickness of the enamel on upper and lower anterior
teeth can be observed in . Figs. 6.11a –i and 6.12a –i.
Therefore, the rotary instrument used for the preparation
should have a diameter compatible with the enamel thickness
of each area. In relation to the intensity of chromatic alterations, for mild ones, a 0.4-mm-deep preparation on enamel is
done on the cervical third and 0.5 mm on the medium and
incisal thirds. For teeth with more severe discoloration, a
0.5-mm-deep preparation on enamel could be performed on
the cervical region and 0.7–1 mm on the medium and incisal
thirds. Concerning the tooth’s shape, small or pegshaped
teeth will require less removal of tooth structure to cover the
surface with restorative material, aiming to obtain the necessary material thickness and good aesthetic results. In the
same way, lingually inclined teeth may require minimum or
no preparation of the labial surface.Aesthetic Veneers: What Are They and How to Handle Them?
17In order to control the preparation depth and guarantee
the ideal amount of tooth structure removal, two preparation guides (or reduction guides) can be produced with a
putty viscosity silicone impression material. This technique
is shown in . Fig. 17.1a–l . For taking the trayless impression, a putty silicone base and catalyst are mixed uniformly
before being placed by hand on the labial and lingual sur -faces of the tooth that will be prepared and neighbour ones
(. Fig. 17.1b ). After setting, the first impression is gently
removed, and a new impression is taken. One of impressions will be cut perpendicularly to the long axis of the
tooth, at the center of the crown, and on the mesiodistal
direction ( . Fig. 17.1c–i ). The second one will be cut parallel to the long axis of the tooth, at the center of the crown on
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 17.1 Preparation guides made with silicone impression
material. a Two portions of heavy putty silicone must be used; b after
mixing with the catalyst, it is applied over the teeth before preparation;
c–f to see the amount of tooth structure removal on the mesiodistal
direction, two parallel longitudinal cuts are performed on the first
guide, on the area that corresponds to half of the crown of the
adjacent teeth, followed by one perpendicular to the long axis of the tooth to be prepared; g , h testing of the preparation guide. i evaluating
the tooth structure removal after preparation; j to evaluate the amount
of tooth structure removal on the cervicoincisal direction, the second
guide must be cut at the region corresponding to the center of labial
surface, parallel to the long axis of the prepared tooth; k testing of the
guide; l evaluation of the structure removal after the preparation
M. F. R. L. Huhtala et al.
17
the cervicoincisal direction ( . Fig. 17.1j–l ). Those preparation guides are placed over the tooth during the preparation
procedure, to analyze if an adequate removal of the tooth
structure is being performed.
Tip
In order to control the preparation depth and guarantee
the ideal amount of tooth structure removal, preparation
guides can be produced with a putty viscosity silicone
impression material.The outline form of the veneer tooth preparation is deter -
mined by the surrounding structures, i.e., gingiva and neighbor teeth. Regarding the cervical cavosurface margin of the
preparation, the height of the lip line during the maximum
smile is important to determine its limit. In other words, it is
important to know if the cervical tooth region will be visible
or not during the smile. To obtain a completely hidden toothrestoration interface, the margin of the preparation has to be
placed inside the gingival crevice. However, any defect inter -
facial defect of the restoration may promote biofilm deposition in this area, leading to gingival inflammation, even
though it might be mild. Thus, if the tooth-restoration inter - .Fig. 17.1 (continued)
gh
ij
klAesthetic Veneers: What Are They and How to Handle Them?
17face is prepared close to or slightly before the gingival mar -
gin, it may contribute to the health of the surrounding soft
tissues. However, this position of the margin can only be possible on patients that do not show gingival margin during
maximum smile and present little or no color alteration of
the tooth, or on the patients that do not mind having a less
favorable aesthetics at this area, aiming to protect the gingival health. However, most people simply do not accept a visible margin, even if it cannot be noticed during conversation
on the social life situations. On these cases and on the situations where the lip line shows the marginal gingiva, the cervical cavosurface angle of the preparation should be placed
0.1–0.3 mm inside the gingival sulcus.
In relation to the proximal margins of the preparation,
on teeth with slight color alterations, they should be placed
before the proximal contacts. However, on teeth with
intense discoloration, the preparation must go further as
half the contact area, in such a way that the dark background would not be visible after the restoration. When
there are diastemas, the preparation should extend to the
interproximal surfaces, allowing the correct restoration of
the proximal contour. Another aspect regarding proximal
limits of the preparation is the sight’s angle (or viewing per -
spective), when preparing the gingival embrasure areas,
below the interproximal contact. When teeth are observed from a perpendicular direction (sight’s angle of 90 degrees)
in relation to the labial surface – a position that dentists
generally use to evaluate the final preparation – there is a
poor vision of the gingival embrasure between contiguous
teeth. This viewing perspective is called “static area of visibility” and does not represent the actual viewing perspective that the patient could be seen by other people in daily
life. This may lead to insufficient preparation of some areas
of the facial surface of the crown. On the other hand, when
the tooth is observed from a lateral perspective, in a sight’s
angle smaller than 90 degrees, the gingival embrasure areas
become more noticeable. If this is not taken into consider -
ation, the aesthetic outcome of the veneer restoration may
not be pleasant, due to the remaining of the discolored
areas of the tooth uncovered by the veneer. The dentist
viewing perspective during preparation needs to change
constantly, to evaluate if the dark areas are not remaining
unprepared and exposed, when the patient is observed
from different angles. This active viewing perspective is
called “dynamic area of visibility” and is necessary during
the preparation ( . Fig. 17.2a–d ) [16, 23].
In relation to outline in the incisal edge, there are three
possibilities. The type I (or window preparation) has a feathered edge, while the type II has an incisal reduction and a
butt joint; and the type III (or wrap preparation) has an inciab
cd
.Fig. 17.2 Lateral view perspective of the embrasure area changing the sight’s angle. a –c Preparation without considering the dynamic area of
visibility. b, d preparation considering dynamic area of visibility
M. F. R. L. Huhtala et al.
17
sal reduction associated with a palatal chamfer . For
direct composite veneer restoration on teeth with thick incisal edges, the feathered-edge preparation should be chosen.
However, on cases of patients with very thin incisal edges
that are susceptible to fractures, or when teeth need to be
elongated, as well for all indirect veneers, an overlapped incisal edge preparation with butt joint or a palatal chamfer
should be performed. These preparations provide proper
thickness of the ceramic at the margin to prevent restoration
fracture, restrict the angle fractures, and enhance the aesthetics of the laminate ( . Fig. 17.5 ).
As in most clinical cases, the direct veneer preparation is
restricted to enamel, and it usually does not lead to postoperative complications, from the pulpal or functional point of
view. From the periodontal point of view, a correct cervical
anatomy and the perfect fitting of the veneer to the preparation, at this region, avoid alterations of the periodontal tissues . In some cases, veneers have shown to be a better
choice than full crowns, in particular for patients with deep
overbite, where there is usually not enough space on the lingual tooth surface; or for the mandibular anterior teeth,
where it is easier to preserve the pulp integrity than on the
full crown preparation.17.3 Sequence of Tooth Preparation
When a homogeneous reduction of the labial surface is
desired, the first step for the veneer preparation is to deter -
mine the maximum preparation depth, by making facial
depth cuts with known dimensions ( . Fig. 17.3a–o ). The
preparation is started with the peripheral depth cut following
the gingival contour, in a U shape ( . Fig. 17.3b–d ), with a
round diamond point, with a diameter compatible with the
size of the tooth and depth of aimed preparation, following
the contour of the gingival margin [11, 16]. By knowing the
diameter of the diamond point, it is possible to standardize
the depth of the preparation, by penetrating half of its diameter into the tooth surface. For instance, the No. diamond point has a 0.8 mm of diameter, while the No. one
has a 1.0 mm of diameter, and the No. one has a 1.2 mm
diameter. As mentioned above, for teeth with small color
alteration, a 0.4 mm reduction should be planned on the cer -
vical region, while for the ones with severe discoloration, this
reduction should be 0.5 mm. For that, half of the diameter of
the No. and No. burs, respectively, can be used as
references . During the preparation of the peripheral
depth cut on the cervical area, it should be performed first
ab
cd
.Fig. 17.3 Direct veneer tooth preparation. a Initial aspect;
b–e preparation of peripheral depth cut. f –i preparation of the
cervicoincisal depth cut; j reduction of the mesial half of the labial
surface; k analysis of the tooth structure reduction; l reduction of the distal half and finishing of the preparation margin using a gingival
protector instrument; m analysis of the preparation on the mesiodistal
direction. n analysis of the preparation on the cervicoincisal direction;
o finished preparation with supragingival marginAesthetic Veneers: What Are They and How to Handle Them?
17
.Fig. 17.3 (continued)
gh
ij
kl
ef
M. F. R. L. Huhtala et al.
17
before the gingival margin, even if later the gingival cavosur -
face margin will be placed inside the gingival sulcus. In doing
so, subsequent corrections of the preparation can be per -
formed without invasion of the biologic width.
Next, the peripheral depth cut should be extended along the
mesial and distal embrasures until the incisal edge ( . Fig. 17.3e ).
This proximal extension of the preparation should be guided by
aesthetics, reaching areas where the tooth/restoration interface
could not be seen, taking into consideration the dynamic area
of visibility ( . Fig. 17.2a–d ). The more compromised in terms
of color alteration is the tooth structure, the larger the extension
of the preparation toward the proximal surfaces should be –
which can even involve half of the proximal contacts. In this
case, when performing the proximal reduction, the adjacent
teeth should be protected with a steel strip.
Next, a cervicoincisal depth cut should be prepared in the
center of the labial surface with a No. tapered diamond
point with a rounded tip, for teeth with slight discoloration,
or with a No. point for darker teeth. However, to obtain
a homogeneous reduction of the entire labial surface, the
cervical-incisal depth cut should be prepared in three planes,
following the convexity of the labial tooth surface
(. Fig. 17.3f–i ). This way, the reduction will be performed
evenly over the tooth surface, allowing the application of a
homogeneous thickness of the restorative material over the
prepared area.The following step is to connect the peripheral depth cut
to the cervicoincisal one, first on one-half of the tooth sur -
face, following the mesiodistal contour of the surface
(. Fig. 17.3j, k ). Then, the reduction should be performed
on the other side ( . Fig. 17.3l ). The depth and homogeneity
of the reduction can be evaluated with the preparation
guides ( . Fig. 17.3m, n ). Then, the improvement of the
preparation margins can be performed, placing the gingival
margin 0.2 mm inside the gingival sulcus, if there is an aesthetic issue. Such procedure can be done using a No.
tapered diamond point, for a chamfer finish line . The
gingival tissue can be protected from the rotary instrument
using a metallic gingival retraction/protection instrument
(. Fig. 17.3l ).
Another option to control the depth of the facial reduction is to use depth-limiting diamond points, available in
two different diameters. The No. three-wheeled diamond depth cutter creates mesiodistal depth of cuts
0.3 mm deep, while the No. performs depth cuts of
0.4 mm deep ( . Fig. 17.4a ). Between the wheels covered by
diamonds, there are inactive areas, which will touch the
intact tooth structure and control the tooth removal. Even
when the depthlimiting diamond points are applied, the
previous peripheral depth of cut can be performed first, to
facilitate the preparation ( . Fig. 17.4b ). Then, the depthlimiting diamond point is to be used, followed by the .Fig. 17.3 (continued)
m
onAesthetic Veneers: What Are They and How to Handle Them?
17
No. tapered point to connect to the peripheral depth
of cut (. Fig. 17.4c–f ).
For indirect veneers, overlapped incisal edge preparation
needs to be performed to avoid fractures of the restoration.
That can be done by a butt joint ( . Fig. 17.5e, f ) or a wrap
preparation ( . Fig. 17.5i, k ). In the first case, just an incisal
reduction is performed, while on the latter, it is followed by
an additional palatal chamfer. There is a discussion in the literature about which would be the best design for the incisal
edge of ceramic veneer preparations . However, the palatal chamfer effectively counteracts shear stress in the incisal area, due to inter-incisor contacts during protrusive movement of the mandible, allowing a safe incisal disocclusion
guide. This design also provides a definite seat during cementation .
Before preparing the palatal chamfer, an incisal reduction
of about 1 mm must be done. For that, three incisal depth
cuts are performed by placing a No. diamond point per -
pendicular to the long axis of the tooth ( . Fig. 17.5c ). They
are then connected, as shown in . Fig. 17.5d–f . Then, a
0.5–1-mmlong palatal chamfer is prepared. The palatal
depth of cuts is done with the No. diamond point posi- .Fig. 17.4 Preparation using depth-limiting diamond point.
a Three-wheeled diamond depth cutter points with different diameters; b peripheral depth cut; c , d mesiodistal depth cuts prepared with No. point; e connection of all depth cuts to create a
homogeneous enamel reduction; f finished preparation with
intrasulcular gingival margin
ab
cd
ef
M. F. R. L. Huhtala et al.
17
.Fig. 17.5 Overlapped incisal edge preparation with a palatal chamfer. a , b Preparation restricted to the labial surface; c incisal depths of cuts;
d–f incisal reduction; g , h palatal depth of cuts. i –l palatal chamfer concluded
b a
d c
f e
h gAesthetic Veneers: What Are They and How to Handle Them?
17tioned parallel to the long axis of the tooth, which are then
connected to one another, including the proximal surfaces
(. Figs. 17.5g–l and 17.7c ).
Tip
It is important to familiarize oneself with the detailed
steps in tooth preparation. One needs to have a clear
anatomical picture of teeth in mind during the
preparation. Selection of appropriate burs or points is
vital for the success of tooth preparation, because it is a
matter of tenths of millimeters.
17.4 Direct Veneer Restoration
To restore the labial surfaces of teeth after veneer preparations, a resin composite material with excellent polishing
characteristics should be selected. Those recommended
include microhybrid, nanohybrid, and nanoparticle composites, to recover the dental aesthetics. Before performing the
final veneer, a restoration mock-up can be done, using the
same composite, shades, and thickness layers of the final restoration. The materials should be applied over the teeth without any previous adhesive treatment. After curing, the restoration mock-up is evaluated, and if it is not the one
desired, it can be easily removed by pulling out the veneer by
its margin, with the aid of an exploratory probe. Then a new
composite mock-up can be placed and evaluated. This will
also allow the dentist to evaluate whether the depth of the
preparation performed, when associated to characterization
material and composites, is enough to hide any altered background color the tooth may present. If necessary, a deeper
preparation can still be done.
Isolation of the operating field can be performed with
gingival retraction cord and cotton rolls, or with a rubber
dam associated with clamps to expose the margin of the
preparation. In those cases, the No. or clamps present the ideal shape, allowing adequate displacement of the
gingival tissue. If the preparation is restricted to enamel, after
acid etching (with phosphoric acid gel) and rinsing, the sur -
face can be dried with air stream, resulting in a opaque
chalky-white appearance. In this case, if the dentist is using
an adhesive system with separate primer and bonding bottles, the primer does not need to be applied. However, if there
are areas of exposed dentin on the prepared surface, after
rinsing the acid gel, the surface should be blot dried. This will
leave the surface visibly moist (glossy), followed by an application of a primer/bond adhesive system or a single bottle
adhesive system. Due to the abundant enamel availability on
this kind of preparation, the acid etching technique should .Fig. 17.5 (continued)
j i
l k
M. F. R. L. Huhtala et al.
17
be preferred in relation to the self-etching approach, resulting in higher bond strength values.
In the case of heavily discolored teeth or when there are
several shades on tooth surface after preparation, due to several previous restorations, a thin layer of opaque light-curing
viscous liquid characterization material, also known as color
modifier, tint, or masking agent, can be used to create a
whiter homogeneous surface color. Either white or VITATM
shade opaque characterization materials can be used. After
that, a thin layer of dentin shade composite should be used, to mask the intense opacity of the tint, followed by a final
layer of more translucent enamel shade composite, to reproduce enamel characteristics ( . Fig. 17.6a–o ). If the adjacent
tooth has a labial surface rich on macro and micro textures,
they should be reproduced over the restoration according to
what was described in 7 Chap. 14. When the tooth that will
receive the veneer has Class III or IV restorations that require
replacement, this should be made on a previous dental
appointment. This would simplify the veneer preparation
procedure.
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 17.6 Direct veneer restoration. a Tooth-shade evaluation;
b, c application of gingival retraction cord size No. ; d protection of
neighbor teeth with a Mylar strip and acid etching. e , f application of
the adhesive system; g light-curing; h , i application of opaque light-curing color modifier shade A1 (Kolor + Plus – Kerr); j application
of dentin shade composite layer (Z350, 3 M/Espe); k , l application of
enamel opacity composite. m enamel shade composite applied;
n, o final resultAesthetic Veneers: What Are They and How to Handle Them?
17
gh
ij
kl
mn
.Fig. 17.6 (continued)
M. F. R. L. Huhtala et al.
17
When the teeth present only chromatic alteration and the
labial shape is intact, a custom-made matrix can be created
before the tooth preparation, copying the surface shape and
texture. It can be used later to restore the exact original anatomy, thus saving clinical time . That matrix can be created in two different ways. In the first, an impression can be
taken, and a plaster model obtained on a previous dental
visit. Over the model a matrix can be produced using a ther -
moplastic material, such as low-density polyethylene sheet,
and a vacuum thermoforming machine. It follows the same
technique applied to produce dental bleaching trays. Another
possibility is to create the matrix immediately before the
preparation, using self-curing acrylic resin. In this case, after
application of a retraction cord into the gingival sulcus, a
thin film of liquid petroleum jelly is applied over the tooth
surface, followed by the placement of acrylic resin, picking
up powder particles on wet brush, and applying over the sur -
face. It must be applied over the labial surface of the treated
tooth, incisal edge, and part of the labial surface of the adjacent teeth. A handle made of acrylic is created over the exter -
nal surface of the acrylic matrix to simplify its placement.
After curing, the margins of the matrix need to be finished
with an abrasive mounted stone. The acrylic matrix should
be tested in the position before and after the operating field
isolation.
After the preparation, adhesive procedures are per -
formed, and the dentin shade composite applied. Before
light-curing of each resin composite layer, the matrix should
be placed in the position to evaluate if there still is space left
to apply the enamel shade composite. The matrix must be
isolated internally with liquid petroleum jelly. The enamel
shade composite is then placed inside the matrix and taken
in the position. The excess of material is removed, and the
restoration is light-cured for only 10 s. The matrix is
removed, and the finishing of the margins should be per -
formed with a scalpel blade, followed by the final light-cur -
ing. The labial surface of the restoration will have the same
shape of the natural tooth, and just a polishing will be gener -
ally necessary.17.5 Indirect Veneers
The indirect veneers can be performed with composites or
ceramics. As the restoration is prepared outside the mouth,
an impression or scanning of the preparation is necessary, in
order to create the restoration over a cast or milling it in
CAD/CAM machine. Before luting, a pretreatment of the
restoration is required, to improve its bonding to the tooth
structure. Those procedures are presented in the following
sentences.
17.5.1 Dental Ceramics
Ceramic is defined as something made from nonmetallic
material by firing at high temperature. The dental ceramics
are widely used biomaterials in prosthetic dentistry, because
of their attractive and well-studied clinical properties. They
have basically three indications in dentistry: (a) ceramicmetal crowns (porcelain fused to metal, PFM) and fixed par -
tial dentures; (b) all-ceramic restorations consisting of
crowns, inlays, onlays, indirect laminates (veneers), and
short-span anterior bridges; and (c) ceramic denture teeth.
Ceramics for dentistry are aesthetically pleasing by their
color, shade, and luster and are chemically stable.
A dental ceramic is best described as a complex multiphase system. It comprises a dispersed crystalline phase
which is surrounded by a glassy phase, actually a continuous
amorphous phase. The crystalline phase is mainly responsible for its physical properties, while the glassy phase gives its
aesthetic characteristics. Traditional feldspar-based ceramics
are also referred to as “porcelain. ” They are silicon (Si) based
and made of aluminosilicate minerals, such as quartz (SiO2),
feldspar (KAlSi3O8–NaAlSi3O8–CaAl2Si2O8), and kaolin
(Al2Si2O5(OH)4). Typically, dental porcelain is composed of
ca. 73–75% feldspar and ca. 22–25% quartz. To increase the
workability of the unfired porcelain, and to impart X-ray
contrast, some kaolin needs to be added. Pigments are
important to provide the required aesthetic shade and hue
. It is noteworthy that there is a crucial difference between
a regular ceramic (such as your coffee mug) and a dental por -
celain, which is related to the proportion of quartz, feldspar,
and silica (SiO2) contained in the ceramic matrix. Dental
porcelains (feldspathic-, leucite-, or fluorapatite-based) can
meet the highest aesthetic standards but have limitations:
they are brittle, with low fracture toughness and flexural
strength. This is a consequence of their very high glass content. Due to the limited thickness in indirect laminates and
the material’s properties, the clinical success of porcelain
veneers relies on reinforcement of the restorations by adhesive cementation .
The new glass ceramics have improved mechanical properties due to a higher proportion of the crystalline phase that
strengthen the material . As they possess higher fracture
strength and increased toughness, when compared to the
o
.Fig. 17.6 (continued)Aesthetic Veneers: What Are They and How to Handle Them?
17porcelain, they also have a wider application field. To the
group of glass ceramics belong the leucitebased and lithium
disilicate-based (LiSi2O5) ceramics, as well the new zirconiareinforced glass ceramic . The stronger materials available are the so-called high crystalline ceramics, mainly the
Y-TZP zirconiabased ones. However, most are highly
opaque and have low aesthetics, not being generally recommended for indirect veneers.
> Identifying various dental ceramics and their correct
indications will guarantee success to the dental
treatment. One should never underestimate the
significance of etching, not only of the tooth structure
but also of the ceramic. In cementation it is vital to
carefully adhere to the luting protocol.
17.5.2 Impression/Scanning of the Tooth
Preparation
The first step to obtain a proper impression is to perform the
gingival displacement. For that, a retraction cord is gently
placed inside the sulcus using a retraction cord packer. The
cord must be placed beneath the finishing line to avoid inter -
ferences during the impression, for capturing the details of
the gingival cavosurface margin. After that a low viscosity
elastomeric impression material (addition silicones and polyethers) is applied over the preparation, followed by the putty
material previously loaded inside an impression tray. The
retraction cord can be left in place during impressioning,
being generally removed in the mold. The gingival displacement can also be performed with the doublecord technique.
A thin retraction cord ( ) embedded in hemostatic solution is placed inside the gingival sulcus, and over it a thicker
one (00). The one step putty-wash silicone impression technique can be used. For that, immediately before the impression, the thicker cord is removed, and the low viscosity
material injected around the tooth preparation. The putty
impression material is mixed, applied inside metal trays and
immediately placed intraorally, letting the materials to polymerize simultaneously. A high-accuracy type IV dental stone is
poured into the mold. After its hardening, a replica is
obtained, which is positive reproduction of the soft tissues
and teeth. The cast is then sent to the dental technician to
prepare the laminate.
Another option is to perform a 3D digital impression,
scanning the tooth preparation using an optical intraoral
scanner. The information is digitalized, and a virtual 3D
model is created. A dedicated software is used for restoration
design process. The milling unit is used to mill the laminated
from ceramic or composite blocks.
17.5.3 Provisional Restoration
Some indirect restorations are performed chairside, such as
when a CAD/CAM system is available in the dental office. However, when the final restoration will be prepared by an
external laboratory, an interim restoration will be required.
When a single tooth will receive the provisional restoration, a plastic clear crown form ( . Fig. 8.13a ) can be used as a
matrix to restore the external anatomy of the tooth. The crown
form is placed on the tooth and the excess is trimmed. A direct
composite or a bis-acryl composite is applied inside the form,
which is taken in position. The excess is removed with a sable
brush or disposable applicator moistened with bonding agent.
After light-curing the matrix is removed, while the composite
stays in place. The margins are checked, and any excess can be
removed with a scalpel blade. Generally, the temporary restoration remains in place without any adhesive application,
solely through mechanical retention. The occlusion can be
adjusted with diamond finishing points. Any adjustments of
the interim restoration must not change the previous tooth
preparation. If the restoration dislodges, a temporary aesthetic
cement can be used (e.g., Bifix Temp, Voco; ClearTemp LC,
Ultradent). Another option is to etch a 1 mm diameter area on
the center of the preparation and cement the temporary restoration with a flowable composite .
When the original labial surface has appropriate shape,
and the veneer indication is only related to color alteration, a
matrix can be prepared with a putty silicone material inside
the mouth, previously the tooth preparation. A trayless
impression is performed, by applying the material covering
the labial and lingual surface of the anterior and some posterior teeth. Interproximal slits are cut on the buccal areas of the
matrix, which serve as vents through which the excess of the
provisional material will flow. An appropriate amount of the
bis-acryl composite is applied in the matrix, which is taken in
place until the initial cure of the material. The marginal fit is
analyzed, and finishing is performed. If the restoration is dislodged, it can be cemented as described above. When the
teeth shape will be changed by the veneers, a diagnostic waxup can be used to prepare the silicone matrix, which will
guide the production of the temporary veneers. The patient
should always be informed about the low retention and fragile
characteristics of the provisional restoration .
17.5.4 Extraoral Phase for Indirect
Restoration
In modern dental laboratories, the ceramic veneers may be
prepared using various approaches. The first and oldest
method is the sintering, which consists in application of an
aqueous slurry of ceramic particles on a refractory cast. A
sintering is performed over the cast at a temperature above
the softening points of the ceramic, whereby the matrix par -
ticles melt and the particles coalesce . Different layers of
ceramics, of different shades and opacities, are incrementally
applied, creating a polychromatic and natural look for the
final restoration. This method is used for feldspar and leucitereinforced veneers [21, 28].
A second option is the direct casting or hot-pressing. In
this case a waxing of the restoration is performed that is
M. F. R. L. Huhtala et al.
17
embedded in a refractory material. The lost wax technique is
applied, creating a refractory mold. In this case a ceramic
ingot is softened by heating and can be pressed or injected
into the mold, creating monolithic and monochromatic laminate. It can be used for lithium disilicate glass ceramic and
leucite-containing glass ceramic [21, 28].
The last method is based on the use of a CAD/CAM system. In this case an intraoral scanning or a scanning of a
stone model is performed, creating a virtual cast of the teeth.
The restoration design is done in the dedicated software, and
the milling is performed on a ceramic bloc, also creating
monolithic and monochromatic laminates [21, 28]. The milling can take place chairside or in the dental laboratory. This
method can be applied for ceramic blocs made of feldspar
and leucite or lithium disilicate-reinforced glass ceramics,
zirconia-reinforced glass ceramic, and hybrid dental ceramic
(ceramic network structure reinforced by a polymer network). Recently high-translucent zirconia has been proposed
for veneer restoration, although not providing yet the best
aesthetic outcome in relation to the other options .
Feldspar and leucite are milled from fully sintered blocs. The
restoration is polished or glazed in a small ceramic furnace.
Lithium disilicate glass ceramic, zirconia-reinforced glass
ceramic, and Y-TZP monolithic zirconia are milled from
oversized dimension from partly sintered blocs (precrystallized state). That initial lower strength allows the milling process. They are then fully sintered in a furnace, shrinking to
the required size, reaching its final translucency and maximum flexural strength. The restoration with hybrid ceramic,
like a composite block, is just milled and polished.
A monolithic restoration means that the final shape of the
restoration was obtained with a single material, which lacks
the polychromatic characteristic of a natural tooth, such as
the translucent incisal edge, opalescence, counteropalescence, and defined dentin mamelons . Those are
obtained when the hot-pressing and CAD/CAM methods
are employed. In this case the restoration can be character -
ized either externally, through glazing (staining), or alternatively cut-back and covered with layers of compatible sintered
ceramic .
17.5.5 Try-in Procedure
Each laminated must be tested into the preparation for fitting.
For that the provisional restoration is removed with an instrument. The preparation is cleaned with pumice and a prophylaxis rubber cup or brush, followed by washing and drying.
Any residues of temporary cement must be removed
(. Fig. 17.7c ). The internal area of the laminate is moistened
with water or glycerin and the restoration is placed. Inadequate
seating can be diagnosed by using a low viscosity silicone
material (Fit Test C & B, Voco). The internal adjustments can
be performed with small round fine diamond points.
To verify the shade of the restoration, water-soluble try-in
pastes that simulate the optical characteristics of the resin
cements can be used to select its color. Due to the small thickness and high translucency of the laminates, an incor -
rect selection of the cement shade can jeopardize the aesthetic outcome of the whole treatment. The try-in paste is
applied in the internal side of the restoration, which is placed
in position like will be performed during the final luting. The
test should start with an untinted and transparent try-in
paste. If the first shade is not adequate, the laminate and the
preparation are washed, and a new shade is tested, until
defining the correct one for that clinical case. Different
options of cements/try-in pastes shades are available, e.g.,
transparent, opaque white, bleach, yellow, brown, or following the Vita Classical shade guide. After that, the dentist must
thoroughly remove the try-in paste with water spray and dry
the restoration with waterand oil-free air. No occlusal evaluation should be performed before the cementation, to prevent unforeseen fracture of the fragile laminate .
17.5.6 Pretreatment of Veneers
Obviously, tooth tissues do not possess any natural affinity to
dental ceramics. This explains why pretreatment of tooth tissues and a ceramic restoration, in association with adhesive
system and a resin cement, are vital. Veneers as well other
dental indirect restorations require a surface pretreatment
for durable adhesion. This step is also called surface conditioning. It is defined as one or a series of steps, including (but
not limited to) cleansing, removal of debris, and modification of internal restoration surface, over which a silane coupling agent and adhesive will be applied, chemically bonding
to the resinous cement [3, 8, 31].
The surface treatment will prevent the formation of (or
remove) any weak surface layer on the substrate (debris,
grease, oil, contaminants). That will increase the surface free
energy and maximize the molecular interaction at the inter -
facial layer, between the laminate and resin cement, optimizing the adhesion at the interface. It can also create special
surface micro-features for micromechanical retention [7,
31]. Sufficient adhesive strength can be provided and maintain a long service time.
Porcelains and the new glass dental ceramics are pretreated by acid etching using hydrofluoric acid, which is a
very corrosive and toxic agent. Great caution and care must
be exercised when using it. Acid etching is considered the
most effective procedure in enhancing adhesion between
feldspar-based and glass ceramic laminates and resin cement.
By etching the ceramic surface, a partial dissolution of the
ceramic glass content occurs, creating a porous topography
that produces micromechanical retention between the laminate surface and resin cement ( . Fig. 17.7g, h ) . Acid
etching is normally performed using ca. 5–10% gel-like
hydrofluoric acid. Nowadays, the use of that acid etching is
unanimously recommended . For lithium disilicate and
zirconiareinforced glass ceramic veneers, a 5% hydrofluoric
acid is applied for 20 seconds. For leucite-reinforced glass
ceramic and feldspar ceramic restorations, the recommended
etching time is around 60 seconds.Aesthetic Veneers: What Are They and How to Handle Them?
17A mandatory application of a silane coupling agent is
needed to chemically bond the inorganic material (silica) of
ceramic structure to the resinous monomers in the adhesive
system and resin cement. The silane also allows the resin to
better wet the ceramic surface that may easily penetrate into
the porous structure [32, 33]. After silane solution dries for around 1 minute, the adhesive and resin cement can be
applied for final cementation of laminate ( . Fig. 17.7i ) [7, 8,
31, 34, 35]. Some manufactures recommend the application
of the adhesive over the silanized surface, which is not
light-cured before the cementation ( . Fig. 17.7j ). Others
recommend the application of the cement directly over the
ab
cd
ef
.Fig. 17.7 Indirect veneer restoration. a Color alteration on
nonvitalized central incisors; b internal and external dental bleaching
procedure did not significantly improve the aesthetics of the smile. The
initial uneven gingival zenith position of the right central incisor in
relation to the left incisor was corrected by a gingival surgery;
c preparations with incisal reduction and palatal chamfer; d placement
of a retraction cord into the crevice, protection of the neighbor teeth with a clear strip and acid etching; e application of the adhesive
system; f glass ceramic veneers etching of the internal surface with
hydrofluoric acid gel; h etched surface after washing and drying,
showing a frosty appearance due to the surface roughness created by
the dissolution of the glassy phase. i application of the silane coupling
agent; j application of the adhesive system; k luting of the veneers with
a light-curing resin cement; l final result
M. F. R. L. Huhtala et al.
17
silanized surface. Each manufacturer instruction must be
followed.
For indirect composite veneers, the internal surface of the
restoration must receive sandblasting (air abrasion). This
procedure increases the surface roughness to provide micromechanical retention. After that the surface is cleaned with
spray of air/water or ultrasonic bath. Some manufacturers
recommend the application of silane to promote bonding to
the inorganic matrix of the composite, exposed by the sandblasting procedure.Tip
Understanding the various steps and rationale in ceramic
veneer pretreatment is important. The try-in must be
performed before the acid etching. After etching the
internal must not be contaminated. If any contamination
occurs, the surface needs to be cleansed with acetone or
ethanol or re-etched with phosphoric acid, followed by
rinsing with water. .Fig. 17.7 (continued)
gh
ij
klAesthetic Veneers: What Are They and How to Handle Them?
.5.7 Cementation of Indirect Veneers
The rubber dam isolation can be performed, in association
with clamps for anterior teeth, although it is not always
feasible or possible . Another possibility is to apply a
lip and check retractor to create a soft tissue displacement.
The neighbor teeth surfaces are protected with a clear
mylar strip or a polytetrafluorethylene (PTFE) tape
(. Fig. 17.7d ). The tooth preparation surface is etched
with phosphoric acid gel for 15 second ( . Fig. 17.7d ). If no
dentin was exposed during the preparation, the surface is
completely air dried, leaving a frosty-white appearance.
However, if any dentin was prepared, the blot drying technique is used, and the excess of moisture is removed with
a cotton pellet, leaving a visible moistened surface. The
selected adhesive system is applied, and the excess is
removed with air stream ( . Fig. 17.7e ). No light-curing is
performed.
The internal area of the restoration is etched with hydrofluoric acid, and the silane coupling agent is applied, as previously described. According to the manufacturer’s instruction,
the adhesive system can be applied over the silanized surface
(. Fig. 17.7j ). The excess is removed with an air stream, but
no light-curing is performed.
The resin cement of choice is the light-curing one, which
allows a better color stability over time. The veneers are
held with a placement instrument that features a flexible
adhesive tip (OptraStick, Ivoclar Vivadent), charged with
the resin cement on the internal surface and then positioned with continuous digital pressure in the tooth. Excess
of cement can be removed with a brush. The proximal area
can be cleaned with dental floss. A light-curing is per -
formed for 10 seconds, to ensure the positioning and fitting
of the laminate. After the cementation of the last restoration, a layer of glycerin gel is placed over the interphase
between tooth and restoration, to eliminate the oxygen
inhibition layer of the cement, and the light-curing is per -
formed again for 60 second on every side of the tooth. Any
additional excess can be removed with a No.11 scalpel
blade. In the interproximal area, a serrated separating strip
can be employed ( . Fig. 15.18f ) .
If more than one restoration will be cemented, the clinician must try in the restoration that will be luted next,
because even small excess of cement from the previous
laminate will prevent the seating of the subsequent. The
laminates of both central incisors are simultaneously
cemented, i.e. both laminates are place in position first an
then light-curing is done simultaneously, following by the
cementation on those teeth more distally located. If any
error occurs, they will be located far from the midline and
will be less visible .17.5.8 Finishing and Polishing
After cementation, the dynamic occlusion contacts must be
evaluated with a thin articulating paper. The anterior disocclusion guide must occur without excessive stress concentration in just one tooth. The canine disocclusion guide
must also be evaluated. Any adjustment can be performed
with a fine-grit diamond points or 30-flutted carbide bur.
The finished areas must be properly polished using abrasive
rubbers, disks, or polishing pastes with felt disks, using progressively finer abrasives ( . Figs. 4.29a –d and 4.31b ). The
whole margin must be evaluated with an exploratory probe.
Any excess must be removed using a very thin grit needle
shaped diamond point. Any excess in the interproximal
area must be detected with dental floss and removed with
abrasive strips. The margins of the restorations should be
reevaluated in the next dental appointment to detect any
remaining discrepancy .
17.6 Changes of the Apparent Tooth
Dimension by Optical Illusions
In some patients, changes in the clinical width or length of a
certain teeth are desired for aesthetic improvement. For
that, orthodontic treatment or gingival surgery is usually
required. However, some patients might not desire to receive
such an invasive or prolonged treatment. For those cases,
some superficial morphology changes can be performed on
the labial surface, making the tooth look larger or shorter,
thereby creating an optical (and aesthetic) illusion. The art
of creating illusions consists of changing perceptions, causing an object to appear different from what it actually is.
This is performed by changing the so-called tooth face,
which is a flat area on the labial surface . In the same
way, the size of incisal and cervical embrasures determines
the youth aspect of teeth and can be shaped when making
the restoration.
17.6.1 Flat Area
On the mesiodistal direction, the flat area or tooth face is
placed between the mesial and distal transitional line angles
(. Fig. 17.8a, c ). The transitional line angles on the labial
surface of neighboring teeth form the labial embrasures.
Even though it may not be a perfectly flat surface, it is
responsible for reflecting the visible light and for the appar -
ent dimensions of the anterior teeth . Light that reaches
the facial surface between the transitional line angles is
reflected to the observer, while the mesial and distal areas to
M. F. R. L. Huhtala et al.
17
those line angles deflect the light, making them appear
darker and less observable and seen. Reallocating the position of the transitional line angles, the area that reflects light
can be increased or reduced . The more the transitional
line angles approach the center of the labial surface, the nar -
rower this flat area becomes. On the other hand, the more
displaced toward the proximal surfaces these transitional
line angles are, the wider is the flat area. The increase of the
flat area width, on the mesiodistal direction, gives a widening illusion to the tooth. Given that, teeth with the same
actual anatomical width can have different apparent dimension if they have different width of the flat areas . That
concept is described as the “law of the face, ” which
implies making dissimilar teeth appear similar by turning
the apparent faces equal.
. Figure 17.9a–d shows resin composite replicas obtained
from the natural tooth shown in . Fig. 17.8a–c , where the
width of the flat area was reduced to create a narrowing illu-sion. The changes that were planned are seen in . Fig. 17.9a
and performed in . Fig. 17.9b, c . . Figure 17.9d shows the
result after polishing. When performing a direct veneer restoration, the flat area can be adapted according to the individual needs, either during the application of composite
increments or during the finishing procedures. To reduce the
width of the flat area and create a narrowing illusion, the dentist should enlarge the mesial and distal embrasures, using a
small diameter abrasive bur disk
On the cervicoincisal direction, the labial surface of anterior teeth generally has three inclinations. The flat area is
then defined by those inclinations, located at the medium
third of the crown, above the high of curvature, and below
the transition line between the middle and incisal third
(. Fig. 17.8a, b ). The larger the flat area on the cervicoincisal
direction, the larger will be the apparent height of the tooth.
. Figure 17.10a–d shows composite replicas obtained from
the natural tooth, originally shown in . Fig. 17.8a–c . The
ab
c
.Fig. 17.8 Location of the flat area (tooth face) on the labial surface
of the central incisor. a On the mesiodistal direction, it is located
between the mesiolabial and distolabial transitional line angles. On the
cervicoincisal direction, it is located between the high of curvature and the transition line between the middle and incisal third of the crown;
b delimitation of the flat area from a proximal view; c delimitation of
the flat area from an incisal view
Aesthetic Veneers: What Are They and How to Handle Them?
17changes were planned in . Fig. 17.10a and performed in
. Fig. 17.10b, c through the cervical and incisal reduction of
the flat central area, using an abrasive disk. Finally, in
. Fig. 17.10d is shown the result after polishing.
Based on the above presented explanations, to increase
the apparent height of short teeth restored with veneers, the
flat area should be enlarged in the cervicoincisal direction
and reduced in the mesiodistal direction. Conversely, to
reduce the apparent length of long teeth, the flat area should
be reduced on the cervicoincisal direction and increased on
the mesiodistal direction.
Tip
To increase the apparent height of short teeth restored
with veneers, the flat area should be enlarged in the
cervicoincisal direction and reduced in the mesiodistal
direction.Tip
To reduce the apparent length of long teeth, the flat area
should be reduced on the cervicoincisal direction and
increased on the mesiodistal direction.
17.6.2 Embrasures
The size and distribution of the embrasures directly influence
smile aesthetic according to what was described in 7 Chap. 1
(. Fig. 1.11a –d). Therefore, when making veneer restorations on several teeth, dentists can change the embrasures to
make the smile look younger. Changes in embrasure shape
can be performed at the moment of the composite application or during the finishing of the restoration, using scalpel
blades and thin polishing disks with small diameter .
Small or absent embrasures make the smile look older.
ab
cd
.Fig. 17.9 Effects of flat area width on the apparent width of the
crown using resin replicas of the same tooth. a Delimitation of the
actual width of the flat area on the left and drawing of the new
dimension on the right; b changing the position of the transitional line angles by wearing with abrasive disk; c transverse cross section
showing the changes performed; d original aspect of the light
reflection on the left and after changes on the right, creating a
narrowing illusion
M. F. R. L. Huhtala et al.
17
Conclusion
Aesthetic treatment decisions should be based on prevailing clinical conditions and the patient preferences and
anticipations, following the principles of maximum conser -
vation of the tooth structure. The veneers are restorations
restricted to the labial surface of aesthetically compromised
anterior teeth, on areas visible during smile or conversation,
keeping intact the proximal and lingual surfaces. The resto -
ration can be performed directly with composite or indirectly with a ceramic or composite. The indirect technique
requires the impression or scanning of the preparation and
a provisional restoration. The cementation steps are critical
to the quality of the treatment, and a careful procedure
must be performed. The clinical success depends on durable
bonding between the laminate and prepared and primed
tooth substance. Whatever is the choice of veneering mate -
rial, the adhesive resin cement, and surface pretreatment
methods, it is very important for the dentist to gain confidence with the use of the chosen laminate treatment
modality.References
1. Busato ALS, Hernandez PAG, Macedo RP . Dentística: restaurações
estéticas. 1st ed. Artes Médicas: São Paulo; .
2. Kina S, Bruguera A. Invisível. Restaurações Estéticas Cerâmicas.
Artes Médicas: São Paulo; .
3. Rufenacht CR. Fundamentals of esthetics. Chicago: Quintessence
Publishing; .
4. Ho GW, Matinlinna JP . Insights on ceramics as dental materials. Part
I: ceramic material types in dentistry. SILICON. ;3: –15.
https://doi.org/10. /s12633- - -7.
5. Lung C, Matinlinna J. Silanes for adhesion promotion and surface modification. In: Moriguchi K, Utagawa S, editors. Silanes chemistry, applications and performance. New York: Nova Publishers; . p. 87– .
6. Palin W, Ferracane J. Resin-based cements used in dentistry. In:
Matinlinna J, editor. Handbook oral biomater. Singapore: Pan Stanford Publishing; . p. –54.
7. Matinlinna J. Processing and bonding of dental ceramics. In: Vallittu
P , editor. Non-metallic biomater tooth repair replace. Cambridge:
Woodhead Publishers; . p. –60.
8. Matinlinna JP , Lung CYK, Tsoi JKH. Silane adhesion mechanism in
dental applications and surface treatments: a review. Dent Mater.
;34:13–28. https://doi.org/10. /j.dental. .09. .
ab
cd
.Fig. 17.10 Effects of flat area length on the apparent height of the
crown using resin replicas of the same tooth. a Delimitation of the
actual flat area length on the left and drawing of the new dimension
on the right; b length reduction with abrasive disk; c longitudinal cross section showing the change performed; d original aspect of the light
reflection on the left and changes on the right, resulting in the
shortening of the apparent crown height
Aesthetic Veneers: What Are They and How to Handle Them?
17 9. Ekambaram M, Yiu CKY, Matinlinna JP . An overview of solvents in
resin–dentin bonding. Int J Adhes Adhes. ;57:22–33. https://
doi.org/10. /j.ijadhadh. .09. .
10. Ekambaram M, Yiu CKY, Matinlinna JP , King NM, Tay FR. Adjunctive
application of chlorhexidine and ethanol-wet bonding on durability of bonds to sound and caries-affected dentine. J Dent.
;42: –19. https://doi.org/10. /j.jdent. .04. .
11. Araujo MA. Estética Para o Clínico Geral. Artes Médicas: São Paulo;
.
12. Touati B, Myara P , Nathanson D. Esthetic dentistry and ceramic restorations. London: Martin Dunitz; .
13. Gaber DA. Porcelain laminate veneers. Chicago: Quintessence; .
14. Mustafa A, Matinlinna J. Materials in dentistry. In: Matinlinna J, editor. Handbook oral biomater. Singapore: Pan Stanford Publishing;
. p. 81– .
15. Nakabayashi N, Pashley D. Hybridization of dental hard tissues.
Tokyo: Quintessences Publisching Co; .
16. Baratieri LN, Monteiro Junior S, Andrada MA, Ritter AV. Odontologia
Restauradora: Fundamentos e Possibilidades. Santos: São Paulo; .
17. Henostroza GH. Adesão em Odontologia Restauradora. Curitiba:
Editora Maio; .
18. Baratieri LN. Dentistica: Procedimentos Preventivos e Restauradores. Santos: São Paulo; .
19. Felippe LA, Baratieri LN. Direct resin composite veneers: masking the
dark prepared enamel surface. Quintessence Int (Berl). ;31: –62.
20. Neto NG, Carvalho RC, Russo EM, Sobral MA, Luz MA. Dentística Restauradora: Restaurações diretas. Santos: São Paulo; .
21. Aschheim KW. Esthetic dentistry: a clinical approach to techniques
and materials. 3rd ed. Saint Louis: Elsevier; .
22. Durán Ojeda G, Henríquez Gutiérrez I, Guzmán Marusic Á, Báez
Rosales A, Tisi Lanchares JP . A step-by-step conservative approach
for CAD-CAM laminate veneers. Case Rep Dent. ; :1–6.
https://doi.org/10. / / .
23. Aschheim KW, Dale BG. Esthetic dentistry: a clinical approach to
techniques and materials. Philadelphia: Lea & Fabriger; .
24. Chai SY, Bennani V, Aarts JM, Lyons K. Incisal preparation design for
ceramic veneers. J Am Dent Assoc. ; :25–37. https://doi.
org/10. /j.adaj. .08. . 25. Pagani C, Silva EG, Rocha DM. Tooth preparations - Science & Art.
Great Britain: Quintessence Publishing; .
26. Jankar AS, Kale Y, Kangane S, Ambekar A, Sinha M, Chaware S. Comparative evaluation of fracture resistance of ceramic veneer with
three different incisal design preparations – an in-vitro study. J Int
Oral hHealth. ;6:48–54.
27. Benetti A, Papia E, Matinlinna J. Bonding ceramic restorations. Nor
Tann Tid. ; :30–6.
28. Wassell R, Nohl F, Steele J, Walls A. Extra-coronal restorations. Cham:
Springer International Publishing; . https://doi.org/10. / - - -0.
29. Souza R, Barbosa F, Araújo G, Miyashita E, Bottino M, Melo R, et al.
Ultrathin monolithic zirconia veneers: reality or future? Report of a
clinical case and one-year follow-up. Oper Dent. ;43:3–11.
https://doi.org/10. /16- -T .
30. Della Bona A, Nogueira AD, Pecho OE. Optical properties of CAD–
CAM ceramic systems. J Dent. ;42: –9. https://doi.
org/10. /j.jdent. .07. .
31. Lung C, Matinlinna J. Surface pretreatment methods and silanization. In: Matinlinna J, editor. Handbook oral biomater. Singapore:
Pan Stanford Publishing; . p. –98.
32. Ho GW, Matinlinna JP . Insights on ceramics as dental materials. Part
II: chemical surface treatments. SILICON. ;3: –23. https://doi.
org/10. /s12633- - -6.
33. Matinlinna JP , Lassila LVJ, Ozcan M, Yli-Urpo A, Vallittu PK. An intro -
duction to silanes and their clinical applications in dentistry. Int J
Prosthodont. ;17: –64.
34. Matinlinna JP , Lassila LVJ, Vallittu PK. Evaluation of five dental
silanes on bonding a luting cement onto silicacoated titanium. J
Dent. ;34: –6. https://doi.org/10. /j.jdent. .01. .
35. Özcan M, Matinlinna JP , Vallittu PK, Huysmans M-C. Effect of drying
time of 3methacryloxypropyltrimethoxysilane on the shear bond
strength of a composite resin to silica-coated base/noble alloys.
Dent Mater. ;20: –90. https://doi.org/10. /j.dental. .10. .
36. Fradeani M. Reabilitação Estética em Prótese Fixa. Quintessence:
São Paulo; .
M. F. R. L. Huhtala et al.
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG
C. R. G. Torres (ed.), Modern Operative Dentistry, Textbooks in Contemporary Dentistry,
https://doi.org/10. / -3- - -0_18691 18
Dentin Hypersensitivity
and Cracked Teeth
Eduardo Bresciani, Carlos Rocha Gomes Torres, and Annette Wiegand
18.1 Dentin Hypersensitivity –
18.1.1 Definition –
18.1.2 Epidemiology –
18.1.3 Etiology –
18.1.4 Dentin Hypersensitivity Mechanisms –
18.1.5 Diagnosis –
18.1.6 Management of Dentin Hypersensitivity –
18.2 Cracked Teeth –
18.2.1 Definition –
18.2.2 Epidemiology –
18.2.3 Etiology –
18.2.4 Diagnosis –
18.2.5 Mechanism of Pain –
18.2.6 Management of Cracked Teeth –
18.2.7 Prognosis –
References –
18Learning Objectives
The learning objectives of this chapter are:
5To define the term "dentin hypersensitivity" and gain
knowledge on epidemiology, pain mechanisms, diagnosis,
and treatment options for dentin hypersensitivity.
5To inform about diagnosis, epidemiology and manage -
ment of cracked teeth.
18.1 Dentin Hypersensitivity
18.1.1 Definition
Dentin hypersensitivity is defined as short and sharp painful
sensitivity, triggered by tactile, thermal, chemical, osmotic,
or evaporative stimuli applied to exposed dentin. It is not
related to any other pathology, so conditions with similar
symptoms, i.e., cracked tooth syndrome (to be discussed
further in this chapter), chipped teeth, fractured restora -
tions, postoperative sensitivity, or pulpitis, have to be
excluded [ 77].
Dentin hypersensitivity is also referred as dentin hyperes -
thesia, dentin sensitivity, sensitive dentin, and root sensitiv -
ity, among others. The term “dentin hypersensitivity” may
not be most adequate, as this scenario is not related to pulpal
inflammation, but it will be the preferred term in this chapter
as it is the most used term.
Dentin hypersensitivity is defined as short and sharp
painful sensitivity, triggered by tactile, thermal,
chemical, osmotic, or evaporative stimuli applied to
exposed dentin, not related to any other pathology.
18.1.2 Epidemiology
Epidemiological data on the prevalence of dentin hyper -
sensitivity vary distinctly depending on the study popula -
tion, methods of examination (clinical examination,
questionnaire), and diagnostic criteria. A recent review by
West et al. [ 77] showed that the prevalence of dentin hyper -
sensitivity ranged from about 2 to 98%, with periodontal
patients presenting higher values (60 to 98%) than adult
patients (up to 50%). Premolars are more often affected
from dentin hypersensitivity than molars and canines;
moreover, it is slightly more prevalent in the upper jaw than
in the lower jaw [ 52, 84].
Age and gender distribution of dentin hypersensitivity
show conflicting evidence. Mostly, a peak of dentin hypersen -
sitivity can be observed in patients around 30 to 40 years. In
older patients, dentin hypersensitivity is probably reduced due
to tertiary dentin formation and a lower number of teeth, which potentially might be at risk for developing dentin hyper -
sensitivity [ 71, 77]. Conflicting data exist on higher prevalence
of dentin hypersensitivity in female patients [ 52, 61, 78], which
might exhibit a more healthy lifestyle (e.g., more extensively
brushing, higher consumption of “healthy,“potentially erosive
food) compared to men. Overall, prevalence of dentin hyper -
sensitivity seems to increase, as the population ages and teeth
are retained for a longer time period [ 47].
> Dentin hypersensitivity is more prevalent on patients
with periodontal problems, and the premolars are the
more affected teeth. The peak occurs in patients
around 30 to 40 years.
Patients seeking treatment for dentin hypersensitivity report
a considerable impairment of their oral health-related quality
of life, as eating, drinking, and oral hygiene habits were
affected [ 8].
18.1.3 Etiology
Dentin hypersensitivity may occur when dentin is exposed to
the oral environment, as a result either of enamel loss or of
root exposure with loss of cementum ( . Fig. 18.1). Attachment
loss is probably the most relevant factor leading to root expo -
sure and dentin hypersensitivity. Especially, patients with gin -
gival recessions ( . Fig. 18.2) are affected from dentin
hypersensitivity [ 66, 78]. Gingival recession is defined as dis -
placement of the gingival margin apically to the cementoenamel junction and is a common entity even in younger
adults with a healthy periodontium [ 55, 66]. Prevalence data
on the percentage of people affected from gingival recession
range from 30% to % [ 39]. Besides inflammation, predis -
posing factors for the development of gingival recession com -
prise morphological conditions of the bone (e.g., dehiscence,
fenestration) and soft tissue (e.g., thickness of keratinized
gingiva, frenum position), orthodontic tooth movement,
.Fig. 18.1 Scanning electron microscopic image of a dentin surface
with open tubules
E. Bresciani et al.
18
and/or oral hygiene (e.g., toothbrushing frequency and duration, scrub method, bristle hardness) [26, 29, 39]. If left
untreated, gingival recession has a high probability for progression .
Dentin hypersensitivity can also occur as consequence of
periodontitis or periodontal treatment. Scaling and root
planing might lead to hypersensitivity in symptom-free teeth
and increased hypersensitivity in already affected teeth.
Potential differences with respect to dentin hypersensitivity
between various instruments and devices for scaling and
root planing were not investigated so far. Not only conservative but also surgical intervention increases dentin hypersensitivity [ 18].
The main reason for enamel loss is tooth wear by erosion,
abrasion, abfraction, and/or attrition. Erosive tooth wear is
defined as dental hard tissue loss due to a chemicalmechanical process not involving bacteria . Erosive tooth
wear is initiated by extrinsic or intrinsic acids undersaturated
with respect to tooth mineral, which demineralize the sur -
face and make it more prone to physical wear. Extrinsic acids
come mainly from diet, and frequency and duration of consumption determine the severity of erosive demineralization.
Extrinsic acids from professional work and practice of sports
are also important; however, they might be considered as secondary factors regarding erosive tooth wear . Exposure to
gastric acid by reflux disease, eating disorders, or alcoholism
might cause intrinsic erosion ( . Fig. 18.3) . Compared to
dietary acids, the pH of gastric acid is much lower, leading to
more severe erosive lesions.
Saliva plays an important role in the prevention of erosion by deluting, removing, and buffering acidic substances.
Moreover, it forms a protective salivary pellicle on the tooth
surface. By providing mineral ions, saliva might also modify
the deand remineralization process. Thus, patients presenting hyposalivation are more prone to erosion [24, 25].
Mechanical forces might increase erosive wear but might
also act as the sole factor causing tooth wear. Abrasion results
from friction between teeth and other materials and attrition from antagonist tooth-tooth contact, and abfraction is discussed to be a result from abnormal occlusal loading leading
to tensile stress in the cervical area . Abrasion can be
caused by abnormal oral hygiene depending on toothpaste,
toothbrush, and the toothbrushing frequency and force
(. Fig. 18.4) . To a certain extent, erosive and mechanical
tooth wear can be considered as physiological, but especially
the interaction between erosion, abrasion and attrition might
lead to increased wear exposing dentin.
As erosive and mechanical processes often interact, a
precise differentiation of tooth wear lesions is often challenging. Erosive tooth wear affects initially the palatal and
occlusal surfaces (intrinsic erosion) or the labial surfaces
(extrinsic erosion). Erosive tooth wear starts with a silkyshining surface progressing into concavities (smooth sur -
faces) or grooves (cusps). On smooth surfaces, erosive tooth
wear is characteristically located coronal from the CEJ and
presents an intact border of enamel along the gingival mar -
gin. On occlusal and incisal surfaces, progression of erosive
tooth wear finally results in a complete destruction of the
morphology.
.Fig. 18.2 Recessions at mandibular incisors due to exaggerated
brushing
.Fig. 18.3 Patient with severe erosive tooth wear due to bulimia
.Fig. 18.4 Abrasive tooth wear and recession due to toothbrushing
with self-made very abrasive toothpasteDentin Hypersensitivity and Cracked Teeth
18Tip
Erosive tooth wear starts with a silky-shining surface
progressing into concavities (smooth surfaces) or
grooves (cusps). On smooth surfaces, erosive tooth
wear is characteristically located coronal from the
enamel-cementum junction and presents an intact
border of enamel along the gingival margin.
Attrition appears as flat facet with a shiny appearance and
distinct margins. Corresponding facets can be found at
antagonistic teeth. Abrasive defects can hardly be distinguished from primarily erosive lesions as these phenomena
clinically often overlap . Non-carious cervical lesions
(wedge-shaped lesions) are probably the result of an inter -
action of erosion, abrasion, and attrition. The evidence for
abfraction to be causative in the development of wedgeshaped defects is meanwhile critically discussed . In
contrast to erosive lesions, wedge-shaped lesions are
located apical from the CEJ and have sharp margins [20,
68]. Lesion depth and morphology contribute to dentin
hypersensitivity .
18.1.4 Dentin Hypersensitivity Mechanisms
Several mechanisms of action were described in the literature
to explain dentin hypersensitivity [9, 10]. The most accepted
mechanism defining dentin hypersensitivity is based on the
hydrodynamic theory described by Brännström . This
theory proposes that dentin hypersensitivity is the result of
rapid fluid movement in the dentin tubules due to external
stimuli, typically thermal, tactile, evaporative, osmotic, and
chemical triggers. Stimulus-induced fluid flow might activate
nerve endings, (A-β and Aδ fibers) at the dentin-pulp inter -
face; the excited nerve terminations are considered as mechanoreceptors. The sudden movement of dentin fluids might
be directed outward or inward, depending on the kind of
stimuli. Cooling, drying, evaporation, and hypertonic solutions produce an outward flow, which generates more pain
than inward flow due to heat application .
> Dentin hypersensitivity is the result of rapid fluid
movement in the dentin tubules which might activate
nerve endings.
The other theories proposed to explain dentin hypersensitivity comprise the neural theory and the ondontoblastic transduction theory. The neural theory suggests that dentin is
innervated and nerve endings within the dentinal tubules are
directly activated by the stimulus. The odontoblastic transduction theory assumes that the stimulus is transmitted
along the odontoblast via synaptic junctions to the sensory
nerve endings .
Usually, the superficial dentin is less permeable than
deeper layers as the number and diameter of tubules per area decreases from the pulpal dentin to the DEJ. Hypersensitive
dentin presents more and wider dentinal tubules than nonsensitive dentin. However, exposed dentin is not necessarily
associated with hypersensitivity, as permeability is reduced
in sclerotic dentin. Also, the presence of a smear layer, i.e.,
resulting from removal of the cementum layer during root
debridement, might reduce permeability temporarily .
18.1.5 Diagnosis
Information about the presence and severity of dentin hyper -
sensitivity can be obtained from a proper anamnesis and clinical examination, which should be routinely done. Verbal
screening includes questions about pain during drinking or
eating hot, cold, or acidic drinks or food or during toothbrushing. Furthermore, pain characteristics (site, severity,
duration, character) should be recorded. Then, information
about personal behavior patterns (consumption of acidic food
or drinks, intrinsic erosion, toothbrushing) and about previous dental treatment (restorative treatment, dental bleaching,
periodontal treatment) should be obtained before a clinical
examination is undertaken. During clinical examination, conditions with similar symptoms, i.e., caries, fracture restorations, teeth, postoperative sensitivity, microleakage, or pulpitis,
must be excluded. If dentin exposure due to enamel loss or
root exposure can be detected, tactile (dental explorer) and
thermal/evaporative stimulation (air stream) should be per -
formed. Ideally, two different stimuli should be applied to confirm the diagnosis. Pain intensity and quality should be
documented (e.g., by numerical rating scales) [21, 74]. One
frequently used score is the Schiff cold air sensitivity scale :
0. Subject does not respond to air stimulus.
1. Subject responds to air stimulus but does not request
discontinuation of stimulus.
2. Subject responds to air stimulus and requests discontinuation or moves from stimulus.
3. Subject responds to air stimulus, considers stimulus to
be painful, and requests discontinuation of the stimulus.
Additionally, the impairment of the oral health-related quality of life can be assessed by using suitable instruments like
the Oral Health Impact Profile [21, 74].
18.1.6 Management of Dentin
Hypersensitivity
The management of dentin hypersensitivity usually follows
a stepwise approach based on the extent and severity of the
condition. Based on a correct diagnosis, potential risk factors for tooth wear and gingival recession (diet, intrinsic
erosion, oral hygiene, etc.) must be identified and eliminated
or at least modified (dietary advice, oral hygiene advice).
Nonand minimally invasive strategies include the application of products, which aim to suppress the pulpal nerve
response or to mechanically occlude dentinal tubules; prodE. Bresciani et al.
18
ucts can be self-applied at home (e.g., toothpastes) or professionally applied (e.g., sealants) in the dental office. If
dentin hypersensitivity persists and goes along with a cervical defect or gingival recession, restorative treatment or
mucogingival surgery can be considered [38, 63].
18.1.6.1 Elimination or Reduction of Etiological
Factors
Different etiological factors might contribute to the development of dentin hypersensitivity. With regard to erosive tooth
wear, recording of dietary intake might be helpful to identify
acidic sources, i.e., fruit juices, soft drinks, sport drinks, or
sour sweets . Frequency of consumption, i.e., by avoiding
dietary acids between meals, and contact time with dietary
acids should be significantly reduced [45, 46]. In case of
intrinsic erosion, referral to an appropriate medical specialist
becomes necessary. Stimulation of salivary flow or the use of
saliva substitutes might be indicated if erosive tooth wear is
associated with hyposalivation.
Tip
For extrinsic erosion, recording of dietary intake might
be helpful to identify acidic sources and frequency of
consumption. Thus, the contact time with dietary acids
can be significantly reduced. In case of intrinsic
erosion, referral to an appropriate medical specialist
becomes necessary. Stimulation of salivary flow or the
use of saliva substitutes might be indicated if erosive
tooth wear is associated with hyposalivation.
Incorrect toothbrushing might contribute to the development of gingival recession and tooth wear [26, 79]. Oral
hygiene advice therefore comprises correct toothbrushing
techniques (depending on the kind of toothbrush used) and
reduced toothbrushing force. High-abrasive toothpastes
should be avoided.
18.1.6.2 Nonand Minimally Invasive
Treatment
The noninvasive treatment of dentin hypersensitivity comprises the occlusion of dentinal tubules or nerve desensitization. For occlusion of dentinal tubules by mineral
precipitation, various products containing strontium, arginine, stannous fluoride, or calcium compounds have been
developed. Nerve desensitization is induced by agents containing potassium salts. An increase in extracellular potassium is thought to result in a sustained depolarization and
axonal accommodation, making the nerve less excitable to
further stimulation [23, 37].
At-home treatment of dentin hypersensitivity is mainly
done by desensitizing toothpastes. Toothpastes containing
potassium, stannous fluoride, calcium sodium phosphosilicate, arginine, and nano-hydroxyapatite presented a significant desensitizing effect compared to placebo treatment due
to mineral precipitation in the dentinal tubules, while stron-tium or amorphous calcium phosphate-containing toothpastes were less effective [3, 28].
A large number of prophylaxis pastes and varnishes are
available for professional application. Prophylaxis pastes
containing arginine and calcium carbonate or calcium
sodium phosphosilicate were shown to have some effect on
dentin hypersensitivity [19, 34, 41]. Varnishes form a water -
proof film on the surface leading to some physical occlusion
of the dentinal tubules. Additionally, different active agents,
like fluoride, oxalate, or glutaraldehyde, are incorporated.
Fluoride varnishes form calcium-fluoride precipitates and
fluorapatite which occlude dentin tubules and reduced dentin hypersensitivity for several weeks . Glutaraldehyde
coagulates protein in the dentinal tubules; oxalate forms
calcium oxalate crystals that occlude the dentinal tubules.
Systematic reviews found that these in-office treatments were
effective in reducing dentin hypersensitivity when compared
to placebo treatments [34, 41]. Alternatively, the use of lasers
has been suggested. High-power lasers, such as Nd:YAG,
Er:YAG, or CO2, may obliterate the dentinal tubules by a
melting or thermomechanical ablation mechanisms and/or
the evaporation of superficial dentinal fluid, reducing flow
within the dentinal tubules. Low-power lasers, such as
GaAlAs and He-Ne, may reduce pulpal nerve impulse conduction and exhibit photobiomodulating effects on cellular
activity, enhancing the formation of tertiary dentin [36, 67].
However, different laser treatments were shown to decrease
dentin hypersensitivity compared to placebo treatment, but
mostly did not result in a superior performance compared to
agents inducing chemical or physical occlusion of dentinal
tubules [34, 36, 67].
Finally, dental adhesives ( . Fig. 18.5) or sealants can be
used for physical occlusion of dentinal tubules . In conclusion, various treatment agents and regimens were shown
to be effective in reducing dentin hypersensitivity compared
to placebo. Due to the high variety of products and techniques and the heterogenous study designs, superiority of
one agent/regimen can hardly be demonstrated. Moreover,
placebo effects are commonly observed in the treatment of
dentin hypersensitivity.
18.1.6.3 Invasive Treatment
If dentin hypersensitivity is associated with a significant loss
of dental hard tissue, restoration of the defect is a valid
option, especially if nonand minimally invasive treatment
failed. The restoration of non-carious cervical lesions can be
done with resin-modified glass ionomers or composites, the
latter placed via two-step self-etch or three-step etch and
rinse adhesives ( . Figs. 14.39 , 14.40 , 14.41 , 14.42 , 14.43 , and
14.44 ) [60, 64]. Risk of retention loss is slightly lower for
resin-modified glass ionomers (annual failure rate: 1.8%)
than for composite restorations (3.4–4.1%) .
In case of gingival recession, surgical therapy for root
coverage can be performed, leading to significant reduction
of dentin hypersensitivity . A variety of surgical procedures have been introduced , but the decrease of dentin
hypersensitivity could not be related to a specific surgical Dentin Hypersensitivity and Cracked Teeth
18
procedure . If gingival recessions are associated with
non-carious cervical lesions, a combined restorative surgical
approach can be considered .
18.2 Cracked Teeth
Cracked tooth syndrome describes a group of clinical signs
and symptoms associated to the presence of incomplete fractures involving enamel and dentin, often extending to the
pulpal chamber and/or periodontal area [12, 42].Cracked tooth syndrome is a group of clinical signs and
symptoms associated with the presence of incomplete
fractures involving enamel and dentin, often extending
to the pulpal chamber and/or periodontal area.
This is a situation of hard clinical diagnosis related to lack of
knowledge by the dentists and to pain perception by patients,
often distorted. The clinical scenario is usually reported by
ab
c
ed
.Fig. 18.5 Application of a desensitizing dental adhesive for mechanical blocking of dentin tubules. a Drying of dentin surface with air stream,
b product application, c slight drying, d light-curing, e cervical area covered by the material
E. Bresciani et al.
18
patients mainly as acute pain of short duration present dur -
ing mastication, or after thermal stimulus, generally related
to cold food or drinks [11, 12, 15, 72]. Other related symptoms may be pain after biting hard food (rebound pain) [11,
72] and/or after taking sugar or grainy food . Radiographic
examination is inconclusive .
Tip
The clinical scenario of cracked tooth syndrome is usually
reported by patients mainly as acute pain of short
duration present during mastication, or after thermal
stimulus, generally related to cold food or drinks. Other
related symptoms are pain after biting hard food and/or
after taking sugar or grainy food.
The importance of this chapter is to help the readers to per -
form an early diagnosis and correct treatment plan, treating
the tooth and maintaining its vitality and function, avoiding
the fracture progression which would lead to complete fracture and possible tooth loss.18.2.1 Definition
The American Association of Endodontists defines the term
cracked tooth as an incomplete fracture initiated from the
crown and extending subgingivally, usually directed mesiodistally . Cracked teeth belong to longitudinal tooth fractures, which can be subdivided in craze lines, fractured cusps,
cracked teeth, split teeth, and vertical root fractures .
Craze lines extend over marginal ridges and buccal and
lingual surfaces in posterior teeth and appear as long vertical
lines in anterior teeth but are confined to enamel ( . Fig. 18.6).
Fractured cusps, cracked teeth, and split teeth begin occlusally and extend apically, while vertical root fractures begin in
the root. Fractured cusps are defined as complete or incomplete fracture involving at least two aspects of the cusp and
extending to the cervical third of the crown or the root
(. Fig. 18.7). In contrast to fractured cusps, cracked teeth are
centered and the depth on the root varies ( . Fig. 18.8).
Cracked teeth are also described as greenstick fractures or
tooth infractions. Progression of a cracked tooth results in a
split tooth, which is defined as complete fracture initiated
from the crown and extending the middle or apical part of
the root ( . Fig. 18.9). Vertical root fractures are initiated
from the root and may involve one or both buccal and lingual
proximal surfaces [56, 57].
18.2.2 Epidemiology
In patients suspected of having tooth cracks or presenting
cracked tooth-like symptoms, about 10% of patients/teeth
were in fact diagnosed with cracked teeth [31, 33, 75].
Cracked teeth are more prevalent at middle-aged and older
patients [31, 53, 58, 75, 82], and molars are more often
affected than premolars [ 31, 58, 75, 82], probably due to
the proximity to the temporomandibular joint. Thus, eating course food, chewing on hard objects, and unilateral
mastication were identified as risk factors for cracked teeth
.Fig. 18.6 Craze lines in enamel on teeth 11 and 12
ab
.Fig. 18.7 Cusp fracture. a Fractured lingual cusp of symptomatic tooth 15, disclosed by caries lesion indicator solution (5% basic fuchsin),
b cusp fracture on gingival level was confirmed during the restorative procedureDentin Hypersensitivity and Cracked Teeth
18
. Some studies found mandibular molars to be most
frequently involved [31, 82]. It is discussed that maxillary
molars are more resistant to cracks due the stabilizing
occlusal oblique ridge . Moreover, loading during mastication might be higher in mandibular molars, when the
mesiopalatal cusp of the maxillary molar leads to fatigue in the antagonist (wedging effect) [22, 31]. It is also discussed
that higher masticatory forces in men might be responsible
for a higher prevalence of cracked teeth , although
most studies reported a similar prevalence in men and
women [58, 82].
> Cracked teeth are more prevalent at middle-aged and
older patients and molars are more often affected than
premolars. Eating course food, chewing on hard
objects, and unilateral mastication were identified as
risk factors for cracked teeth.
Cracks occur in intact and restored teeth. If cracks occur in
restored teeth, those with nonbonded restorations, such as
gold and amalgam ( . Fig. 18.8), are more often affected than
teeth with bonded restorations (composite) or crowns [31,
58, 75, 82].
18.2.3 Etiology
Intact, non-restored teeth often exhibit tooth cracks at the sur -
face, developing in enamel or at the DEJ, which might progress
into dentin, but are less likely to cause tooth fracture. Tooth
fracture is more likely to occur from dentin cracks, which
ab
cd
.Fig. 18.8 Cracked teeth. a Incomplete fracture with mesiodistal
direction observed on the pulpal and gingival walls of tooth 46 after
removal of an extensive restoration; b mesiodistal incomplete fracture
on upper molar observed after removal of an occlusal amalgam restoration; c tooth 17 presenting partial loss of amalgam restoration
and the presence of a crack line with buccal-lingual direction. d Tooth 16
after removal of extensive restoration. The fracture lines can be observed
on the lingual groove and on the linguogingival line angle (arrows)
.Fig. 18.9 Split tooth. Mesiodistal fracture extending to the apical
part of the root
E. Bresciani et al.
18
might be a result of restorative procedures (e.g., removal of
tooth structure) or fatigue caused by the restoration geometry
. The fatigue and fracture resistance of teeth is also depending on age, hydration, and temperature variations .
Natural predisposing factors responsible for the development and progression of cracks in intact teeth include mor -
phological and physical factors, such as sudden biting on
hard substances, eccentric contacts and interferences, wear,
bruxism, malocclusion and anatomic form of the cusps, and
the occlusal morphology (so-called wedging effect; see
above) [ 35]. The fracture resistance of teeth is also reduced in
the presence of carious lesions, requiring extensive preparation and resulting in large and/or deep cavities. Occlusal load
stress during mastication and repeated thermal expansion of
restorative material might cause an increased cuspal flexure
inducing stress at sharp internal line angles of the cavity
(gold, amalgam) and producing microcracks. Inadequate
design features also comprise insufficient cuspal protection
in inlay/onlay design or a deep cusp-fossa relationship .
Finally, stress concentration due to pin placement, physical
forces during luting of indirect restoration, non-incremental
placement of composite restorations, etc. might predispose
crack formation .
18.2.4 Diagnosis
The main clinical signs and symptoms of cracked teeth are
pain on biting/chewing and sometimes on the release of pressure (rebound pain) and/or sensitivity to cold thermal stimuli [5, 27, 65]. Symptoms might be present for periods
ranging from weeks to month, and patients might have difficulties in identifying the affected tooth. In the absence of
pulpal inflammation, vitality testing usually gives a positive
response, but an exaggerated response to cold thermal stimuli is possible. The pulpal and periapical diagnosis depends
on the extent and orientation of the crack. Cracks might
become colonized by bacteria arranged in biofilms, which
might reach the pulp and periodontal ligament if the crack
progresses . Cracks with pulpal involvement might result
in pulpitis or pulp necrosis, which makes the diagnosis of
cracked teeth sometimes challenging. Periodontal probing is
necessary to disclose the depth of the crack. Cracked teeth
with periodontal probing depths exceeding 4 mm are more
likely to show pulp necrosis than cracked teeth with a periodontal probing depth of 3 mm or less . Radiographic
examination rarely improves the detection of cracks, as fractures in mesiodistal direction are usually not visible, but is
essential to determine the periodontal and periapical status.
Tip
The main clinical signs and symptoms of cracked teeth
are pain on biting/chewing and sometimes on the
release of pressure (rebound pain) and/or sensitivity to
cold thermal stimuli.Symptoms can be provoked by loading of individual
cusps (so-called bite test) by specific instruments (Tooth
Slooth – Professional Result and FracFinder – Denbur)
(. Fig. 18.10 ). Each cusp should be tested separately. Biting
tests can be also performed with wood sticks or cotton rolls
(. Fig. 18.11 ), but instruments were shown to be more reliable .
Visual detection of cracks is improved by using magnifying loupes/microscopes, dyes ( . Figs. 18.7 and 18.12 ), fiberoptic transillumination ( . Fig. 18.13 ), or light-induced
fluorescence ( . Fig. 18.14 ). In case of restored teeth, especially in case of amalgam fillings or gold restorations, removal
of restorations is necessary to detect fracture lines
(. Fig. 18.8). Then, wedging forces can be applied to deter -
mine if tooth segments are separable (split tooth, see above)
or not (cracked tooth). As differential diagnosis dentin
hypersensivity, postoperative sensitivity, fractured restorations, occlusal trauma or parafunctions must be considered.
18.2.5 Mechanism of Pain
The pain associated with loading or loading release is
explained by the movement of dentinal fluid due to movement of fractures sites (hydrodynamic theory). In this case,
the painful response is fast and intense due to activation of
Type A myelinated nerve fibers . Pain related to pulp
inflammation is characterized by a short, sharp pain, indicative of A-delta fiber activation, followed by a prolonged, dull
ache, indicative of C-fiber activation .
18.2.6 Management of Cracked Teeth
Early diagnosis is very important to reduce progression and,
thus, involvement of pulp and periodontium. Ideally, predisposing factors (see etiology 18.2.3) should be controlled to
avoid the formation of cracks. Treatment of longitudinal
fractures depends on the extent and depth. Root canal treatment might be necessary in case of pulpal inflammation/
necrosis. If the crack extends to the root surface and leads to
extensive attachment loss, extraction or – in case of multiroot teeth – hemisection/root amputation must be considered. Restorative treatment of incomplete coronal fractures
not involving pulp or periodontium aims to immobilize and
bind the fractured segments. If possible, the margins of the
restoration should cover the crack to its full extent.
Historically, orthodontic bands, copper rings, or temporary crowns were suggested for immediate treatment, but
such restorations are time-consuming, invasive, and/or costly
. Alternatively, the placement of direct composite splints
for short-term management of cracked teeth is suggested, but
comes along with transient side effects, e.g., problems with
chewing . In many cases, initial treatment can be per -
formed by placing intracoronal composite restorations to
control if treatment leads to an improvement or complete
relief of symptoms. Composite restorations can be also con-Dentin Hypersensitivity and Cracked Teeth
18
ab
.Fig. 18.11 Load test and devices used to stimulate painful
symptoms during the detection of cracked teeth. a Test performed
with wooden tongue depressor; b test being performed with cotton roll. Both tests might detect teeth with fracture, but specific detection
of the involved cusp is not clear
ab
c
.Fig. 18.10 Instrument for detecting cracked teeth. a The instrument
(FracFinder) presents a flat and non-skid surface to rest on the opposing
tooth of that being tested. The opposite surface presents a concavity that can be adapted to the suspected cusp, concentrating the load on
the individual cusp. b Test being performed on buccal cusp of tooth 24.
c Test being performed on the same tooth but on lingual cusp
E. Bresciani et al.
18
ab
c
.Fig. 18.12 Tooth 46 presenting incomplete fracture and rebound
pain reported by the patient during mastication. a Clinical aspect of
the occlusal surface showing a class I amalgam restoration; b lingual
view of the tooth, showing a clinically detected fracture line at the lingual groove extended gingivally (arrow); c fracture line observed
after removal of the restoration at the linguogingival line angle on the
distolingual cusp (arrow). The fracture was evinced by a plaque
disclosing solution
a b
.Fig. 18.13 Fiber-optic transillumination for detection of cracks. a Aspect of the cracked teeth under natural light; b fractures clearly visible
under transilluminationDentin Hypersensitivity and Cracked Teeth
18sidered for permanent treatment. Opdam et al. evaluated the effectiveness of composite restorations without
cuspal coverage for managing cracked teeth and found a
mean annual failure rate of 6% (need for endodontic treatment) after 7 years. No failures were observed when composite restorations were performed with cuspal coverage.
Seventy-five percent of teeth were free of any symptoms dur -
ing the observation period . Another study evaluated
cracked teeth restored with indirect composite onlays and
found 93% of teeth free of symptoms after an observation
period of 6 years . Krell and Rivera monitored the outcome of symptomatic cracked teeth with reversible pulpitis
after treatment with a full coverage crown . All teeth were
retained over a period of 6 years, but 20% needed root canal
treatment. A recent study by Wu et al. showed that
cracked teeth permanently restored with a crown had a better
pulpal prognosis than cracked teeth that remained cemented
with orthodontic bands. However, clinical trials comparing
different restorative approaches for successful treatment of
cracked teeth are missing so far, so superiority of full crown
coverages against onlay/cusp coverages and/or intracoronal
composite restorations is not proven yet.
18.2.7 Prognosis
In vital and asymptomatic or newly symptomatic teeth,
pulpal inflammation is considered reversible, and restorative
treatment of the cracked tooth is in focus. However, late diagnosis or crack propagation might lead to irreversible pulpitis
or pulp necrosis making root canal treatment necessary.
Studies by Abbott and Leow and Krell and Rivera
showed that about 20% of cracked teeth with reversible pulpitis required root canal treatment within the first 3 to 6
months after diagnosis, while 80% of the cases remained
stable over 5 to 6 years. Similarly, Wu et al. found about
70% of cracked teeth with reversible pulpitis to remain healthy over 3 years. The prognosis is less favorable in teeth
with deep probing depth, which indicates that the crack progressed into the root surface . The survival rate of cracked
teeth after root canal treatment amounts to 90% over 2 years
or 92% over 5 years . Teeth with a probing depth of
more than 6 mm again had a worse prognosis compared to
teeth with a probing depth of less than 6 mm . Moreover,
cracks with extension onto the pulpal floor increased the risk
of the tooth being extracted .
Conclusion
This chapter covered clinical conditions related to dental sensitivity not associated to the caries diseases, which are the
dentin hypersensitivity and the cracked tooth syndrome. The
most relevant information about dentin hypersensitivity was
presented, including its etiology, mechanisms, and diagnosis.
The treatment by elimination or reduction of etiological fac -
tors and other options were described. The importance of
performing an early diagnosis and correct treatment plan of
cracked tooth syndrome was described. The specific tools
and methods for diagnosis were explained, as well the treat -
ment options and prognosis. Many clinicians do not have
enough knowledge about this specific problem, and the lack
of a prompt and precise diagnosis can allow the progression
of the crack to a complete fracture that can cause tooth loss.
References
1. Abbott P , Leow N. Predictable management of cracked teeth with
reversible pulpitis. Aust Dent J. ;54: –15. https://doi.
org/10. /j. - . . .x.
2. Agossa K, Godel G, Dubar M, SY K, Behin P , Delcourt-Debruyne
E. Does evidence support a combined restorative surgical approach
for the treatment of gingival recessions associated with noncarious
cervical lesions? J Evid Based Dent Pract. ;17: –38. https://
doi.org/10. /j.jebdp. .04. .
ab
.Fig. 18.14 Observation of tooth cracks by light-induced fluorescence using intraoral QLF camera (Qraypen, Inspektor Research Systems). a
Tooth illuminated by white light. b Tooth illuminated by blue light, showing red fluorescence in the cracks due to the bacterial penetration
E. Bresciani et al.
18
3. Bae JH, Kim YK, Myung SK. Desensitizing toothpaste versus placebo
for dentin hypersensitivity: a systematic review and metaanalysis. J
Clin Periodontol. ;42: –41. https://doi.org/10. /jcpe. .
4. Banerji S, Mehta SB, Kamran T, Kalakonda M, Millar BJ. A multicentred clinical audit to describe the efficacy of direct supracoronal
splinting – a minimally invasive approach to the management of
cracked tooth syndrome. J Dent. ;42: –71. https://doi.
org/10. /j.jdent. .02. .
5. Banerji S, Mehta SB, Millar BJ. Cracked tooth syndrome. Part 1: aetiology and diagnosis. Br Dent J. ; : –63. https://doi.
org/10. /sj.bdj. . .
6. Banerji S, Mehta SB, Millar BJ. Cracked tooth syndrome. Part 2:
restorative options for the management of cracked tooth syndrome. Br Dent J. ; : –14. https://doi.org/10. /sj.
bdj. . .
7. Barbour ME, Lussi A. Erosion in relation to nutrition and the environment. Monogr Oral Sci. : –54. https://doi.
org/10. / .
8. Bekes K, John MT, Schaller H-G, Hirsch C. Oral health-related quality
of life in patients seeking care for dentin hypersensitivity. J Oral Rehabil. ;36:45–51. https://doi.org/10. /j. - . . .x.
9. Brannström M. A hydrodynamic mechanism in the transmission of
pain producing stimuli through the dentine. In: Anderson DJ, editor. Sens Mech dentine. Oxford: Pergamon Press; . p. 73–9.
10. Byers MR, Dong WK. Autoradiographic location of sensory nerve
endings in dentin of monkey teeth. Anat Rec. ; : –54.
https://doi.org/10. /ar. .
11. Cameron CE. The cracked tooth syndrome: additional findings. J Am
Dent Assoc. ;93: –5.
12. Cameron CE. Cracked-tooth syndrome. J Am Dent Assoc.
;68: –11. https://doi.org/10. /jada.archive. . .
13. Carvalho TS, Colon P , Ganss C, Huysmans MC, Lussi A, Schlueter N,
et al. Consensus report of the European Federation of Conservative
Dentistry: erosive tooth wear—diagnosis and management. Clin
Oral Investig. ;19: –61. https://doi.org/10. /s00784015- -7.
14. Chambrone L, Tatakis DN. Long-term outcomes of untreated buccal
gingival recessions: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Periodontol. ;87: – . https://doi.org/10. /jop. . .
15. Cohen SN, Silvestri AR. Complete and incomplete fractures of posterior teeth. Compend Contin Educ Dent. ;5: –5, –9,
16. Douglas de Oliveira DW, Oliveira-Ferreira F, Flecha OD, Gonçalves
PF. Is surgical root coverage effective for the treatment of cervical
dentin hypersensitivity? A systematic review. J Periodontol.
;84: – . https://doi.org/10. /jop. . .
17. Dowell P , Addy M. Dentine hypersensitivity–a review. Aetiology,
symptoms and theories of pain production. J Clin Periodontol.
;10: –50.
18. Draenert ME, Jakob M, Kunzelmann K-H, Hickel R. The prevalence of
tooth hypersensitivity following periodontal therapy with special
reference to root scaling. a systematic review of the literature. Am J
Dent. ;26:21–7.
19. Freda NM, Veitz-Keenan A. Calcium sodium phosphosilicate had
some benefit on dentine hypersensitivity. Evid Based Dent.
;17:12–3. https://doi.org/10. /sj.ebd. .
20. Ganss C, Lussi A. Diagnosis of erosive tooth wear. Monogr Oral Sci.
:22–31. https://doi.org/10. / .
21. Gernhardt CR. How valid and applicable are current diagnostic criteria and assessment methods for dentin hypersensitivity? An over -
view. Clin Oral Investig. ;17:31–40. https://doi.org/10. /
s00784- - -1.
22. Geurtsen W, Schwarze T, Günay H. Diagnosis, therapy, and prevention
of the cracked tooth syndrome. Quintessence Int. ;34: –17.
23. Gillam DG. Treatment approaches for dentin hypersensitivity. In:
Taha S, Clarkson BH, editors. Clinician’s guide to the diagnosis and
management of tooth sensitivity. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Ber -
lin Heidelberg; . p. 51–80. https://doi.org/10. / - - -5. 24. Hannig M, Hannig C. The pellicle and erosion. Monogr Oral Sci.
: –14. https://doi.org/10. / .
25. Hara AT, Zero DT. The potential of saliva in protecting against dental
erosion. Monogr Oral Sci. : – . https://doi.
org/10. / .
26. Heasman PA, Holliday R, Bryant A, Preshaw PM. Evidence for the
occurrence of gingival recession and non-carious cervical lesions as
a consequence of traumatic toothbrushing. J Clin Periodontol.
;42:S237–55. https://doi.org/10. /jcpe. .
27. Hilton TJ, Funkhouser E, Ferracane JL, Gordan VV, Huff KD, Barna J,
et al. Associations of types of pain with crack-level, tooth-level and
patient-level characteristics in posterior teeth with visible cracks:
findings from the National Dental Practice-Based Research Net -
work. J Dent. ;70:67–73. https://doi.org/10. /j.
jdent. .12. .
28. Hu M-L, Zheng G, Zhang Y-D, Yan X, Li X-C, Lin H. Effect of desensitizing toothpastes on dentine hypersensitivity: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. J Dent. ;75:12–21. https://doi.org/10. /j.
jdent. .05. .
29. Joss-Vassalli I, Grebenstein C, Topouzelis N, Sculean A, Katsaros
C. Orthodontic therapy and gingival recession: a systematic review.
Orthod Craniofac Res. ;13: –41. https://doi.
org/10. /j. - . . .x.
30. Kahler W. The cracked tooth conundrum : terminology, classification, diagnosis, and management. Am J Dent. ;21: –82.
31. Kang SH, Kim BS, Kim Y. Cracked teeth: distribution, characteristics,
and survival after root canal treatment. J Endod Elsevier Ltd.
;42: –62. https://doi.org/10. /j.joen. .01. .
32. Kim SY, Kim SH, Bin CS, Lee GO, Yang SE. Different treatment proto -
cols for different pulpal and periapical diagnoses of 72 cracked
teeth. J Endod Elsevier Ltd. ;39: –52. https://doi.
org/10. /j.joen. .11. .
33. Krell KV, Rivera EM. A six year evaluation of cracked teeth diagnosed
with reversible pulpitis: treatment and prognosis. J Endod.
;33: –7. https://doi.org/10. /j.joen. .08. .
34. Lin PY, Cheng YW, Chu CY, Chien KL, Lin CP , Tu YK. In-office treat -
ment for dentin hypersensitivity: a systematic review and network
meta-analysis. J Clin Periodontol. ;40:53–64. https://doi.
org/10. /jcpe. .
35. Lynch CD, McConnell RJ. The cracked tooth syndrome. J Can Dent
Assoc. ;68: –5.
36. Machado AC, Viana ÍEL, Farias-Neto AM, Braga MM, de Paula Eduardo
C, de Freitas PM, et al. Is photobiomodulation (PBM) effective for the
treatment of dentin hypersensitivity? A systematic review. Lasers Med
Sci. ;33: –53. https://doi.org/10. /s10103017- -7.
37. Markowitz K, Pashley D. The physiological basis of dentin hypersensitivity. In: Gillam DG, editor. Dentine hypersensitivity. Cham:
Springer International Publishing; . p. 11–40. https://doi.
org/10. / -3- - -8.
38. Martens LC. A decision tree for the management of exposed cervical dentin (ECD) and dentin hypersensitivity (DHS). Clin Oral Investig. ;17:77–83. https://doi.org/10. /s00784- -7.
39. Merijohn GK. Management and prevention of gingival recession. Periodontol . ;71: –42. https://doi.org/10. /prd. .
40. Moazzez R, Bartlett D. Intrinsic causes of erosion. Monogr Oral Sci.
: –96. https://doi.org/10. / .
41. Moraschini V, da Costa LS, dos Santos GO. Effectiveness for dentin
hypersensitivity treatment of non-carious cervical lesions: a metaanalysis. Clin Oral Investig. ;22: –31. https://doi.org/10. /
s00784- - -9.
42. Naik SB, Gautham RR. Cracked tooth syndrome – a review and
report of an interesting case. Arch Oral Sci Res. ;1:84–9.
43. Närhi M, Yamamoto H, Ngassapa D, Hirvonen T. The neurophysio -
logical basis and the role of inflammatory reactions in dentine
hypersensitivity. Arch Oral Biol. ;39(Suppl):23S–30S.
44. Navarro D, Teixeira R, Fávaro L, Coelho A, Rodrigues R, Gomes P ,
et al. Relationship between noncarious cervical lesions, cervical
dentin hypersensitivity, gingival recession, and associated risk Dentin Hypersensitivity and Cracked Teeth
18 factors: a crosssectional study. J Dent. ;76:1–5. https://doi.
org/10. /j.jdent. .06. .
45. O’Toole S, Bartlett D. The relationship between dentine hypersensitivity, dietary acid intake and erosive tooth wear. J Dent. ;67:84–
7. https://doi.org/10. /j.jdent. .10. .
46. O’Toole S, Bernabé E, Moazzez R, Bartlett D. Timing of dietary acid
intake and erosive tooth wear: a case-control study. J Dent.
;56:99– . https://doi.org/10. /j.jdent. .11. .
47. Olley RC, Sehmi H. The rise of dentine hypersensitivity and tooth
wear in an ageing population. Br Dent J. ; : –7. https://
doi.org/10. /sj.bdj. . .
48. Opdam NJM, Roeters JJM, Loomans BAC, Bronkhorst EM. Sevenyear clinical evaluation of painful cracked teeth restored with a
direct composite restoration. J Endod. ;34: –11. https://doi.
org/10. /j.joen. .04. .
49. Pashley DH. Dentin permeability, dentin sensitivity, and treatment
through tubule occlusion. J Endod. ;12: –74. https://doi.
org/10. /S0099- (86) -1.
50. Petersson LG. The role of fluoride in the preventive management of
dentin hypersensitivity and root caries. Clin Oral Investig.
;17:63–71. https://doi.org/10. /s00784- - -9.
51. Qiao F, Chen M, Hu X, Niu K, Zhang X, Li Y, et al. Cracked teeth and
poor oral masticatory habits: a matched case-control study in China.
J Endod. ;43: –9. https://doi.org/10. /j.joen. .01. .
52. Que K, Guo B, Jia Z, Chen Z, Yang J, Gao P . A cross-sectional study:
non-carious cervical lesions, cervical dentine hypersensitivity and
related risk factors. J Oral Rehabil. ;40:24–32. https://doi.
org/10. /j. - . . .x.
53. Ratcliff S, Becker IM, Quinn L. Type and incidence of cracks in poste -
rior teeth. J Prosthet Dent. ;86: –72. https://doi.org/10. /
mpr. . .
54. Ricucci D, Siqueira JF, Loghin S, Berman LH. The cracked tooth: histopathologic and histobacteriologic aspects. J Endod. ;41: –
52. https://doi.org/10. /j.joen. .09. .
55. Rios FS, Costa RSA, Moura MS, Jardim JJ, Maltz M, Haas AN. Estimates and multivariable risk assessment of gingival recession in the
population of adults from Porto Alegre, Brazil. J Clin Periodontol.
;41: – . https://doi.org/10. /jcpe. .
56. Rivera E, Walton RE. Cracking the cracked tooth code: detection and
treatment of various longitudinal tooth fractures. Am Assoc Endo -
dontists Colleagues for Excellence News Lett. ;(Summer) 2:1–19.
57. Rivera EM, Walton RE. Longitudinal tooth cracks and fractures: an
update and review. Endod Top. ;33:14–42. https://doi.
org/10. /etp. .
58. Roh BD, Lee YE. Analysis of cases of teeth with cracks. Dent Traumatol. ;22: –23. https://doi.org/10. /j. - . . .x.
59. Salas MMS, Nascimento GG, Vargas-Ferreira F, Tarquinio SBC, Huysmans MCDNJM, Demarco FF. Diet influenced tooth erosion prevalence in children and adolescents: results of a meta-analysis and
meta-regression. J Dent. ;43: –75. https://doi.org/10. /j.
jdent. .05. .
60. Santos MJMC, Ari N, Steele S, Costella J, Banting D. Retention of
tooth-colored restorations in non-carious cervical lesions—a systematic review. Clin Oral Investig. ;18: –81. https://doi.
org/10. /s00784- - -7.
61. Scaramucci T, de Almeida Anfe TE, da Silva Ferreira S, Frias AC,
Sobral MAP . Investigation of the prevalence, clinical features, and
risk factors of dentin hypersensitivity in a selected Brazilian population. Clin Oral Investig. ;18: –7. https://doi.org/10. /
s00784- - -1.
62. Schiff T, Delgado E, Zhang YP , Cummins D, DeVizio W, Mateo
LR. Clinical evaluation of the efficacy of an in-office desensitizing
paste containing 8% arginine and calcium carbonate in providing
instant and lasting relief of dentin hypersensitivity. Am J Dent.
;22 Spec No:8A–15A.
63. Schmidlin PR, Sahrmann P . Current management of dentin hyper -
sensitivity. Clin Oral Investig. ;17:55–9. https://doi.org/10. /
s00784- - -0. 64. Schwendicke F, Göstemeyer G, Blunck U, Paris S, Hsu L-Y, Tu
Y-K. Directly placed restorative materials. J Dent Res. ;95: –
22. https://doi.org/10. / .
65. Seo DG, Yi YA, Shin SJ, Park JW. Analysis of factors associated with
cracked teeth. J Endod Elsevier Ltd. ;38: –92. https://doi.
org/10. /j.joen. .11. .
66. Seong J, Bartlett D, Newcombe RG, Claydon NCA, Hellin N, West
NX. Prevalence of gingival recession and study of associated related
factors in young UK adults. J Dent. ;76:58–67. https://doi.
org/10. /j.jdent. .06. .
67. Sgolastra F, Petrucci A, Severino M, Gatto R, Monaco A. Lasers for
the treatment of dentin hypersensitivity: a meta-analysis. J Dent
Res. ;92: –9. https://doi.org/10. / .
68. Shellis RP , Addy M. The interactions between attrition, abrasion and
erosion in tooth wear. Monogr Oral Sci. :32–45. https://doi.
org/10. / .
69. Signore A, Benedicenti S, Covani U, Ravera G. A 4to 6-year retro -
spective clinical study of cracked teeth restored with bonded indirect resin composite onlays. Int J Prosthodont. ;20: –16.
70. Sim IGB, Lim TS, Krishnaswamy G, Chen NN. Decision making for
retention of endodontically treated posterior cracked teeth: a
5-year follow-up study. J Endod. ;42: –9. https://doi.
org/10. /j.joen. .11. .
71. Splieth CH, Tachou A. Epidemiology of dentin hypersensitivity.
Clin Oral Investig. ;17:3–8. https://doi.org/10. /
s00784012- -8.
72. Stanley HR. The cracked tooth syndrome. J Am Acad Gold Foil Oper.
;11:36–47.
73. Tavelli L, Barootchi S, Nguyen TVN, Tattan M, Ravidà A, Wang H. Efficacy of tunnel technique in the treatment of localized and multiple
gingival recessions: a systematic review and metaanalysis. J Periodontol. ;89: –90. https://doi.org/10. /JPER.18- .
74. Türp JC. Discussion: how can we improve diagnosis of dentin hyper -
sensitivity in the dental office? Clin Oral Investig. ;17:53–4.
https://doi.org/10. /s00784- - -z.
75. Udoye CI, Jafarzadeh H. Cracked tooth syndrome: characteristics
and distribution among adults in a Nigerian Teaching Hospital. J
Endod. ;35: –6. https://doi.org/10. /j.joen. .12. .
76. West NX, Lussi A, Seong J, Hellwig E. Dentin hypersensitivity: pain
mechanisms and aetiology of exposed cervical dentin. Clin Oral
Investig. ;17:9–19. https://doi.org/10. /s00784- -x.
77. West N, Seong J, Davies M. Dentine hypersensitivity. Monogr Oral
Sci. : –22. https://doi.org/10. / .
78. West NX, Sanz M, Lussi A, Bartlett D, Bouchard P , Bourgeois D. Prevalence of dentine hypersensitivity and study of associated factors: a
European population-based cross-sectional study. J Dent.
;41: –51. https://doi.org/10. /j.jdent. .07. .
79. Wiegand A, Schlueter N. The role of oral hygiene: does toothbrushing harm? Monogr Oral Sci. : –9. https://doi.
org/10. / .
80. Wu S, Lew HP , Chen NN. Incidence of pulpal complications after
diagnosis of vital cracked teeth. J Endod. ; : . https://
doi.org/10. /j.joen. .02. .
81. Yahyazadehfar M, Ivancik J, Majd H, An B, Zhang D, Arola D. On the
mechanics of fatigue and fracture in teeth. Appl Mech Rev.
;66: . https://doi.org/10. /1. .
82. Yang SE, Jo AR, Lee HJ, Kim SY. Analysis of the characteristics of
cracked teeth and evaluation of pulp status according to periodontal probing depth. BMC Oral Health. ;17:1–6. https://doi.
org/10. /s12903- - -x.
83. Yang Y, Chen G, Hua F, Yu Q, Yang W. Biting pain reproduced by the
tooth Slooth: an aid for early diagnosis of cracked tooth. Quintessence Int (Berl). ;50: . https://doi.org/10. /j.
qi.a41498.
84. Yoshizaki KT, Francisconi-dos-Rios LF, Sobral MAP , Aranha ACC,
Mendes FM, Scaramucci T. Clinical features and factors associated
with non-carious cervical lesions and dentin hypersensitivity. J Oral
Rehabil. ;44: –8. https://doi.org/10. /joor. .
E. Bresciani et al.
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG
C. R. G. Torres (ed.), Modern Operative Dentistry, Textbooks in Contemporary Dentistry,
https://doi.org/10. / -3- - -
Supplementery
Information
Index –
A–C
Index
A
Abfraction 8, 9, 11, , , ,
Abnormal formation of the enamel
Abrasion 6, 8–11, 27, 31, , , , , ,
, , , ,
Abrasive , , , , – , , ,
,
–discs
–pastes ,
–rubber ,
–rubber point ,
–strip(s) ,
Abrasive-impregnated rubber
Absorbing pads , ,
Absorption range , , ,
Accident 52, 59, 63, 64
Acetate band
Acid etching , , , , , ,
,
Acidic monomer
Acidogenic 79–81, 87,
Aciduric 80, 81
Actinic damage
Activator
Active medium , , ,
Addition-fragmentation monomer
Addition silicone
Adhesive pooling ,
Adhesive restoration , , , , ,
,
Adhesive system – ,
Aesthetics , , , , , , ,
,
–smile
Aging physiological process ,
Air abrasion
Airborne particle abrasion , ,
Aliphatic amine
Allergy(ies) 2, 4, 5, 29,
Alloy
–admixed
–dispersed phase
–fine cut
–lathe cut
–regular cut
–spherical ,
Aluminum oxide , ,
Amalgam , , , , , , , ,
, – , – , – , , ,
, , , , , , , – ,
– , ,
–well
Amalgamator ,
Amalgapin , , , , , ,
Amelogenesis imperfecta 8, 15, 16
American Dental Association (ADA)
American National Standards Institute
(ANSI)
American Society of Anesthesiology (ASA) 29
Ammonia forming agents
Anamnesis 2, 3, 6, 7, 32, 40, 96, , ,
,
Anatomic wedges 276Anesthesia , ,
Angle
–axiopulpal
–of beam spread ,
–cavosurface ,
–external line , , , ,
–incisal line
–incisal point
–internal line
–line ,
–margin
–point –
Anionic detergents , ,
Antisepsis ,
Area of visibility
–dynamic ,
–static
Arginine ,
Argon-ion laser ,
Arkansas stone ,
Arms 45, 46, 50, 56, 65, 67, 70
Aromatic tertiary amine
Articulating paper , , , , , ,
,
–forceps ,
Artificial dentin
Artificial retention , ,
Assistant 52–54, 56, 57, 59, 68
Astringent solution
Atomizing
Attenuation of light
Attrition 6, 8, 9, 11, 31, ,
Auxiliary 52, 58
B
Bactericidal effect
Band
–cellulose
–clear ,
–matrix , , , ,
–Mylar
–plastic , ,
–polyester
–polyvinyl chloride
–pre-contoured polyester
–straight , , ,
–Tofflemire
Band-pass filter – , ,
Barton
Base – , , , , ,
Beer–lambert law
Bennett , , ,
Benzoyl peroxide
Bevel – , , , , , , ,
, , ,
Bioactive ,
–glass
–molecules
Biocompatible
Biofilm 78–84, 86, 88, 89, 91, 93, 97, , ,
, , , , , , , , ,
, , , ,
–control of 632Biological principles
Biological sealing 90, 92, 97
Biologic width , , , , , ,
Biomaterial
Biomimetic
Biopulpectomy
Bis-acryl composite ,
Bite test
Biting blocks ,
Biting force ,
Black, G.V. , , , ,
Blade , , , – , – , ,
,
Blot drying technique , , , ,
Blue light , , – , ,
Bonded amalgam
Bonding , , , , , , ,
,
Bonding interface rupture
Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP) ,
Boomerang
Bow compass ,
Broad-spectrum ,
Brushes , ,
Brushing technique
–Bass
–Charters
–Fones
–Stillman
Brush, interdental ,
Bruxism 11, 12, 23, 31, , , , ,
,
Buccal corridor 23, 25, 27
Bulk-fill ,
Bulk increment
Bur(s)
–cone ,
–cylinder ,
–inverted cone , ,
–multi-bladed
–neck , , ,
–round
–spherical
–straight fissure
–taper
–tapered fissure
Burnisher ,
–egg , , ,
–round
Butt joint , ,
C
Calcium carbonate
Calcium compounds
Calcium fluoride 82,
Calcium hydroxide
–cement ,
–paste ,
–powder ,
–solutions , , ,
–suspensions
Calcium sodium phosphosilicate
Camphorquinone , , , ,
Canines , ,
Capping ,
Capsules , , ,
–pre-proportioned , , , ,
Carbide ,
Carbon steel ,
Carborundum
Cardiac disorders 4
Caries
–active lesion 97
–activity ,
–acute lesion 89, 97,
–arrested lesions 93
–chronic lesion 87
–confounding factors 79, 80
–detector dyes
–disease 86, 90, 94, 95, , ,
–ecological plaque hypothesis 81
–hidden lesion 89, 90
–inactive lesion 88, 97
–infiltration
–non-specific plaque hypothesis 80
–primary determinant factor 79
–rampant lesion 81
–risk 28, , , , , , , ,
–root 92,
–secondary determinant factor 79
–secondary lesions –
–specific plaque hypothesis 80
–wall lesions
Caries lesion
–active
–inactive
–recurrent ,
Cariogenicity
Carious lesion , , , , ,
Carious tissue, removal of ,
Carpule syringe
Carriers ,
Carver
–cleoid , ,
–contour carbide
–discoid , ,
–Frahm , , ,
–Hollenback , , – , ,
Casein phosphopeptide-amorphous calcium
phosphate (CPP-ACP)
Cataract
Cavitation
Cavity(ies)
–complex
–compound
–configuration factor ,
–floor
–preparation testing
–simple
–varnish
–wall ,
Cavosurface angle – , , , , ,
, , ,
Cement , , , , – ,
Cementoenamel junction (CEJ) ,
Centric contact ,
Centric occlusion (CO) 23, , , , ,
Centric relation 23
Ceramic , , – ,
–ingot
–laminate 683Cervical lesions , , , ,
Cervicoincisal depth cut
C-factor – , ,
Chair 53, 54, 57, 58, 67, 68, 74
Chameleon effect
Chamfer finish line
Characterization
Characterization material , ,
Cheek retractor ,
Chemically activated , ,
Chemical stimulus
Chewing gum , –
Chief complaint 32, 33, 40,
Chip
Chipped teeth
Chisel , , ,
Chlorhexidine , , , ,
Chroma ,
Chromatic alterations ,
Chu’s Aesthetic Gauge ,
Circumferential matrix ,
Clamp(s)
–gingival retraction ,
–winged ,
–wingless , ,
Classification
–artificial ,
–Black’s ,
–Class I , , , , , , ,
–Class II , , ,
–Class III , ,
–Class IV
–Class V , , , , , , ,
,
–Class VI
–etiologic
–Mount and Hume’s ,
Cleaning ,
Cleaning agents ,
Cleaning of the preparation , , ,
Clenching
Clinical assessment 17
Clinical chart 23, 32, 33
Clinical examination 23, 33, 40, ,
Coefficient of linear thermal expansion
(CLTE) , ,
Coherent
Cold pulp testing
Collagen fiber ,
Collimated ,
Color changes 14, 15, 21
Color-masking
Color modifier(s) , , ,
Color perception ,
Commissural line 23
Composite , , , , – , ,
, ,
Compound Class I ,
Compound preparation ,
Compression load
Compressive strength ,
Compressive stress
Compules
Compulsory notification of infectious
diseases 4
Computer-aided design/computer-assisted
machining (CAD/CAM) , –
Concentricity 147Condensable
–composites
Condensation , , , , , – ,
,
Condensers
Cones ,
Conical teeth 12
Connective tissue attachments
Connective tissues 20, 28
Conservative composite restoration ,
–
Conservative preparation ,
Contact(s)
–centric
–forming instrument ,
–eccentric
–tightness , , ,
–tooth-to-tooth
Continuous curing cycle
Contra-angle , , , , ,
Control phase 29, 30
Convenience form , , , , , ,
, , ,
Conventional curing protocol ,
Copper , ,
Cord
–dental dam stabilizing
–retraction
Corrective phase 30
Corrosion – , , , , , ,
,
Cotton roll , – , – ,
Cotton roll isolation , , , , ,
,
Counter-opalescence ,
Coupling agent
Coves , , ,
Crack(s) , , , ,
Cracked teeth – ,
Cracked tooth syndrome 12, ,
Cracking 12, 23
Craze lines
Creep , ,
Crevice ,
Crevicular fluid
Cri dentinaire
Critical pH 82
Cross-link ,
Crowding 12
Crown form ,
Crystalline phase
Crystallization , , ,
Cup(s) , ,
Curing lamp
Curing mode
Curing protocol , , ,
Cusp
–angle , , ,
–elongation phenomenon
–incline ,
–lost ,
–restoration of , , ,
–weakened
Cuspal-capping
Cuspal coverage ,
Cuspal deflection 12, , , , , ,
Cuspal fracture
Custom-made matrix Index
C–F
D
Dappen dishes
Dark-curing , , ,
Darkened groove 90, 97
Dead tracts
Decay 32
Decision-making process 33
Defense mechanisms of pulp tissue , ,
Definitive phase 29, 30, 32
Deflection, cuspal , ,
Deformation ,
Degradation , ,
Degree of conversion , – , , ,
,
Delayed expansion
Delivery unit 50–53, 56, 58, 64, 68
Demineralization 78, 79, 81, 82, 84–86, 88, 89, 93,
95, 97, 99, , , ,
Dens in dente 12, 13,
Dental arch ,
Dental bleaching ,
Dental dimensions
Dental explorer
Dental floss ,
Dental floss ligatures
Dental history 2, 6, 7, 33
Dental office 50, 52, 56, 57, 65, 67, 74
Dental proportion
Dental separation , , , , ,
Dental stone
Dental team 52, 53, 74
Dental whitening 14–16
Dentin
–affected
–bridge ,
–color
–dark color
–desensitizer
–firm ,
–glistening aspect ,
–hard ,
–hypersensitivity – ,
–intertubular
–leathery
–matrix metalloproteinase , ,
–peritubular –
–permeability ,
–pink discoloration , ,
–primary
–reactionary 85, 86, ,
–reparative 86, , , , ,
–replacement , ,
–sclerosis , ,
–sclerotic 85, 86, 88, , , , , ,
–scream of
–secondary , ,
–shade – , , ,
–soft , ,
–spoon , , , ,
–tertiary 85, 86, , , , ,
Dentinal fluid
Dentin caries
–affected dentin 85
–infected dentin 85
–necrotic dentin 85
Dentinoenamel junction (DEJ) , , ,
Dentinogenesis imperfecta 16Dentin-pulp complex , , , , ,
, , , , , , ,
Dentists 44–50, 52–58
Depth cut , ,
Depth-limiting diamond point
Depth-limiting drill
Depth of cure ,
Depth of the preparation ,
Desensitizing agent
Detergents
Developmental lobes
Diabetes mellitus 81
Diagnosis 17, 20, 30, 40, , , ,
Diagnosis of the pulp condition , , ,
,
Diagnostic
–false-negative decisions 96
–false-positive decisions 96
–true negative decisions 96
–true positive decisions 96
–wax-up
Diamond , , , – , , , –
Diamond dresser ,
Diamond point , , , , , , ,
, , , , , , , , , ,
, , , , ,
–agglutinated diamonds
–chemical vapor deposition (CVD)
Diastema(s) 12, 13, 32, , , , , ,
,
Dichroic reflector
Diet 78–82, 86, 90, 94, 97
Dietary advices
Dietary protocol 28
Digital imaging fiber-optic transillumination
(DIFOTI)
Digital smile design
Direct casting
Direct pulp capping , , – , ,
Direct pulp protection –
Direct technique
Discomfort 57, 63, 68
Discs , , , ,
–abrasive
Disease
–multifactorial 78
–occupational 67
Disocclusion guide(s) 23, 31, 32, , , ,
,
–anterior
–canine
Displacement
–dental
–of the restoration , ,
Disposable applicator ,
Ditch 17, , , , , ,
Documentation 32, 33, 40
Dovetail lock ,
Dresser
Durability ,
–restoration
Dystrophic calcification 16
E
Early childhood caries ,
Eccentricity
Eccentric load 360Ectopic eruption 12
Edema ,
Edge-to-edge occlusion
Education 67
Elastic deformation
Elastic modulus , , , , ,
Elastomeric impression material
Elbows 46, 52, 53, 58, 67
Elderly patient 2
Electrical conductance measurements
Electric pulp test ,
Electromagnetic spectrum
Embrasure(s) , , , , , , ,
Emergence profile
Emittance , – , , , , ,
,
Enamel
–caries
–dark zone 82
–lesion body 82
–subsurface lesion 83
–surface zone 82, 84
–translucent zone 82
–hatchet
–prisms , , ,
–undermined , , ,
Enameloplasty ,
Endodontic posts , ,
Energy density , ,
Energy dose ,
Entry direction , ,
Er,Cr:YSGG
Ergonomic(s) 44–46, 67–69, 74
Erosion 6, 8–11
Erosive tooth wear (ETW) 8, –
Er:YAG ,
Esthetic 15–17, 20, 21, 23–27, 30–32, 40,
–analysis , , ,
–assessment 20
–transformation
Etch-and-rinse adhesives
Etching
Etiology ,
EVA system ,
Evidence-based clinical practice 3
Excavator(s) , , ,
Excursive movements
Exploratory probe , – , , ,
Extended fissure sealant
Extension for prevention , , , ,
Extensive amalgam restoration ,
Extracellular polysaccharide 81
Extraoral exam 2, 7,
Extrinsic acids
Extrinsic stain 14, 15, 20, ,
Extrusion , ,
Eye protection 58
F
Facet
Fatigue 46, 49, 52, 56, 63–65, 68, 69,
Feathered-edge ,
Feldspar ,
Felt ,
Fermentable carbohydrates 82
Fiber optic transillumination (FOTI)
Fiber post 458Index
Filler
–content , , ,
–inorganic ,
–particle
–ratio
Filling instrument , ,
Fingers 44, 46, 58, 70, 72
Finishing , , , , , , , ,
, , , , , , , , ,
– , , , , , ,
Finishing of the enamel walls
Fissure 80, 82, 88, 89, , , , ,
Fistulas
Fitting ,
Flame shaped ,
Flash , ,
Flat area ,
Flat brush
Flexural strength , ,
Flowable composites , , , , ,
,
Fluorapatite ,
Fluorescence , , ,
Fluoridated apatite
Fluoridation
–local
–preeruptive ,
–systemic ,
Fluoride 79, 82, 86, 88, 89, 94, , , ,
– , – , ,
–acute lethal dose
–amine ,
–gel
–inorganic
–organic
–probably toxic dose
–silver diamine
–sodium
–solutions
–stannous
–toxicology
Fluorosis 15, 16,
Food impaction 17–19
Forceps
–clamp ,
–clamp holding
–Halstead hemostatic mosquito
–Miller articulating paper
–punch ,
–rubber dam punch
Forces , , , ,
Fork-shaped bending tool
Four-handed dentistry 45
Fracture(s)
–resistance , , ,
–toughness
–longitudinal ,
–vertical root
Fractured cusps
Fractured restorations
Free radical , ,
Free smooth surface
Frictional retention ,
Friction grip (FG)
Frosty appearance
Full crown
Full-power curing cycle
Furniture 45, 52, 53, 64G
Galvanic
Gap(s) , , , , , , , ,
Gear reduction contra-angle handpiece
Gel
–glycerin-based
–oxygen blocking
–point ,
General principles
Gingiva-colored composite
Gingival barrier – , , ,
Gingival contour 24
Gingival displacement
Gingival line 23–25
Gingival margin , , ,
Gingival margin trimmer ,
Gingival protection instrument
Gingival retraction ,
Gingival smile 24
Gingival sulcus , , , , , , ,
Gingival zenith ,
Glass(es) 54, 58
–ceramic ,
–fiber post
–fillers ,
Glass ionomer cement (GIC) , , , ,
, , ,
Glassy phase ,
Glazing
Glutaraldehyde ,
Gnarled enamel
Gradual curing protocol ,
Grasp of hand instruments 59, 62
Grinding , , , , – ,
Groove(s) , , , , , , ,
,
–developmental , , ,
Gummy smile 23–25
Gun design syringe
H
Habits 67–69
Half-moon margins
Hand instrument
–active ,
–blade , , ,
–calcium hydroxide liner placement
–complementary ,
–formulas
–handle
–plastic filling
–retraction cord packing
–shank ,
–sharpening
Handpiece
–high-speed , – , , ,
–low-speed , , ,
–oscilatory
–straight – ,
Hardness ,
Harmful
Hatchet –
Head 46, 47, 49, 52–58, 67, 68, 70
Headrest 54, 56, 58
Healthy 56, 58, 68, 69, 74Hearing damage
Heating
Heat test ,
Height of curvature 17
Hidden caries 8,
High-copper ,
High-speed handpieces
Hips 46, 47, 49, 70
History of the present illness 3, 33
Hoe , ,
Holes
Hollenback , , – , ,
Hooke’s law
Horizontal percussion ,
Horizontal slot ,
Hot-pressing ,
Hue , ,
Humidity 63, 64
Hutchinson’s incisors 12, ,
Hybrid composite
Hybrid dental ceramic
Hybridization ,
Hybrid layer ,
Hydrodynamic theory 11, 12, ,
Hydrofluoric acid gel
Hydrophilic monomer
Hydroxyapatite 78, 81, 82, , ,
Hydroxyapatite crystals
Hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA)
Hyperesthetics 23
Hyperkyphosis 46
Hyperlordosis 46
Hypersensitivity
Hypomineralization 15–16
Hypoplasia 16
Hyposalivation 5, 28
I
Iatrogenic ,
Illumination 57, 62–65
Incandescent ,
Incident beam angle ,
Incident irradiance –
Incisal edge , , , , , , ,
, , , , , , ,
Incisal embrasures ,
Incisal line 24, 25
Incisal reduction
Incisor , , , , , ,
Inclines, cusp ,
Increment(s) , , , , , , , ,
, , – , , , , , ,
Incremental technique
Indirect ceramic veneers
Indirect curing technique
Indirect laminates
Indirect pulp capping
Indirect pulp protection
Indirect restoration
Indirect veneer , , ,
Infected dentin ,
Infiltration technique – ,
Informed consent 33
Infrared , – , , , ,
Infrared band-pass filter
Ingot
Initiator Index
F–M
Injuries 45, 65, 67
Inlay
Inorganic matrix
Insert ,
Instrument(s) 50, 52, 53, 56, 57, 61, 66–69, 74,
, , , , , , , , ,
, , – ,
Interdental papilla
Interdisciplinary 32
Interface
–adhesive
–tooth-restoration , ,
Interfacial defect
Interferences ,
Interim restoration
Internal line angle(s) , ,
–first set
–second set
Internal walls
International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) 45–47,
Interprismatic enamel ,
Interproximal carver (IPC) ,
Interproximal contact(s) 17, 19, , , ,
,
Interproximal guard(s) , ,
Interproximal space , , , , , ,
, , , , , ,
Interpupillary line 23, 25
Interrod
Intervertebral discs 46, 47, 52, 69
Intoxication ,
Intradentinal pins
–cemented
–friction-locked ,
–self-threading
Intra-oral camera ,
Intraoral clinical 7
–exam
Intraoral scanner
Intraradicular post
Intrinsic acid
Intrinsic staining 14
Inverted cone instrument ,
Irradiance
Ischium 48, 49
Isolation , , , ,
Isolation of the operating field , ,
Isthmus region ,
J
Junctional l epithelium
K
Kinetics ,
Knees 46–48, 53, 69, 70
Knot
–double
–running –
L
Labial embrasure
Laboratory 74
Lactobacillus 80, 81, 94Laminate
Laser , – , , ,
Lateral excursive movement
Law of the face
Layering technique , , , , , ,
, , , , ,
LED , , , , ,
Left-handed 56, 70, 72
Leg 46–49, 54, 56, 57, 65
Lesion activity status
Leucite ,
Ligature
–dental floss , ,
–elastic , ,
–o-ring
Light , , , – , , , , ,
, , , , , ,
–conducting tip
–overhead 57
–pipe ,
–reflection measurement
–tip , , ,
Light-activated – , , , ,
Light-curing , , – , – , ,
, , , , , , , , , ,
, , ,
–protocol
–unit , , , ,
Light-emitting diode , ,
Light guide , – , , ,
– ,
Light guide free curing unit
Line angle
–external
–internal
–round
–sharp
Liner – ,
–low elastic modulus
Lip line 24, ,
Lithium disilicate
Load
–compression
–shear
–tensile
Lobes
–dentin ,
–developmental , , ,
Local anesthetic test
Locks ,
Long-inverted cone , ,
Lost wax technique
Loupe ,
Low fusing compound , , , ,
,
Lubricating gel, glycerin based
Lucirin TPO
Lumbar region 47, 52, 65
M
Macroesthetics 23
Macrofilled composite
Macrotextures ,
Magnifier
Maintenance phase 29, 30, 40
Mamelons of dentin , 535Margin
–cavosurface
–preparation
Marginal degradation ,
Marginal ridge(s) , , , , , ,
, , , , ,
Marginal staining 20, 21
Marginal trimming ,
Masking agent ,
Masticatory stress
Matrix , , , , , , , , ,
, , , , , ,
–band , , , ,
–Barton
–boomerang-shape
–cervical , ,
–circumferential ,
–custom made , , , ,
–metallic , ,
–retainer , , ,
–retainerless , ,
–riveted ,
–sectional ,
–shell
–spot-welded – ,
–S-shaped ,
–T
–universal , , , , ,
–welded
–window , ,
Maximum intercuspation (MIC) , ,
,
Mechanical principles
Medical history 2, 4, 5, 7
Medical interview 3, 4, 40
Medication 2, 4–6, 9, 28
Megafiller
Mercury , , –
Mesenchymal cells , ,
Metalloproteinases (MMP) , ,
Metamerism
Microbiota 78–81, 89, 93, 94
Microcrack , , , ,
Microdontia 12, ,
Microesthetics 23,
Microfilled composite – ,
Microhardness
Microhybrid composite ,
Microleakage 20, , , , , , ,
, , ,
Micromechanical interlocking
Micromechanical retention , ,
Micromotor , ,
Microorganisms – , ,
Microscope, dental operating
Microtexture
Migration, tooth
Miller forceps
Mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA)
Miniesthetics 23
Minimally invasive dentistry ,
Minimally invasive preparation ,
Mirror 47, 56, 58, 62, 68, 69
–first-surface
–second-surface
Mobility test
Mock-up , ,
Molar incisor hypomineralization (MIH) 658Index
Monochromatic
Monolithic
Monomers – , , ,
Mortar ,
Mosquito forceps
Mottled teeth
Mounted stone(s) , , ,
Mouth 46, 52–57, 62
Mouthrinse
Movement(s)
–excursive ,
–lateral
–protrusive
Mulberry molar 12
Multi-bladed bur(s) , ,
Muscles 44–46, 49, 59, 64, 68, 72
Mutans 80, 81, 92, 94
N
Nanofilled composite
Nanohybrid composite , ,
Nano-hydroxyapatite
Narrow-spectrum
Natural retention – , ,
Nd:YAG , ,
Near-infrared light transillumination (NILT)
Necrosis 85
Needle shaped diamond point
Nerve desensitization
Nibs , ,
Noise 45, 63,
Nomenclature ,
Non-adhesive restorations , ,
Non-carious lesion(s) 2, 8, 9, , ,
Non-demineralizing cleaning agents
Non-invasive measures
Non-selective removal
Nonstick composite filling instrument ,
Non-supporting cusp
Nutrition ,
Nutrition habits
O
Objective exam 7
Oblique crack
Oblique increment , ,
Oblique ridge , ,
Occlusal adjustment
Occlusal frontal line 23, 24
Occlusal frontal plane 23
Occlusal interrelationship
Occlusal load(s) , , , , , , ,
, ,
Occlusal plane 27, , , , ,
Occlusal splint(s) 23, –
Occlusal stamp , ,
Occlusion ,
–centric ,
–of dentinal tubules
–dynamic
–static
Ocular hazards
Odontoblast , –
Odontoblastic layer
Odontoblast-like cells , 294Office 50, 65, 69
Older patients 5, 6
Onlay
Opacity ,
Opalescence –
Opalescent halo
Opaque , , , , , , , ,
Opaque halo , , ,
Opening of the cavity ,
Operating field , , , – , , ,
Optical density
Optical illusion
Oral cavity 53, 54, 57, 58, 69
Oral environment stabilization
Oral health
–impact profile
–records 32, 33
Oral hygiene – , – , , ,
–habits
Organically modified ceramic
Organic matrix , , – ,
Ormocer
Orthodontic extrusion ,
Orthostatic 45, 46
Outline
–form , , , , , , ,
–of the preparation
Overbite ,
Overcontour 8, 17,
Over finish
Overhang(s) , , , , , , ,
, , – , , ,
Overlapped incisal edge preparation ,
Overlay
Overtrituration
Oxalate
Oygen blocking gel
Oxygen inhibition layer ,
Ozone
P
Packable
Packing instrument, retraction cord
Pain
–diffuse
–odontogenic
–rebound , ,
–referred
–reflex
–spontaneous , ,
–throbbing ,
Palatal chamfer , ,
Palpation ,
Parafunctional activities
Parafunctional habits 11, 23
Parafunctional oral habit
Parallel-walled light guide
Partly sintered blocs
Patient 44, 46, 47, 52–54, 56, 57
Peg-shaped teeth ,
Perforation , , , ,
Performance 49, 56, 57, 63
Periapical abscess
Periapical alterations
Periapical infection
Periapical inflammation ,
Perikymata , 571Periodont 6–8, 32
Periodontal examination 7, 8
Periodontal health ,
Periodontal probing
Peripheral depth cut ,
Pestle
Phenyl-propanedione ,
Phosphoric acid , , ,
–gel – ,
Photochemical damage
Photodynamic therapy
Photomechanic ablation
Piezoelectric
Piggyback wedging technique
Pink discoloration
–of dentin
Pins
–wrench
Pioneer bacteria 81
Pit 89, 90, 98, ,
Pit and fissures
–sealant ,
Plane
–buccolingual ,
–delimitation ,
–dental
–frontal
–horizontal ,
–mesiodistal
–occlusal
–sagittal
–section ,
Plaque
–chemical control of ,
–index 28
–mechanical control of ,
Plasma arch curing units (PAC)
Plastic deformation
Plier ,
–riveting
Pluggers
Plunging ball technique
Point(s) , , , , – , – ,
, ,
–angle
Polishing , , , , , , , ,
, , , , , , , , , ,
, , , –
Polish retention
Polyacrylic acid , , ,
Polychromatic restoration
Polychromatism
Polyether
Polymer –
Polymeric chain ,
Polymerization – , , , , – ,
, , , , , , , ,
–shrinkage ,
–supplemental
Polypharmacy 5, 6
Polywave
Porcelain
Position 44–47, 49, 50, 52–54, 56–58, 61, 65–68,
70, 72, 74
Positioning jig
Post-bonding
Post-eruptive enamel maturation 79, 88, ,
Post-gel phase Index
M–R
Post(s)
–intraradicular
Postoperative sensitivity , , , , ,
, ,
Post-polymerization
Posture 44–49, 52, 54–59, 65, 67–69, 74
Potassium salts
Practice 44, 45, 65, 67, 74
Precapsulated
Preclinical 45, 62, 68, 74
Pre-contoured matrix
Precrystallized state
Predentin ,
Predisposing factors
Pre-gel , , ,
–phase
Pre-odontoblasts
Preparation – , , , , , ,
, , , , , ,
–cavity ,
–components ,
–deep
–guide ,
–horizontal slot
–large size
–medium
–medium-size
–prosthetic
–shallow
–small size
–therapeutic
–tooth – , , , , , ,
–very deep
Prepolymerized ball technique
Pre-procedural mouth rinsing
Pre-reacted glass-ionomer filler
Prevention
–primary , ,
–secondary
–tertiary
Preventive measure , –
Preventive procedures
Preventive resin restorations
Primary dentin
Primary prevention 81
Principle of gradation 27
Prismless enamel , , , ,
Prisms – , ,
Probiotics
Procedure 45–47, 52–54, 56, 57, 59, 61, 67, 68
Prophy-jet device
Prophylactic antibiotics 5
Prophylaxis , , ,
Proportion gauge
Protective materials , ,
Protrusive movement
Provisional restoration , ,
Proximal box preparation
Pulp ,
–accidental exposure of
–aging process
–capping
–condition assessment ,
–curettage ,
–exposure , , , ,
–horn
–inflammation ,
–microexposures –protection ,
–repair ,
–sensitivity testing , ,
–vitality , , , , , , ,
Pulpal alterations, origins of , ,
Pulpal chamber
Pulpal condition
Pulpal diseases 12
Pulpal exposure(s) , , , , ,
Pulpal inflammation , ,
Pulpal pressure
Pulpal wall
Pulpectomy
Pulpitis
–acute irreversible ,
–acute reversible
–hyperplastic chronicle ,
–ulcerative chronic
Pulpless ,
Pulpotomy , , , , ,
Pulse-delay protocol
Pumice
Punch , , ,
Pupal provocation tests 12
Q
Quality of life ,
Quantitative light-induced fluorescence
(QLF) ,
Quartz-tungsten-halogen (QTH)
R
Radiant emittance , – , – ,
Radiant exitance
Radiant power incident
Radiographic analysis
Radiographic examination 98, , , , ,
,
Radiometer
Ramp
Ramp cycle
Reattachment of fractured tooth
Rebonding ,
Reciprocating movement device
Recurrent carious lesion
Re-dentistry 16
Reduction guide
Reflective wedge ,
Refractory cast
Refrigeration , , – , ,
Reinforce , , ,
Reinforcement
Reinforcing structures
Relative air humidity 64
Remaining tooth structure , , , ,
, , , , , , , , , ,
, , , , , – , , ,
, , , ,
Remineralization 78, 79, 81, 82
Removal of the remaining carious tissue ,
,
Repetitive restorative cycle 29, 30,
Repetitive strain 45, 65
Resin-based sealant , ,
Resin cement , , , 550Resin infiltration technique
Resin modified GIC (RMGIC) ,
Resinous monomers
Resistance , , , ,
Resistance form , , ,
Rest 48, 52, 61, 62, 64, 65, 67, 74
Restoration technique 5–12, 16–21, 23, 28–32,
–
–direct
–extraoral
–indirect
–intraoral
–semi-direct ,
Retainer
–disposable
–integrated
–Ivory
–matrix , – , , ,
–Siqveland , , ,
–Tofflemire , , – , , , ,
–universal , , , , , , ,
, , ,
Retention
–additional ,
–artificial
–axial offset
–cove ,
–form , ,
–locks , ,
–micromechanical
–slot ,
–undercuts
Retraction clamp ,
Retraction cord , , , , , ,
–packing instrument
Reverse curve
–Hollenback’s
Right-handed 52, 53, 56
Risk assessment 7, 28
Risk communication 33
Riveted matrix
Riveting plier
Rods ,
Room 50, 52, 57, 63, 68
Root canal treatment ,
Root furcation ,
Rotary instrument
–abrasive , ,
–cutting ,
–head , , ,
–neck
–shank , , , ,
Rotation speed
–axial
–cutting , ,
–peripheral
Roughness ,
Round angles
Round bur ,
Round diamond point , ,
Round internal line angles ,
Rubber dam – , – , – , ,
,
–frame
–isolation , , , , , , ,
,
Rubber sheet – , , – , , ,
, , 518Index
S
Safety
–glasses , ,
–procedures
Saliva
–absorbers
–acquired pellicle 81
–buffering capacity 81, 94
–clearance 81
–ejectors , , ,
–hygoformic –
–flux 80–82
Salivary glands’ ducts
Sandblasting , ,
Saphenous vein 49
Saw
Scaffold
Scalpel blade , ,
Schultz
Scissor
Sclerotic dentin , , , ,
Scoliosis 46, 52, 65
Screwdriver-shaped incisors 12
Sculpture –
Sealers
Secondary caries , , , , , ,
, ,
–lesions 20
Sectional matrix , ,
Selective bonding ,
Selective removal ,
Self-cure
Self-etching adhesive , , ,
Self-retentive preparation
Self-sealing
Sensitivity ,
–scale
–thermal testing
Separation
–ring , , , ,
–technique
–tooth 78–80, 82, ,
Serrated strip ,
Setting time , ,
Shade guide , – ,
Shade selection , , , , , , ,
,
Shade tabs ,
Shadows 57, 58, 64
Shared decision-making 2, 29, 31, 33, 40
Shrinkage , , , , , , , ,
, , ,
Shrinkage stress , , , , , ,
, , , ,
Sight’s angle
Silane coupling agent , , , , ,
Silanized surface ,
Silicon carbide (Sic) ,
–brush
Silicone index , ,
Silver ,
Simple preparation
Simulator phantom
Sintering
Site – –site 1 ,
–site 2
–site 3 ,
Size –
–size 1 , ,
–size 2
–size 3 ,
Sjögren’s syndrome 81
Sleeve technique ,
Slots
Small preparations
Smear layer , , , , ,
Smear plugs
Smile esthetics
Smile line 24
Smoking habit
Smooth surfaces – ,
Smooth walls
Sodium fluoride
Sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS) ,
Sodium monofluorophosphate
Soft start
–protocol
Sonic –
Sound 63
Spanish white
Spatula , ,
Spectral absorption ,
Spectral output
Spectral power
Spherical particles , ,
Spiral wheels , ,
Split teeth
Spoon excavator , ,
Spot-welding device
Spray of air-water
S-shaped curve
Staining
Stainless steel , ,
Stamp , ,
Standard light guide
Stannous fluoride
Stem cells
Steps , , ,
–cycle
–of tooth preparation
Stepwise excavation , , , , ,
Sternum bone 56
Stimulated emission of radiation
Stimulus
–cold thermal
–evaporative
–osmotic ,
–tactile
–thermal , ,
Stool 46, 48–50, 52, 54, 56, 57, 67, 69
Strain
Stratified layering technique
Strength , , , – ,
Streptococcus 80, 81, 94
–S. mutans ,
Stress
–compressive
–concentration –
–distribution
–shearing –tensile
Stress-absorbing layer ,
Strip, abrasive , ,
Strontium
Strontiumapatite
Students 46, 67, 68, 74
Subjective exam 3, 7
Sucrose 78, 80, 81
Suction 52, 58, 63, , – , ,
Sugar alcohol ,
Sugars –
Supine 53, 54, 58
Supporting cusps , ,
Surface conditioning
Surface pre-reacted glass-ionomer (S-PRG)
Surface pretreatment
Surface roughness , ,
Surfaces (tooth) 46, 47, 56
Surface sealing , ,
Surface texture
Surgical crown lengthening 12, 20, 25
Symptoms , , ,
Syringes , ,
Systemic diseases 2, 4, 28, 30
Systemic phase 29, 30
T
Tactile feedback
Tattoo
T-band , , ,
Technique
–stratified layering
–wedge alternation ,
Teeth clenching
Temperature 44, 45, 63, 64
Templates ,
Temporomandibular joint (TMJ) 7, 23
Tensile strength
Terminology ,
Tertiary amine
Test cavity preparation
Thermal 64
Thermal expansion coefficients
Thermoplastic material
3D digital impression
3D model
3D printing
Three-wheeled diamond depth cutter ,
Thumping action
Tin , ,
Tint(s) , , , , , ,
Tofflemire ,
Tongue retractor , ,
Tooth 46, 47, 57, 61, 62
–contour
–face
–fractures 6, 12
–function
–mobility testing
–preparation , , , , , , ,
, – , ,
–separation
Toothbrush , ,
–powered
–sonic Index
S–Z
Toothpaste , , , ,
Torque
Torso 45, 46, 54, 56, 69, 70
Total bonding
Total energy concept
Total-etch adhesive system ,
Training model
Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β )
Transillumination ,
Transitional line angle ,
Translucent – , , , , , ,
, , ,
Transparent strip crowns ,
Transposition 12, 13
Trans-surgical restoration ,
Tray 53, 56
Trayless impression ,
Treatment 44, 50, 54, 56, 63–69, 74
Treatment plan 2, 7, 8, 16, 22, 29, 30
Triangular fossae
Trimmer, gingival margin , , –
Trituration , ,
Try-in procedure
Tubular sclerosis
Tungsten carbide , , ,
Turbine , , , , ,
Turbo light guide
Tweezer ,
Twist drill ,
U
Ultrasonic , , , ,
Ultrasound –
Ultraviolet (UV) light
–radiation
Umbrella effect ,
Unbonded wall ,
Under-contour
Under finish
Undermined enamel 84, 97, , , , ,
, , , ,
Under trituration ,
Uniform curing cycle
Upper lip curvature 24–26
Urea
Urgent phase 30V
Vacuum thermoforming machine
Value , , , , ,
Vapor
Varicose veins 47, 65
Varnish(es) ,
Vascular changes
Vasoconstrictors solutions
Veneer – , ,
Vertical percussion
Vertical slot preparation , ,
Vertical walls ,
Viewing perspective
Viscosity , , , ,
Visible light ,
Vision ,
–direct 52–54, 56, 58, 62
–indirect 56, 58, 62
Visual examination 96, 98
Vitreous ceramic
Volumetric shrinkage
W
Wall(s)
–axial , , , , , , ,
–buccal ,
–convergence of ,
–distal
–external ,
–gingival , , – ,
–horizontal surrounding
–internal ,
–labial
–lingual ,
–mesial ,
–pulpal , , , ,
–sub-pulpal
–vertical surrounding , ,
Wand-style design unit
Water sorption , ,
Wax-up ,
Weakened cusps ,
Weak point
Wear
–facet 23, –resistance
–three-body
–two-body
Wedge(s)
–alternation technique ,
–curved
–effect ,
–reflective
–rigid , , , , , ,
–wedging
–wooden , , , , – , ,
, , , , , , , , ,
, ,
Wedging, preoperative ,
White light , , ,
Whitening 14–16
White spot(s)
–lesion 83–86, 97, 98, , , , , ,
,
Width-to-length ratio – ,
Window 65
Window preparation
Working areas 53, 64
Working field
Work-related musculoskeletal disorders
(WMSD) 44, 45, 65, 74
Wrap preparation ,
X
Xenon plasma
Xylitol , , ,
Y
Y-TZP zirconia
Z
Zinc
–oxide
–phosphate
–polycarboxylate
Zinc oxide-eugenol cements
Zirconia, high-translucent
Zirconia-reinforced glass ceramic ,
Zone 45, 52, 53, 58Index
Basavaraj
Subhashchandra
Phulari
ORTHODONTICS
Principles
and
Practice
nd
Edition
ORTHODONTICS
Principles and Practice
Philadelphia | New Delhi | London | PanamaThe Health Sciences Publisher
ORTHODONTICS
Principles and Practice
Basavaraj Subhashchandra Phulari BDS MDS (Ortho) FRSH FAGE
Formerly, Faculty of Department of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics
Mauras College of Dentistry, Hospital and Oral Research Institute
Republic of MauritiusSECOND EDITION
Headquarters
Jaypee Brothers Medical Publishers (P) Ltd.
/24, Ansari Road, Daryaganj
New Delhi , India
Phone: +91-11-
Fax: +91-11-
E-mail: jaypee@jaypeebrothers.com
Inquiries for bulk sales may be solicited at: jaypee@jaypeebrothers.com
Orthodontics: Principles and Practices
First Edition:
Second Edition:
ISBN: -93- -89-5
Printed at:Overseas Offices
J.P. Medical Ltd.
83, Victoria Street, London
SW1H 0HW (UK)
Phone: +44-20
Fax: +44(0)20
E-mail: info@jpmedpub.comJaypee Medical Inc.
Chestnut Street
Suite , Philadelphia, PA , USA
Phone: +1 - -
E-mail: support@jpmedus.com
Jaypee Brothers Medical Publishers (P) Ltd.
Bhotahity, Kathmandu, Nepal
Phone: + -
E-mail: kathmandu@jaypeebrothers.com
Website: www.jaypeebrothers.com
Website: www.jaypeedigital.com
© , Jaypee Brothers Medical Publishers
The views and opinions expressed in this book are solely those of the original contributor(s)/author(s) and do not
necessarily represent those of editor(s) of the book.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication and may be reproduced, stored or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photo copying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission in writing of the publishers.
All brand names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered
trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book.
Medical knowledge and practice change constantly. This book is designed to provide accurate, authoritative information about
the subject matter in question. However, readers are advised to check the most current information available on procedures
included and check information from the manufacturer of each product to be administered, to verify the recommended
dose, formula, method and duration of administration, adverse effects and contra indications. It is the responsibility of the
practitioner to take all appropriate safety precautions. Neither the publisher nor the author(s)/editor(s) assume any liability
for any injury and/or damage to persons or property arising from or related to use of material in this book.
This book is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in providing professional medical services. If
such advice or services are required, the services of a competent medical professional should be sought.
Every effort has been made where necessary to contact holders of copyright to obtain permission to reproduce copyright
material. If any have been inadvertently overlooked, the publisher will be pleased to make the necessary arrangements
at the first opportunity.Jaypee-Highlights Medical Publishers Inc.
City of Knowledge, Bld. , 2nd Floor, Clayton
Panama City, Panama
Phone: +1 - -
Fax: +1 - -
E-mail: cservice@jphmedical.com
Jaypee Brothers Medical Publishers (P) Ltd.
17/1-B, Babar Road, Block-B, Shaymali
Mohammadpur, Dhaka-
Bangladesh
Mobile: +
E-mail: jaypeedhaka@gmail.com
Jaypee Brothers Medical Publishers (P) Ltd
Dedicated to
My dear parents (Subhashchandra and Shivalingamma Phulari),
brothers (Sangamesh, Jagadeesh and Manjunath),
My beloved wife Dr Rashmi GS Phulari, MDS (Oral Pathology & Microbiology) and
My dearest sons (Yashas and Vrishank) for their love, support and encouragement
And to
Dear (Late) Chandu who is always in our hearts and thoughts...
Contributors
Aakash Shah BDS MDS (Ortho)
Professor
Department of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics
Faculty of Dental Sciences
Dharmsinh Desai University
Nadiad, Gujarat, India
Aneshwar Rohanlal Bhagwandass BDS (Manipal), DMD (USA)
Private Practioner
United States of America
Anil Shah BDS Master of ESOLA Academy Vienna University, Austria
President, SOLA India
Innovate Dental Center
Surat, Gujarat, India
Basavaraj Subhashchandra Phulari
BDS, MDS(Ortho), FRSH, FAGE
Formerly, Faculty
Department of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics
Mauras College of Dentistry,
Hospital and Oral Research Institute
Republic of Mauritius
Basti Risi Kino DMD, MDSc, PGDip (PSM)
Director of Public Dental Services
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life
Republic of Mauritius
Desi Moodley
BDS, PDD-Aesthetic Dent (Stell), MSc Dent Sc (Stell), PhD (UWC)
Researcher
Oral and Dental Research Institute
University of the Western Cape
Cape Town, South Africa
Frank Tsahannerr Dr Med Dent (Munich University)
Implantologist
Perchastr.5
Berg am starnberger see, Germany
Mark Donald Vernon BChD MFDSRCS (England)
Clinical Lecturer
The Barts and The London Dental Institute
United Kingdom
Mohan Vakade MDS (Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery)
Master of ESOLA Laser Academy, Vienna University
Professor and HOD
Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery
Vaidik Dental College
Daman, Gujarat, IndiaNaresh Thukral
BDS Master of ESOLA Academy Vienna University, Austria
Founder President, SOLA India
Head, Laser Academy and a Faculty
Executive Member of Board
SOLA-International
Ohana Gabriel
Dentiste
7 Ar Gombetta
, Courbevoie
France
Poorya Naik BDS MDS (Ortho)
Reader
Department of Orthodontics and
Dentofacial Orthopedics
College of Dental Sciences
Davangare, Karnataka, India
Rashmi GS BDS MDS (Oral Pathology and Microbiology)
Professor
Department of Oral Pathology and Microbiology
Manubhai Patel Dental College and Hospital
Vadodara, Gujarat, India
Syed Zakaullah BDS MDS (Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery)
Professor and Vice Principal
Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery
Al-Badar Dental College and Hospital
Gulbarga, Karnataka, India
Valentina Tsipova BDS MDS (Ortho)
University of Tartu
Estonia
Richard Poavin and Brulet Alain
Graphic Designer
Rich.C.lte’e
Route co^tiere-TrouAux-Biches
i^le Maurice
Rue Aristide Briand
conflans Ste, Honorine
France
Preface to Second Edition
Since the first edition of this book was published in , I have received an overwhelming feedback in the form of
numerous email messaged and letters. I am extremely grateful for the positive response the book has received from the
faculty in the field of Orthodontics and students alike.
The basic format of the book comprising of 49 chapters grouped under 15 sections is retained in the second edition
as well. The book continues to give simple and logical narration of difficult orthodontic concepts in a fluid easy-tounderstand language.
Numerous high-quality clinical photographs and skilfully made graphic illustrations throughout the book make it
easier for the students to grasp the subject. Few pictures that lacked good resolution have been replaced in the new
edition.
Innovative self-explanatory flowcharts and tables along with good pictures have come to be the hallmark of this title.
In addition, summary charts given at the end of each chapter as Chapter Overview come handy during revision of the
subject in preparation to exams.
Sample questions in both long question and short note formats are given for each chapter to prepare the students for
theory examination. Chapter-wise Multiple Choice Questions (MCQs) are also given to aid students in preparation for
viva-voce.
All the efforts have been made to present the subject in concise yet all comprehensive manner. It is hoped that the new
edition will continue to be appreciated by students and staff alike.
Basavaraj Subhashchandra Phulari
basavarajsp@gmail.com
Preface to First Edition
The fascinating field of Orthodontics has come a long way since the era of finger pressure and crude wires to the more
sophisticated, state-of-art techniques and appliances of today. The oldest specialty of dentistry has witnessed immense
progress in the last few decades, both in terms of technology as well as patient management. Braces are no more only for
children and adolescents. More and more adult patients are seeking orthodontic treatment in the recent years. Thanks to
technical advances in the appliance design, there has been increased understanding of cellular responses to orthodontic
force and awareness among general public.
The ever-growing field of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics as it is called today is fascinating and at the
same time complex. Teaching orthodontics to undergraduates had never been more challenging, especially, in the view
of vast literature and comparatively minimal exposure to clinical orthodontics, the undergraduate students generally
have during their course. This book is a humble step towards meeting this enormous challenge of providing an all
comprehensive, yet simple-to-understand text for the students of dentistry. The objective is to narrate the essentials of
orthodontics in a simple and logical way, at the same time arouse interest in the minds of undergraduate dental students
about this wonderful field. Furthermore, it is also hoped that the book will be of value to postgraduate students as well.
The 49 chapters, encompassing 15 sections have been compiled by an impressive bunch of academicians around
the world. The chapter, History of Orthodontics gives a quick glance at the turning events in the evolution of the first
speacialty of dentistry. Often asked and considerably difficult concepts such as Cephalometrics and Model Analysis are
explained systematically with provision for quick review. Management of different types of malocclusion is narrated in
simple manner with complete case records to support the text.
A separate chapter on Preclinical Orthodontics has been included for the first time which deals with rationale,
armamentarium and step-by-step wire bending procedures, much required for undergraduate students. A working
classification of basic orthodontic instruments is given with their modes of usage in chapter 27— Orthodontic Instruments .
There is another section that covers the Recent Advances in Orthodontics including implants, invisalign and application
of lasers in orthodontics.
Over 2, high quality clinical photographs and professionally done graphic illustrations with informative legends in
the book make the text easy to grasp. Incorporation of tables, flow charts and boxes throughout the textbook wherever
necessary will give the reader a convenient summary of key features and also make reviewing easier.
An accompanying booklet MCQs in Orthodontics features over 2, multiple choice questions given chapter-wise
with answer keys. Furthermore, in each chapter, the questions follow the same order of points given in that particular
chapter, thus can act as a very good means of revision of that topic/chapter and at the same time prepares the student for
viva voce as well as PG entrance test and other competitive tests.
I regret any deficiencies and shortcomings that might have crept in despite our best efforts. I would also welcome
comments and suggestions from both students and teachers for further improvement of the book.
Basavaraj Subhashchandra Phulari
Acknowledgments
There are several people who have contributed to this project without whose cheerful cooperation the task would have
been arduous if not impossible.
With profound sense of gratitude and respect, I express my heartfelt thanks to Dr Rajendrasinh Rathod MDS,
Chairman of Manubhai Patel Dental College and Hospital, Vadodara, Gujarat, India; Chairman and Dean of Mauras
College of Dentistry, Hospital and Oral Research Institute, Republic of Mauritius, for his timely suggestions, critical
observations and above all for his inspirational support not only in this endeavor but throughout my academic career.
He has been a constant source of encouragement and guidance throughout this project while providing me with all the
facilities required for completion of this work. My special thanks to Dr YK Desai, Professor, Prosthodontics for support
and comments he provided to this work. I would also like to thank Dr Yashraj Rathod, Trustee, Manubhai Patel Dental
College and Hospital, Vadodara, Gujarat, India for his unstinting support and encouragement during this endeavor.
I have much pleasure in acknowledging the help I have received from my students of Mauras College of Dentistry,
Hospital and Oral Research Institute, Republic of Mauritius in grueling sessions of spell check, and for familiarizing me
with ‘student’s point of view’ .
I am indebted to Dr Anil Shah and Dr Aakash Shah for all the help and encouragement I have received from them
during the formative stages of this project. I am proud to have them as contributors.
I extend my special thanks to Mr Chitranjan Luchoo for his expert comments and suggestions regarding photography,
and Mr Prakash Gopoul for providing crisp, neat line drawings for the book. I will be failing in my duty if I do not mention
the affection and support I have received from Dr Goyal and family, Jayantee Raghunandan and family, Ramesh Purgus
and family and Gopoul family who have always provided that moral boost much needed during compilation of the book.
I take this opportunity to thank my beloved parents Mr Subhashchandra Phulari and Mrs Shivalingamma Phulari,
and brothers Sangamesh, Jagadish, and Manjunath Phulari for their constant support and cooperation during the entire
course of this publication. I thank my beloved wife Dr Rashmi GS Phulari MDS (Oral Pathology and Microbiology) for
being a constant source of inspiration and support throughout this project, helping me at every step right from checking
the flow of text, arrangement of photographs to final proofs. I fondly acknowledge my dearest sons Yashas and Vrishank
for their patience and love.
I profusely thank Shri Jitendar P Vij (Group Chairman), Mr Ankit Vij (Group President) and production team of
M/s Jaypee Brothers Medical Publishers (P) Ltd, New Delhi, India for their enthusiasm, excellent cooperation and
constant support in publishing the book.
Most of all, I thank God for all the kindness and mercy showered upon me.
Contents
SECTION 1: Introduction and History
1. Introduction ................................................................................................................................................ 1
Basavaraj S Phulari
2. History ......................................................................................................................................................... 7
Basavaraj S Phulari
SECTION 2: Growth and Development
3. General Principles of Growth and Development .................................................................................. 18
Rashmi GS, Valentina Tsipova
4. Prenatal Growth and Development ....................................................................................................... 35
Rashmi GS
5. Postnatal Growth and Development .................................................................................................... 44
Basavaraj S Phulari, Poorya Naik
6. Development of Dentition and Occlusion ............................................................................................ 51
Basavaraj S Phulari, Rashmi GS
SECTION 3: Classification and Etiology
7. Occlusion—Basic Concepts ................................................................................................................... 63
Basavaraj S Phulari
8. Classification of Malocclusions ............................................................................................................. 71
Basavaraj S Phulari, Poorya Naik
9. General Etiological Factors of Malocclusion ........................................................................................ 89
Valentina Tsipova, Rashmi GS
10. Local Etiological Factors ........................................................................................................................ 96
Rashmi GS
11. Genetics in Orthodontics .....................................................................................................................
Rashmi GS, Basavaraj S Phulari
12. Epidemiology of Malocclusion ............................................................................................................
Basti Risi Kino, Basavaraj S Phulari
SECTION 4: Diagnosis and Diagnostic Aids
13. Orthodontic Diagnosis .........................................................................................................................
Aakash Shah, Basavaraj S Phulari
xiv
Orthodontics: Principles and Practice 14. Model Analysis ......................................................................................................................................
Basavaraj S Phulari
15. Cephalometrics .....................................................................................................................................
Basavaraj S Phulari
16. Maturity Indicators ...............................................................................................................................
Basavaraj S Phulari
SECTION 5: Biomechanics
17. Biology of Tooth Movement ................................................................................................................
Aakash Shah, Basavaraj S Phulari
18. Mechanics of Tooth Movement ...........................................................................................................
Aakash Shah, Basavaraj S Phulari
SECTION 6: Preventive and Interceptive Orthodontics
19. Preventive Orthodontics .....................................................................................................................
Basavaraj S Phulari, Ohana Gabriel
20. Interceptive Orthodontics ...................................................................................................................
Basavaraj S Phulari, Aneshwar Roshanlal Bhagwandass
21. Oral Habits and Their Management ....................................................................................................
Basavaraj S Phulari
SECTION 7: Treatment Planning
22. Orthodontic Treatment Planning ........................................................................................................
Basavaraj S Phulari
23. Anchorage in Orthodontics .................................................................................................................
Aakash Shah, Basavaraj S Phulari
24. Methods of Gaining Space ...................................................................................................................
Basavaraj S Phulari
25. Arch Expansion .....................................................................................................................................
Valentina Tsipova, Basavaraj S Phulari
26. Extraction in Orthodontics ...................................................................................................................
Basavaraj S Phulari, Frank Tsahannerr
SECTION 8: Orthodontic Instruments
27. Orthodontic Instruments .....................................................................................................................
Basavaraj S Phulari
SECTION 9: Pre-clinical Orthodontics
28. Pre-clinical Orthodontics .....................................................................................................................
Basavaraj S Phulari
xv
Orthodontics: Principles and PracticeSECTION 10: Orthodontic Appliances
29. General Principles of Orthodontic Appliances ..................................................................................
Poorya Naik, Basavaraj S Phulari
30. Removable Appliances .........................................................................................................................
Basavaraj S Phulari
31. Fixed Appliances and Techniques .......................................................................................................
Poorya Naik
32. Functional Appliances ..........................................................................................................................
Aakash Shah, Basavaraj S Phulari
33. Orthopedic Appliances ........................................................................................................................
Basavaraj S Phulari
SECTION 11: Corrective Orthodontics
34. Management of Class I Malocclusion ..................................................................................................
Basavaraj S Phulari, Aakash Shah
35. Management of Class II Malocclusion .................................................................................................
Basavaraj S Phulari
36. Management of Class III Malocclusion ...............................................................................................
Basavaraj S Phulari
37. Management of Midline Diastema .....................................................................................................
Desi Modley, Basavaraj S Phulari
38. Management of Open Bite ...................................................................................................................
Basavaraj S Phulari
39. Management of Deep Bite ....................................................................................................................
Poorya Naik
40. Management of Crossbite ....................................................................................................................
Basavaraj S Phulari, Poorya Naik
41. Management of Cleft Lip and Palate ...................................................................................................
Poorya Naik, Basavaraj S Phulari
SECTION 12: Surgical Orthodontics
42. Surgical Orthodontics ...........................................................................................................................
Frank Tsahannerr, Syed Zakaullah, Basavaraj S Phulari
SECTION 13: Retention and Relapse
43. Retention and Relapse .........................................................................................................................
Basavaraj S Phulari
xvi
Orthodontics: Principles and PracticeSECTION 14: Laboratory Procedures in Orthodontics
44. Orthodontic Study Model ....................................................................................................................
Basavaraj S Phulari, Valentina Tsipova
45. Welding and Soldering ........................................................................................................................
Basavaraj S Phulari
SECTION 15: Recent Advances in Orthodontics
46. Adult Orthodontics ...............................................................................................................................
Basavaraj S Phulari
47. Implants in Orthodontics .....................................................................................................................
Mark Donald Vernon
48. Invisalign Techniques ............................................................................................................................
Basavaraj S Phulari
49. Lasers in Orthodontics .........................................................................................................................
Anil Shah, Naresh Thukral, Mohan Vakade
50. MCQs in Orthodontics ...........................................................................................................................
Basavaraj S Phulari
Index .......................................................................................................................................................
1INTRODUCTION
Humans have attempted to straighten the teeth for
thousands of years before orthodontics became a dental
specialty in the late nineteenth century. Proper alignment of
the teeth has long been recognized to be an essential factor
for esthetics, function and overall preservation of dental
health. Malposed/poorly aligned teeth may predispose
to a number of unfavorable sequelae such as poor oral
hygiene predisposing to periodontal diseases and dental
caries, poor esthetics giving rise to psychosocial problems,
increased risk of trauma, abnormalities of function and
temporomandibular joint (TMJ) problems (Box 1.1) .
Box 1.1: Unfavorable sequelae of malocclusion
Poor facial appearance
Poor oral hygiene maintenance
Risk of dental caries
Risk of periodontal diseases
Abnormalities of functions
Psychosocial problems
Risk of trauma to the teeth
TMJ problems.
Orthodontics is the branch of dentistry concerned
with the growth of the face, development of occlusion
and the prevention and correction of occlusal anomalies/
abnormalities. Th e term “orthodontics” comes from Greek:
“orthos” meaning right or correct and “odontos” meaning
tooth (Flowchart 1.1) . Th e term ‘orthodontics’ was fi rst
coined by Le Felon in .
DEFINITION
Knowing the defi nition is often an important initial step
in understanding any subject. A number of defi nitions
have been put forward over the years to explain what
orthodontics is. Some of the widely followed defi nitions
are given below:
In , Noyes gave the fi rst defi nition of orthodontics
as “Th e study of the relation of the teeth to the development
of the face and the correction of arrested and perverted
development. ”In , Th e British Society of Orthodontists
proposed that “Orthodontics includes the study of growth
and development of jaws and face particularly and the
body generally, as infl uencing the position of the teeth;
the study of action and reaction of internal and external
infl uences on the development, and the prevention and
correction of arrested and perverted development. ”
Later, the American Board of Orthodontics (ABO) and
the American Association of Orthodontists (AAO) stated
that, “Orthodontics is that specifi c area of dental practice
that has, as its responsibility, the study and supervision
of the growth and development of the dentition and its
related anatomical structures from birth to dental maturity,
including all the preventive and corrective procedures of
dental irregularities, requiring the repositioning of teeth
by functional or mechanical means to establish normal
occlusion and pleasing facial contours. ”
WHAT IS MALOCCLUSION?
Th e term ‘malocclusion’ was fi rst coined by Guilford
and it refers to any irregularities in occlusion beyond the
accepted range of normal category. Malocclusions are
caused by hereditary or environmental factors or more
commonly, by both the factors acting together. One of the
most common causes of malocclusion is the disproportion
in size between the jaw and the teeth or between the
maxillary and the mandibular jaws. A child who inherits
mother’s small jaw and father’s large teeth, may have teeth
that are too big for the jaw, causing crowding in the arch.
Abnormal oral habits, such as thumb/digit sucking, lip
biting and mouth breathing may also cause malocclusion
by adversely aff ecting the normal occlusal development.
Malocclusion can be presented in a number of ways.
Some of the common characteristics of malocclusion include:
Overcrowded teeth
Spacing between the teeth
Improper “bite” between maxillary and mandibular teeth
Disproportion in the size and the alignment between
the maxillary and the mandibular jaws.
It must be appreciated that not all malocclusions need
treatment. Treatment of malocclusions that are mildly unesthetic and not detrimental to the health of the teeth and their
supporting structures may not be needed and is not justifi ed.
AIMS OF ORTHODONTIC TREATMENT
Although orthodontic treatment improves facial appearance
and is occasionally performed for cosmetic reasons, it
should be aimed at restoration of overall dental health.Introducti on
Phulari BS1CHAPTER
Flowchart 1.1: Derivation of the term orthodontics
2
SECTION 1 Introduction and History Jackson has summarized the aims of orthodontic
treatment that are popularly known as Jackson’s Triad
(Fig. 1.1) . They are:
i. Functional efficiency
ii. Structural balance
iii. Esthetic harmony.
Functional Efficiency
The teeth along with their surrounding structures, are
required to perform certain significant functions such as
mastication and phonation. Orthodontic treatment should
increase the efficiency of the functions performed.
Structural Balance
Orthodontic treatment not only affects teeth but also the
soft tissue envelop and the associated skeletal structures.
The treatment should maintain a balance between these
structures and the correction of one should not affect the
health of the other.
Esthetic Harmony
The orthodontic treatment should enhance the overall
esthetic appeal of the individual. This might just require
the alignment of certain teeth or movement of the
complete dental arch, including its basal bone. The aim is
to get results which go well with the patient’s personality
and make him or her look more esthetically appealing.
BRANCHES OF ORTHODONTICS
The general field of orthodontics can be divided into the
following three categories based on the nature and time of
intervention:
Preventive orthodontics
Interceptive orthodontics
Corrective orthodontics.
Preventive Orthodontics
Preventive orthodontics is defined as “ Action taken to
preserve the integrity of what appears to be the normal
occlusion at a specific time. ” As the name implies, preventive orthodontics includes actions undertaken
prior to the onset of a malocclusion, so as to prevent the
anticipated development of a malocclusion.
Preventive orthodontics encompasses all those
procedures that attempt to ward off untoward
environmental attacks or anything that would change
the normal course of events. They include the care of
deciduous dentition with restoration of carious lesions
that might change the arch length; monitoring of eruption
and shedding timetable of teeth; early recognition and
elimination of oral habits that might interfere with the
normal development of the teeth and jaws; removal of
retained deciduous teeth and supernumeraries, which may
impede eruption of permanent teeth and maintenance of
space following premature loss of deciduous teeth to allow
proper eruption of their successors.
Interceptive Orthodontics
Interceptive orthodontics implies that an abnormal situation
(malocclusion) already exists when the action is taken.
Certain interceptive procedures are undertaken during the
early manifestation of malocclusion to lessen the severity of
malocclusion and, sometimes, to eliminate the cause.
Interceptive orthodontics is defined by the American
Association of Orthodontists as “That phase of the science
and art of orthodontics employed to recognize and
eliminate potential irregularities and malpositions in the
developing dentofacial complex. ”
Interceptive procedures include serial extraction,
correction of developing anterior crossbite, control of
abnormal oral habits, removal of supernumeraries and
ankylosed teeth and elimination of bony or tissue barriers
to erupting teeth.
Certain procedures undertaken may be common
to both preventive and interceptive orthodontics.
However, the timing of the services rendered is different.
Preventive orthodontic procedures are carried out before
the manifestation of a malocclusion, while the goal of
interceptive orthodontics is to intercept a malocclusion
that has already been developed or is developing, so as to
restore a normal occlusion.
Corrective Orthodontics
Corrective orthodontics, like interceptive orthodontics, is
also undertaken after the manifestation of a malocclusion.
It employs certain technical procedures to reduce or
correct the malocclusion and to eliminate the possible
sequelae of malocclusion.
Corrective surgical procedures may require removable
or fixed mechanotherapy, functional or orthopedic
appliances, or in some cases, an orthognathic/surgical
approach.
ORTHODONTIC APPLIANCES
Today orthodontists have a wide array of appliances in
their armamentarium to treat malocclusions. Success
of orthodontic treatment depends on the appropriate
Fig. 1.1: Aims of orthodontic treatment (Jackson’s triad)
3
CHAPTER 1 Introductionselection of the appliances, the timing of the treatment, the
type of tooth movement and/or skeletal changes desired,
age of the patient and other factors. There are basically four
types of orthodontic appliances, which can either be used
individually or in combination to treat malocclusions.
i. Removable orthodontic appliances
ii. Fixed orthodontic appliances
iii. Functional appliances
iv. Orthopedic appliances/Extra-oral force appliances
Removable Orthodontic Appliances
Removable orthodontic appliances are so called because
they can be removed and fitted back into the mouth by the
patient (Fig. 1.2) .
Use of removable appliances requires careful case
selection for the success of the treatment. They are
ideally used when simple tipping movement of teeth is
sufficient to correct a certain type of malocclusion. The
range of malocclusions that can be treated with removable
appliances alone is limited. They can also be used as
passive appliances to maintain the teeth in their corrected
positions after active phase of orthodontic therapy, e.g.
retainers. Removable orthodontic appliances can be used
in conjunction with fixed mechanotherapy.
Fixed Orthodontic Appliances
Fixed orthodontic appliances are so called because they
are fixed to the teeth and cannot be removed by the
patient. Fixed orthodontic therapy involves fixation of
attachments (brackets) to the teeth and application of
forces by arch wires or auxiliaries via these attachments
(Fig. 1.3) .
Fixed appliances are indicated when multiple tooth
movements are required for correction of malocclusion,
such as rotations and bodily movement of the teeth.
Fixed mechanotherapy allows fine finishing and settling
of occlusion. There are a number of fixed orthodontic
techniques such as: Begg’s, Edgewise, pre-adjusted
Edgewise, straight wire and lingual techniques.Functional Appliances
Functional appliances/myofunctional appliances are
those appliances that utilize the forces of the circumoral
musculature for their action to effect the desired changes
(Fig. 1.4) . They act principally by holding the mandible
away from the normal resting position to effect growth
modification of the mandible.
Orthopedic Appliances/Extraoral Force Appliances
Orthopedic appliances use extraoral forces of high
magnitude (> g/side) to bring about skeletal changes.
Intermittent application of such high forces in the growth
period aids in correction of skeletal malocclusions
by growth modification. Orthopedic appliances like
functional appliances require good patient compliance for
their success, e.g. headgears and chin cup (Fig. 1.5) .
TIMING OF ORTHODONTIC INTERVENTION
Appropriate timing of orthodontic treatment is essential
to accomplish the desired treatment outcome and its
long-term stability. Timing of orthodontic intervention is
related to the stage of dentition.
Deciduous Dentition
Orthodontic treatment during this stage mainly includes
the following:
 Parental education
Care of deciduous dentition
Space maintenance
Elimination of abnormal oral habits.
Early Mixed Dentition
Orthodontic treatment during this stage includes the
monitoring of shedding timetable, serial extraction, space
maintenance and control of abnormal oral habit. Although
most corrective orthodontic procedures are performed in
older children and adolescents, it may be advantageous
in some cases to begin the treatment early before all the
permanent teeth have erupted and facial growth is complete.
Fig. 1.2: Removable orthodontic appliance
Fig. 1.3: Fixed orthodontic appliance
4
SECTION 1 Introduction and HistoryAdvantages of early orthodontic treatment include:
Correction of bite problems by guiding jaw growth and
controlling the width of the upper and lower dental arches.
Reduction or elimination of abnormal swallowing or
speech problems.
Growth modification using functional and orthopedic
appliances is best done in this period where significant
growth is taking place.
Shortening and simplification of later orthodontic
treatment.
Prevention of later tooth extractions.
Improvements in appearance and self-esteem.
Parental education.
Late Mixed Dentition/Early Permanent Dentition
Most corrective orthodontic treatments are carried out in
late mixed dentition or early permanent dentition stage.
Late Treatment
Many types of orthodontic treatments are feasible
after adolescence. However, growth modification
procedures to correct skeletal malocclusion may not
be feasible due to cessation of growth.
Surgical treatment involving orthognathic surgeries
are best carried out in late teens/early adulthood after
the cessation of growth.
SCOPE OF ORTHODONTICS
From the era of finger pressure application to invisalign
treatment, the field of orthodontics has witnessed
profound development in the form of newer appliance
designs and techniques, which have only increased the
scope of orthodontics.
Monitoring and Assessment of Developing Dentition
Shedding and eruption schedule is closely monitored
to ensure the normal course of events. Space maintainers are given in case of premature loss
of primary teeth to facilitate the eruption of successor
teeth.
Habit breaking appliances are given to eliminate
deleterious oral habits, such as thumb/digit-sucking
and lip-biting, which can adversely affect the
development of dentofacial structures.
Planned extraction of certain deciduous and/or
permanent teeth (serial extraction) done in selected
cases can prevent future development of crowding by
providing adequate space for the remaining teeth to
erupt.
Correcting Malocclusions of Dental Origin
Malocclusions of dental origin include abnormalities of
intra-arch alignment and inter-arch relationship of teeth.
They can be managed by removable or fixed orthodontic
appliances.
Correcting Malocclusions of Skeletal Origin
Skeletal malocclusions include conditions where the
upper and lower jaws are abnormally related to each other.
Growth modification: Skeletal malocclusions can
be treated successfully by modifying the growth of
jaws during active growth period using functional or
orthopedic appliances.
Surgical correction: Severe skeletal malocclusion
in adults can be corrected by orthognathic/surgical
approach.
Adult Orthodontics
Better understanding of bone cell reactions to orthodontic
forces and improvements in appliance design has made
orthodontic treatment feasible in adult age as well.
Orthodontic treatment in adults may involve the following:
Adjunctive orthodontic procedures: They refer to
limited orthodontic treatment carried out to facilitate
other dental procedures. Adjunctive orthodontic
Fig. 1.4: Activator, a myofunctional orthodontic appliance
Fig. 1.5: Orthopedic appliance
5
CHAPTER 1 Introductionprocedures include uprighting of tilted abutment teeth
prior to bridge work, space gaining for placement of
implants, etc.
Comprehensive orthodontic treatment: It is usually
carried out in young adults and involves full-fledged
orthodontic treatment with or without extraction of teeth.
Guards
Mouthguard/Sportsguard: Mouthguards are often
used during contact sports, such as boxing to prevent
trauma to the teeth.
Night guards: Night guards can be given in bruxism to
prevent further loss of tooth structures by clenching of
teeth.
Management of Dentofacial Anomalies
Dentofacial anomalies such as cleft lip and cleft palate
are usually associated with impaired facial appearance,
speech, hearing, mastication, deglutition, and dental
occlusion. Thus, management of such patients often
requires a multidisciplinary approach with a long-term
treatment plan and individualized rehabilitation program
designed to address the treatment needs. Malocclusion is
usually present and orthodontic therapy with or without
corrective jaw surgery is frequently indicated.
BENEFITS OF ORTHODONTIC TREATMENT
Improved confidence
Well-aligned teeth that are easier to keep clean and healthy.
Ideally positioned teeth, which lessen the chance of
gingivitis and advanced gum disease.
Closed spaces to avoid the need for a bridge or denture.
Better chewing and food digestion.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Ackerman JL, Profitt WR. The characteristics of malocclusion:
A modern approach to classification and diagnosis. Am J Orthod
;56: -54.
2. Eveleth PB, Tanner JM. World-wide variation in human growth
(2nd edn), Cambridge, Mass. Cambridge University Press, .
3. Foster TD. A Textbook of Orthodontics, St Louis, Blackwell
Scientific Publications, .
4. Graber TM, Neumann B. Removable Orthodontic Appliances.
Philadelphia. WB Saunders, .
5. Graber TM, Vanarsdall RL, et al. Orthodontics, Current
Principles and Techniques. Diagnosis and Treatment Planning in
Orthodontics. Mosby, .
6. Graber TM. Orthodontics: Principles and Practice. WB Saunders,
.
7. Krogman WM. Child Growth Ann Arbor, Mich. The University of
Michigan Press, .
8. Moorrees CFA. The dentition of the growing child, Cambridge,
Harvard University Press, .
9. Proffit WR. Concepts of growth and development. In: Contemporary
Orthodontics, 2nd edn. St Louis: Mosby Yearbook, ;24-62.
10. Profitt WR, Ackerman JL. Rating the characteristics of
malocclusion: A systematic approach for planning treatment,
Am J Orthod ;64(3): -69.
11. Tanner JM, Whitehouse RH, Takaishi M. Standards from birth to
maturity for height, weight, height velocity and weight velocity in
British children. Arch Dis Child. ;41: -71.
EXAM-ORIENTED QUESTIONS
Long Essays or Long Questions
1. Define orthodontics. Describe aims and scope of orthodontics.
2. Describe briefly the aims, objectives, scope and limitations of orthodontic treatment.
3. What is orthodontia? Describe various sequelae of malocclusion of teeth.
Long Note or Short Essay
1. Aims of orthodontics and scope of orthodontics
Short Notes
1. Jackson’s traid or aims of orthodontics
2. Branches of orthodontics
3. Benefits of orthodontic treatment
4. Unfavourable sequelae of malocclusion.
6
SECTION 1 Introduction and HistoryMonitoring and
assessment of
developing dentition
Correcting
malocclusions
of dental origin
Correcting
malocclusions
of skeletal origin
Adult orthodontics
Guards
Management of
dentofacial anomaliesDeciduous dentition
Early mixed dentition
Late mixed dentition
Early permanent
dentitionRemovable
orthodontic appliances
Fixed orthodontic
appliances
Functional appliances
Orthopaedic appliancePreventive
orthodontics
Interceptive
orthodontics
Corrective orthodonticsFunctional efficiency
Structural balance
Esthetic harmonyFundamentals of
orthodontics
Aims of
orthodontic treatmentBranches of
orthodonticsOrthodontic
appliancesTiming of orthodontic
interventionScope of
orthodonticsCHAPTER OVERVIEW
7Since the beginning of human history, human beings have
understood at a very basic level that without a proper
bite, survival is very diffi cult. If you cannot chew well, you
cannot eat well. Th e remains of the ancient Egyptians,
Romanians and the Etruscans show that these societies
used various kinds of metal and wires to straighten or
adjust the teeth.
Many advances in dentistry and some pioneering
eff orts in teeth straightening began in the eighteenth
century, but it was really in the nineteenth century that
orthodontics became a science of its own.
Many inventors have signifi cantly contributed to the
fascinating science of orthodontics. Th e person given
the most credit for pioneering modern orthodontics
is Dr Edward H Angle, who is rightly honored as the
“Father of Modern Orthodontics. ” Publication of Angle’s
classifi cation system of malocclusion in marked a
turning point in the history of orthodontics, paving way to
establishment of the oldest specialty of dentistry.
Th e history of orthodontics is interesting and at the
same time complex. It is the oldest specialty of dentistry.
It would be wise to follow the development of this exciting
fi eld of science right from the era of ancient civilization
to the current times. Prior to 1900s, the specialty of
orthodontics was referred as “Regulation of Teeth” and
as “Orthodontia” up to 1930s. Th e term “Orthodontics”
has been used up to 1970s and currently the speciality is
addressed as “Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics”
( ) .
ANCIENT CIVILIZATION
Th e history of orthodontics has been intimately interwoven
with the history of dentistry for more than 2, years.
Dentistry in turn, has its origins as a part of medicine
( ) .
Th e Greek physician, Hippocrates ( – BC),
was the fi rst to separate medicine from fancy or religion.
He established a medical tradition based on facts and the
collected information was gathered into a text known as
the “Corpus Hippocraticum. ” Th is text of the pre-Christian
era contains many references to the teeth and to the tissues of the jaws as part of the medical text, which includes
descriptions of irregularity and crowding of teeth.
Aristotle ( – BC) , the Greek philosopher, was
the fi rst writer who studied the teeth in a broad manner. In
his work entitled, “De Partibus Animalium” (On the Parts
of Animals), he compared various dentitions of the known
species of animals of that time.
Aulus Cornelius Celsus (25 BC–50 AD) , the prominent
Roman author of the fi rst century, described fi nger
pressure to move teeth in his work “De Re Medicina” (On
Medicine).
“When in a child a permanent tooth appears before the
fall of the milk tooth, it is necessary to dissect the gum all
around the latter and extract it. Th e other tooth must then
be pushed with the fi nger, day by day, towards the place
that was occupied by the one extracted and this is to be
continued until it reaches its proper position. ”
MIDDLE AGES THROUGH SEVENTEENTH CENTURY
Th ere is little reference to dentition during this period. An
Arabic physician, Paul of Aegina (Paulus Aeginata, –
) wrote about irregularities in the dental arches caused
by supernumerary teeth. He advised extraction of such teeth.
Ambrose Paré ( – ), a French surgeon, paid
specifi c attention to the cleft palate. He was the fi rst surgeon to devise an obturator for the treatment of cleft palate.
EIGHTEENTH CENTURY
Eighteenth century witnessed major events in the
development of dental science dentistry . France was
the leader in dentistry throughout the world in this
century. Th is was mainly due to one person named Pierre
Fauchard . No one person exerted a stronger infl uence
on the development of the profession than he did. In fact,
he is referred to as the “Founder of Modern Dentistry. ”
He created order out of chaos, developed a profession
: Evolution of term orthodontics
Orthodontics
Regulation prior to 1900s
Orthodontia up to 1930s (“ia” referred to a medial condition)
Orthodontics up to 1970s
Currently orthodontics and dentofacial orthopedics : Ancient civilization
Years Authors Contributions to orthodontics
– BC Hippocrates Description of irregularity of teeth in
“Corpus Hippocraticum”.
– BC Aristotle Comparison of various Dentitions
of different species of animals in his
work “De Partibus Animalium”.
25 BC–
50 ADAulius
Cornelius
CelsusDescribed fi nger pressure to move
teeth in his work “De Re Medicina.”History
Phulari BS2CHAPTER
8
SECTION 1 Introduction and Historyout of a craft and gave to this new branch of medicine a
scientific and sound basis for the future. He published
his two-volume book entitled “The surgeon dentist, a
treatize on the teeth” , which had an entire chapter on
ways to straighten teeth. With reference to orthodontics,
as early as , he developed what is probably the
first orthodontic appliance. It was called Bandelette
(Fig. 2.1). It was designed to expand the arch, particularly
the anterior teeth and was the forerunner of the expansion
arch of modern times ( ) .
John Hunter ( – ) , an English surgeon and a
great teacher of anatomy, published his book “The Natural
History of the Human Teeth” in . He demonstrated the
growth, development and articulation of the maxilla and
the mandible and outlined the internal structure of the
teeth and bone and their separate functions. He gave the
basic nomenclature of dentistry incisors, bicuspids and
molars.
The art of modern dentistry based on scientific
foundation was first developed in Europe. It then came to the
United States through the European-trained “Operators for
the teeth” who came to America seeking fresh opportunities.
Many native practitioners of America then began to
“regulate” teeth. Malocclusion was called “irregularities”
and their correction “regulation” during this period.
NINETEENTH CENTURY
Foundations were laid in the nineteenth century to the
oldest specialty of dentistry—Orthodontics. It was in
the latter part of the nineteenth (1880s) century that the
specialty began to emerge ( ) .
By the mid-nineteenth century, basic concepts of
diagnosis and treatment had begun. It was a time when
each practitioner attempted treatment by devising their
own method based on purely mechanical principles. At
that time, orthodontics was part of prosthetic dentistry
and the literature on the subject described orthodontics in
the area of partial or total replacement of missing teeth. : Contribution to orthodontics in 18th century
Year Authors Contributions to orthodontics
Pierre Fauchard Father of modern dentistry
He published his two-volume
book entitled “The Surgeon
Dentist, A Treatise on the Teeth”
Developed first expansion
appliance called “Bandelette”
– John Hunter Natural history of teeth
Growth and development of
jaws
Internal structure of teeth
Functions of teeth
: Contribution to orthodontics in 19th century
Year Authors Contributions to orthodontics
William Lintott Introduced the use of screws
JS Gunnell Introduced chin strap
Emerson C
Angel First to introduce Arch
Expansion by opening
midpalatal suture
Father of expansion appliances
William and
MagillDeveloped molar bands
and
1889John Nutting
Farrar “Father of American
orthodontics”
Wrote “Irregularities of the Teeth
and Their Correction”
Textbook was the first great
work devoted exclusively to
orthodontics
Laid the foundation for
“Scientific orthodontics”
(intermittent forces, limits to
amount of tooth movements)
– Norman N
Kingsley Treatise on oral deformities
“worked on correction of cleft
palate”
Extraoral traction.
Henry A Baker Baker’s anchorage Intermaxillary
elastics)
Fig. 2.1: Bandelette designed by Pierre Fauchard
to expand dental arches
Fig. 2.2: Expansion appliance developed
by Emerson C Angel
9
CHAPTER 2 History As early as in , William Lintott introduced the
use of screws in his work “On the teeth. ” He described
premature loss of deciduous teeth as a cause of
malocclusion, recommended that treatment be begun
between the age of 14 and 25 years and also described a
bite opening appliance.
JS Gunnell, in , introduced the chin strap as
occipital anchorage for the treatment of mandibular
protrusion, the principle of which is used even today.
Emerson C Angel ( – ), in , was the first
to advocate the opening of the median suture to provide
space in the maxillary arch, since he strongly opposed
extraction (Fig. 2.2) . This began the use of arch expansion
in orthodontics.
William and Magill developed molar bands on the
teeth as early as in .
It was not until the latter part of the nineteenth century,
when a few dedicated dentists gave special attention and
importance to this phase of dentistry, that orthodontics
began to emerge as a specialty science. It was known at that
time as ‘Orthodontia’ , the suffix ‘ia’ referred to a medical
condition. In the last three decades of nineteenth century,
some great contributors were made to the specialty by the
following dentists.
John Nutting Farrar ( – ) is often referred as
the “Father of American Orthodontics” . It was he who gave
impetus to the scientific investigations that permitted the
understanding of the theory and practice of orthodontics.
During his studies, he investigated the physiologic and
pathologic changes occurring in animals as the result of
orthodontically induced tooth movement.
He published two volumes entitled “Irregularities of
the Teeth and Their Correction” in and . The
textbook was the first great work devoted exclusively
to orthodontics. Farrar was good at designing brace
appliances and was the first to suggest the use of mild force
at timed intervals to move teeth “in regulating the teeth,
the traction must be intermittent and must not exceed
certain fixed limits. ” He was also the first to recommend
root or bodily movement of the teeth.
Another man who also deserves much credit during
this period of time is Norman N Kingsley ( – ) , : Angle’s contribution to orthodontics
Text book “Irregularities of the Teeth” (1st edition)
Classification of malocclusion
E-Arch appliance
Pin and tube appliance
Ribbon arch appliance
Edgewise appliance
2.3
2.4 2.5
Fig. 2.3: Norman N Kingsley ( – ); Fig. 2.4: Intermaxillary elastics: Fig. 2.5: Edward Hartley Angle ( – )a pr ominent dentist, artist/sculptor and orthodontist
(Fig. 2.3) . He is known for his works on “Correction of cleft
palate” . As early as in , he devised a technique called
“Jumping the bite” with the use of a bite plane. He used
vulcanite on conjunction with ligatures, elastic bands
made of rubber, jackscrews and the chin cap.
Henry A Baker is remembered for the introduction
of the so called Baker’s anchorage or the use of the intermaxillary elastics with rubber bands in (Fig. 2.4).
TWENTIETH CENTURY
Angle’s Contribution to Orthodontics
One of the most dominant, dynamic and influential figures
in the specialty of Orthodontics was Edward Hartley
Angle ( – ) (Fig. 2.5) . He is rightly regarded as the
“Father of Modern Orthodontics. ” ( )
Edward H Angle was born on June 1, , in
Herrick, Pennsylvania. He completed DDS degree from
Pennsylvania College of Dental Surgery in . He joined
the faculty of the Dental Department of the University of
Minnesota in . In the year , He resigned from
the University of Minnesota and moved to Chicago and
then he became the first professor of Orthodontics at
Northwestern University School of Dentistry. In ,
Angle completed his MD degree from Marion Sims
College. He moved to St. Louis, assuming the professor
post first at Marion Sims College of Medicine and shortly
afterwards at Washington University Dental School. It
was then that he started his first orthodontic case, on his
preceptor’s son. Experiences in various schools led him
to the conviction that orthodontia could not be properly
10
SECTION 1 Introduction and Historytaught in a dental college. He started the first school of
orthodontia in , named as “ The Angle School of
Orthodontia ” at St. Louis.
Edward H Angle organized the first orthodontic
society and called it as “ The Society of Orthodontists. ”
In , the Society adopted the name it bears today: The
American Association of Orthodontists (AAO). They also
established the magazine, a quarterly titled The American
Orthodontist, which we read today as the American
Journal of Orthodontics.
— Dr. Anna Hopkins was elected the Society’s first
Secretary. She completed one of the early Angle courses,
but was never to practice orthodontia. In she became
Mrs Edward Hartley Angle.
Appliances Contributed by Angle
In , Edward H Angle developed his first orthodontic
appliance, the “E” (expansion)-arch appliance. It is also
referred to as Edward Angle’s E-arch. E-arch appliance
consists of bands which are placed on molar teeth
on either side of the arch of a heavy labial arch wire
extended around the arch. The ends of labial extended
arch wire threaded to the buccal aspect of the molar
bands allowed the arch wire to be advanced so that
the arch perimeter is increased. Individual teeth were
ligated with the heavy labial extended arch wire with
ligature wire of 0. ” .
Pin and tube appliance was developed in . In this
pin and tube appliance, all teeth are banded. Vertical
tubes were welded to the bands on the labial surface
in the center of the crown for all teeth in the arch. Arch
wires were secured with soldered pins that inserted
into the vertical tubes. Tooth movement was achieved
by altering the placement of these pins.
Angle developed Ribbon arch appliance in . It
is a modification of pin and tube appliance. Ribbon
arch was the first appliance to use a true bracket.
The bracket has a vertical slot facing occlusally. The
brackets were attached to the bands at the center of
labial surface of teeth. Edgewise appliance was developed and introduced to
orthodontics by Edward H Angle in the year which
formed the basis of all fixed orthodontic techniques
in use today. In order to overcome the deficiencies
encountered with his previous techniques Angle
developed the edgewise bracket that could give a better
control over individual tooth movement (Fig. 2.6) .
The unique feature of rectangular arch wire in a
rectangular slot of the edgewise bracket enabled control of
tooth movement in all three planes of space. Subsequent
development of various fixed orthodontic appliances
such as Straight wire appliance, pre adjusted edgewise
appliance are actually modifications of the standard
edgewise appliance of Angle.
Edward H Angle’s Publications and Presentations
Angle presented his first scientific paper at the Ninth
International Medical Congress in .
Published the first edition of his textbook which
would go through seven editions under the following
titles:
1. Irregularities of the Teeth , .
2. A System of Appliances for Correcting Irregularities of
the Teeth , .
3. The Angle System of Regulating and Retention of the
Teeth , .
4. The Angle System of Regulation and Retention of the
Teeth—with an Addition of Treatment of Fractures of
the Maxillae , .
5. Angle System of Regulation and Retention of the Teeth
and Treatment of Fractures of the Maxillae , .
6. Malocclusion of the Teeth and Fractures of the Maxillae ,
.
7. Treatment of Malocclusion of the Teeth , .
Angle published his famous article “The Classification
of Malocclusion” in the Dental Cosmos, . His
classification provided an intelligent and easily
understood means of communication among
members of the dental profession. Angle believed that
the maxillary first molars were the key to occlusion
and his system of classification divides malocclusions
in anteroposterior/sagittal plane only. Despite this
drawback, Angle’s classification system has stood
the test of time and is still the most commonly used
method of classifying malocclusions, more than
years since he first proposed it.
Though Angle died in (August 11th), his influence
is still felt strongly in orthodontics. His concept of
normal occlusion and establishment orthodontia as a
specialty science will remain Angle’s greatest monument.
Characteristic of the man was a remark made shortly
before he died: “I have finished my work. It is as perfect as
I can make it. ”
Another distinguished orthodontist was Calvin S Case
( – ) (Fig. 2.7) . He developed a classification of
malocclusion that included 26 divisions. Case published
his major work “ A practical treatise on the techniques and
Fig. 2.6: Edgewise appliance
11
CHAPTER 2 Historyprinciple of dental orthopedic and prosthetic correction
of the cleft palate. ” Case was a strong advocate of the
relationship of malocclusion to facial improvement. Facial
improvement was a guide to treatment. He was also a
strong proponent of extraction theory in orthodontics.
Charles A Hawley ( – ) used a celluloid sheet
containing a geometric figure that when adapted to a
model determined the extent of proposed tooth movement
and introduced the retainer appliance that bears
his name (Fig. 2.8) .
HD Kesling introduced his philosophy of tooth
movement by using a rubber tooth positioning device
in which the teeth were moved into a more ideal cuspal
relationship after major correction has been accomplished.
History of Cephalometrics
Ever since God created man in His image, man has been
trying to change man into his image. Attempts to change
facial appearance are recounted throughout recorded
history. The question of what is a normal face, as that of
what constitutes beauty, will probably never be answered
in a free society. ( )
Orthodontists, in their attempts to change facio-orodental deviations from accepted norms, have adopted
cephalometric measurement, a method long employed
in physical anthropology. With the introduction of
roentgenography, it was inevitable that this procedure
should be employed as a medium for the purpose of
roentgenographic cephalometrics.
Cephalometric radiography was introduced to
orthodontics during the 1930s.
Cephalometry had its beginnings in craniometry.
Craniometry is defined in the Edinburgh encyclopedia
of as “the art of measuring skulls of animals so as
to discover their specific differences” . For many years
anatomists and anthropologists were confined to
measuring craniofacial dimensions using the skull of dead
individuals. Although precise measurements were possible
craniometry has the disadvantage for growth studies. Cephalometry is concerned with measuring the head
inclusive of soft tissues, be it living or dead. However, this
procedure had its limitations owing to the inaccuracies
that resulted from having to measure skulls through
varying thickness of soft tissues.
With the discovery of X-rays by Roentgen in ,
radiographic cephalometry came in to being. It was
defined as the measurement of head from bony and soft
tissue land marks on the radiographic image (Krogman and
Sassouni ). This approach combines the advantages of
craniometry and anthropometry. The disadvantage is that
it produces two-dimensional image of a three-dimensional
structure.
In , Professor Wilhelm Conrad Roentgen made
a remarkable contribution to the field of science with the
discovery of X-rays. On December 28, , he submitted
a paper “On A New Kind of Rays, A Preliminary
Communication” to the Wurzburg Physical Medical
Society for publication in its journal.
Professor Wilhem Koening and Dr Otto Walkhoff
simultaneously made the first dental radiograph in .
It was clear that the use of X-rays provided the means of
obtaining a different perspective on the arrangement
: Cephalometry
Year Authors Contributions to
orthodontics
– William B Downs Cephalometric appraisal of
orthodontic results
Down’s analysis
– Herbert I Margolis Tweeds triangle
– Wendell L Wylie Analysis based on dividing
dimensions along the Frankfort
plane into contributing linear
components
– Richard A Riedel ANB angle
Alexander
JacobsonThe Wit’s analysis
Fig. 2.8: Hawley’s retainer introduced by Charles A Hawley
Fig. 2.7: Calvin S Case ( – )
12
SECTION 1 Introduction and Historyand relation of bones thus expanding the horizons of
craniometry and cephalometry.
The first X-ray pictures of skull in the standard lateral
view were taken by AJ Pacini and Carrera in .
Pacini received a research award from the American
Roentgen Ray Society for a thesis entitled “Roentgen
Ray Anthropometry of the Skull” . Pacini introduced a
teleroentgenographic technique for standardized lateral
head radiography and thereby opened, what proved to
become a tremendous advance in cephalometry, as well
as in measuring the growth and development of face. His
method, which was rather primitive, involved a large fixed
distance from the X-ray source to the cassette. The head
of the subject, placed adjacent to a standard holding the
cassette, was immobilized with a gauze bandage wrapped
around both the face and the cassette after the patient’s
midsagittal plane was carefully oriented parallel to the
cassette.
He identified the following anthropometric landmarks
on the roentgenogram: gonion, pogonion, nasion, and
anterior nasal spine. He also located the center of the sella
turcica and the external auditory meatus. He measured the
gonion angle and the degree of maxillary protrusion.
In the methodology of cephalometric radiography
came to full function when B Holly Broadbent in USA
and H Hofrath in Germany simultaneously published
methods to obtain standardized head radiographs in
the Angle Orthodontist (A new X-ray technique and
its application to orthodontia) and in Fortschritte der
Orthodontie, respectively.
This development enabled orthodontists to capture
the field of cephalometry from the anatomists and
anthropologists who had monopolized craniometric
studies, particularly in nineteenth century.
B Holly Broadbent’s Contribution
B Holly Broadbent published an article in the
first issue of the new Angle Orthodontist titled “ A New
X-ray technique and its application to orthodontia. ” It
was the introduction to the specialty and to dentistry
of cephalometric roentgenography (Fig. 2.9) and of
course, cephalometric tracing and evaluation. Broadbent
devised the roentgenographic cephalometer, which is the
instrument that accurately positions the head relative to
the film and the X-ray source. His study, supported by the
Bolton family, consisted of a longitudinal study of 3,
school children from birth to adulthood. In honor of his
sponsor, Broadbent established a new point of reference
on the skull, known as the Bolton point.
Broadbent’s interest in craniofacial growth began
with his orthodontic education under EH Angle in .
He continued to pursue that interest along with his
orthodontic practice, working with a leading anatomist
J Wingate Todd.
The uncertainty of locating land marks in the skull of the
living child by approaching through skin and soft tissues
led him to search for a means of recording craniometric landmarks on the living child as accurately as done with a
craniostat in measuring the dead skull.
During 1920s, Broadbent refined the craniostat into
craniometer by the addition of metric scales. That proved
to be the first step in the evolution of craniostat into
a radiographic cephalostat. It did not take him much
longer to convert the direct measuring instrument into a
radiographic craniometer.
Meanwhile the course of Broadbent’s orthodontic
practice he corrected the malocclusion of Charles
Bingham Bolton, son of Chester and Francis P Bolton.
His discussions of facial growth with Congress woman
Bolton led to the addition of Bolton study of facial growth
to the long list of Bolton philanthropies. As Charles grew to
adulthood this study became a major personal as well as
financial commitment.
Cephalometrics was neither developed as a technique
looking for an application nor was it developed as a
diagnostic tool. Broadbent’s single goal was the study
of craniofacial growth. The Broadbent technique for
cephalometric radiography was one of the tools that he
developed for the implementation of that study.
The technique and apparatus perfected for the Bolton
Fund study of the normal developmental growth of the
face , eliminated practically all of the technical difficulties
encountered in previous methods of recording dentofacial changes, and proved to be a convenient as well as
scientific method of measuring orthodontic procedures.
According to Broadbent the patient’s head was
centered in the cephalostat with the superior borders of
the external auditory meatus resting on the upper parts the
two ear rods. The lowest point on the inferior bony border
of the left orbit, indicated by the orbital marker, was at the
level of the upper parts of the ear rods. The nose clamp
was fixed at the root of the nose to support the upper part
of the face. The focus film distance was set at 5 feet ( .4
cm) and the subject film distance could be measured
to calculate image magnification. With the two X-ray
tubes at right angles to each other in the same horizont al
Fig. 2.9: Cephalometric roentgenography (Lateral cephalogram)
13
CHAPTER 2 HistoryREMOVABLE ORTHODONTIC APPLIANCE
Removable orthodontic appliances are so called because
they are designed to be fitted and removed by the patient.
Removable orthodontic appliances are limited to tipping and
simple rotator movements of teeth, which are sufficient for
many orthodontic treatments. They depend on co-operation
and a certain degree of skill on the part of the patient.
Removable orthodontic appliances may be active or passive.
The use of removable orthodontic appliances was
always more popular in Europe than the United States,
but even there the use of fixed appliances (using bands
and brackets) has largely become the primary method of
treatment. Nevertheless, removable appliances are often
an effective means of addressing many patients’ needs and
in some cases have considerable advantages over fixed
appliances.
Removable orthodontic appliance consists of following
three components:
1. Retentive components
2. Active components
3. Base plate.
Retentive Components
The success of a removable orthodontic appliance
mainly depends upon good retention of the appliance.
Adequate retention of a removable orthodontic appliance
is achieved by incorporating certain wire components,
which get engaged into the undercuts on the teeth. These
wires components that help in retention of a removable
appliance are called clasps.
Clasps
Clasps are the retentive components of removable
orthodontic appliances. Following are the researchers,
involved in the design of various types of clasps
(Table 2.7).
Bows
Bows are one of the active components of removable
orthodontic appliance. They are usually used for overjet plane, two images (lateral and posteroanterior) could be
simultaneously produced.
While Germany’s Hofrath’s technique differed from
Broadbent’s in that the path of the central ray was not
fixed in relation to the head and no plan was suggested for
superpositioning subsequent X-rays.
William B Downs ( – ) (Fig. 2.10) was a
mainstay of the teaching staff at Illinois’s. With Brodie,
Goldstein, and Myer, he coauthored “Cephalometric
appraisal of orthodontic results” .
Margolis ( – ) (Fig 2.11) wrote on the
relationship between the inclination of the lower incisor
and the incisor-mandibular plane angle and was the first
to corroborate Tweed’s clinical observation that, in normal
occlusions, the lower incisors are 90° to the mandibular
basal bone.
In , Wylie produced a method of assessing
anteroposterior dysplasias, and, that same year, Margolis
contributed his maxillofacial triangle.
Cephalometric Analysis
The major use of radiographic cephalometry is
in characterizing the patient’s dental and skeletal
relationships. This led to the development of a number
of cephalometric analyses to compare a patient to his or
her peers, using population standards. William B Downs
in developed the first cephalometric analysis. Its
significance was that it presented an objective method
of portraying many factors underlying malocclusion and
there could be a variety of causes of malocclusion exclusive
to teeth. This was followed by other analyses by Cecil C
Steiner , C H Tweed , RM Ricketts ,
V . Sassouni , HD Enlow , JR Jaraback ,
and Alex Jacobson , etc.
Richard A Riedel ( – ): Even before completing
his master’s requirements at Northwestern University,
Richard A Riedel (Fig. 2.12) , introduced one of the most
widely accepted diagnostic cephalometric measurement
in use, that is, ANB angle.
2.10 2.11 2.12
Fig. 2.10: William B Downs ( – ); Fig. 2.11: Herbert I Margolis ( – ); Fig. 2.12: Richard A Riedel ( – )
14
SECTION 1 Introduction and Historyretraction of anteriors. They can also be used for space
closure in the anterior segment as well as space distal
to canines. The following are some of the routinely used
design of labial bows:
1. Short labial bow
2. Long labial bow
3. Split labial bow
4. Modified split labial bow
5. Reverse labial bow
6. Robert’s retractor
7. Mill’s retractor
8. High labial bow
9. Filled labial bow
BASE PLATE
Base plate has a greater percentage of bulk in removable
orthodontic appliance than other components. The design
of base plate varies with the type of removable orthodontic
appliance. Self cure or autopolymerizing acrylic resins are
used for the fabrication of base plate. It joins all other (active
and retentive) components of removable orthodontic
appliance together into a single functional unit.
EXPANSION ORTHODONTIC APPLIANCES
Expansion orthodontic appliances are used to relieve
crowding in cases of arch length–tooth material discrepancy. Following are the researchers involved in the
development of various types of expansion appliances
( ) .
MYOFUNCTIONAL/FUNCTIONAL ORTHODONTIC
APPLIANCES
The term functional appliance means that when the
appliance is fully seated in the mouth, the mandible is forced
into an eccentric/noneccentric relation position. Any such
mandibular posture causes the musculature to try to move
the mandible toward a centric position. This results in force
systems being exerted whenever the appliance is mounted
on the teeth or soft tissues of the mouth. Although functional appliances have been used
throughout the century in Europe and in the last 40
years in the United States, it was not until the late 1960s
that scientific data were available to evaluate the empiric
rationalization for their clinical effectiveness. This early
data consisted of animal experiments demonstrating
histologic and radiographic evidence of increased growth
of the condylar cartilage when the mandible was held in
a forward position. Petrovic suggested that the unique
characteristics of the condylar cartilage, including cell
division of the prechondroblast (as opposed to the
chondroblast in epiphyseal cartilage of the long bones or
cartilage in the synchondroses of the cranial base) make
this cartilage more responsive to orthopedic devices. The
animal studies of the 1960s and 1970s created enormous
enthusiasm in the professional community and played
an important role in the rapid acceptance and use of
functional appliances in the United States that has been
largely ignored up till that time.
Activator
Norman Kingsley, an early influential American
orthodontist, has been credited with the development of
the first appliances to position the mandible forward as
early as . However, most consider Pierre Robin to have
developed the earliest removable functional appliance, in
fiance in .
Hotz devised a “Vorbissplatte” which was a modified
form of Kingsley’s vulcanite palatal plate. This was used to
treat retrognathism associated with deep bite.
Pierre Robin devised an appliance called Monobloc
made up of a single block of vulcanite. He used it to
position the mandible forward in patients with glossoptosis
and severe mandibular retrognathism. By positioning
the mandible forward; it reduced the risk of airway
obstruction.
Viggo Andresen in (Fig. 2.13) in Denmark
designed a loose filling appliance which he first used on
his daughter. He made a modified Hawley type of retainer
on the maxillary arch to which he added a lower lingual
horse-shoe-shaped flange which helped in positioning the
mandible forward. He used this appliance on his daughter
who was going on a three month vacation. On her return
three months later, he found a marked sagittal correction
and improvement of the facial profile.
Although it was developed more than 70 years ago, the
Andreson appliance, which is also known as an activator
or monobloc, has been successfully used by generation of
orthodontists. The thousands of cases from last 25 years,
the activator is generally used in Vienna for the treatment
of Class II Div I malocclusion.
During the time of Viggo Andresen and Haupl the
appliances were made of vulcanized rubber, but this
gave way to acrylic in the 1950s. Over the year, various
modifications have been made to the original design of
Andresen’s appliance such as: : Expansion orthodontic appliances
S. no Type of expansion appliance Developed by
1. Derichsweiler expansion appliance Derichsweiler
2. Issacson’s expansion appliances Issacson
3. Hass expansion appliance Hass
4. Coffin spring Walter Coffin
5. Jack expansion screw Jack : Clasps
S. no Types of clasp Designed by
1. Adam’s clasp CP Adams
2. Schwartz clasp Schwartz
3. Crozat clasp Crozat
15
CHAPTER 2 History1. The bow activator of AM Schwartz
2. Wunderer’s modification
3. The propulsor
4. Cutout or palate free activator
5. The reduced activator or cybernator of Schmuth
6. Kawetzky modification
7. Herren’s modification of the activator.
Most of the modifications of Andresen appliance were
based on Andresen’s concepts.There can be advantages
to using a simple design in terms of patient co-operation,
case of adjustment and freedom from breakages.
Graber observed that,
“Numerous modifications have been made to the
Andresen–Haupl monobloc and have been described
in texts and periodical contributions by Petrik, Eschler,
Hoffer, Grossman and others. These are surprisingly
effective at times but generally a simpler design of
appliance is preferred. ”
Frankel Appliance
A more recent innovation in functional appliance design,
the functional corrector or functional regulator or Frankel
appliance was designed by Rolf Frankel in Germany and
was introduced to orthodontics in . This appliance
was unique in that, it was principally tissue-borne,
mostly supported in the vestibule rather than supported
by teeth. There are five types of Frankel appliances and
are used for management of Angle’s class I, class II and
class III malocclusions and even it is used in bimaxillary
protrusion.
Bionator
The Bionator was developed in Germany by Wilhelm
Balter in the early 1950s to increase patient’s comfort and
facilitate daytime wear to increase the functional use of
the appliance. Balter accomplished this by drastically
reducing acrylic bulk of the appliance. There are three
types of bionators:1. Standard bionator.
2. Class III or reverse bionator.
3. Open bite bionator.
Twin-block Appliance
Twin-block appliance is a functional jaw orthopedic
appliance developed by Scottish orthodontist William
Clark in the year .
The twin-block appliance is composed of maxillary
and mandibular retainers that fit tightly against the teeth,
alveolus, and adjacent supporting structures. Delta clasps
are used bilaterally to anchor the maxillary appliance to
the first permanent molars and 0. inch ball clasps are
placed in the interproximal areas anteriorly. The precise
clasp configuration depends on the type of deciduous or
permanent teeth and number of teeth present at the time
of appliance construction.
Various designs are available for the lower part of the
twin block appliance. The original design advocated by
clark and it consists of a horse shoe of acrylic that extends
anteriorly from the mesial of the first permanent molars.
The acrylic covers the lingual aspect of the premolar/
deciduous molars and the canines and incisors. In this
design delta clasps are used to anchor the appliance to
the first premolar/first deciduous molar and ball clasp
are present between the canines and lateral incisors,
additional ball clasps can be placed between the incisors
if appliance retention is thought to be a problem. There
should not be any acrylic material touching the lower
molars, this allows the lower molar to erupt vertically if the
acrylic on the maxillary block is trimmed to increase the
vertical dimension.
The twin block appliance has been shown to produce
increase in mandibular length, incisor proclination and
variations in lower anterior facial height.
The posterior bite blocks of the twin block appliance can
be trimmed to facilitate the eruption of the lower posterior
teeth in patient with a deep bite and an accentuated curve
of Spee. The blocks also can be left untouched to prevent
the eruption of the posterior teeth in patients with a
tendency toward an anterior open bite.
Herbst Appliance
The Herbst bite jumping mechanism, was developed by
Emil Herbst in the early 1900s. The original banded design
of this appliance was introduced at the international
dental congress in Berlin (Germany) by Herbst in .
It was introduced by Pancherz. Pancherz used a banded
Herbst design that involved the:
Placement of bands on molar and premolar in maxilla
Bands are connected by copper lingual wire.
Bands on lower right first premolar and lower right first
premolar
Bands are connected by a lower lingual arch wire
The Herbst appliance is a fixed functional orthopedic
appliance having passive tube and plunger system with
the exact length of the tube determining the amount of
Fig. 2.13: Viggo Andresen
16
SECTION 1 Introduction and Historyanterior mandibular development. The tube is attached
to a maxillary posterior tooth, whereas the plunger is fixed
anteriorly to the mandibular dentition and slides through
the tube during opening and closing movements. : Myofunctional/Functional orthodontic appliances
S. no Types of appliance Designed by Year
1. Activator Viggo Andresen (Fig. 2.13)
2. Frankel appliance Rolf Frankel
3. Bionator functional
applianceWilhelm Balter
4. Jasper jumper Joseper
5. Twin-block appliance William Clark
6. Herbst appliance Emil Herbst
7. Oral Screen Newell
: Fixed orthodontic techniques
S. no Techniques Formulated by
1. E–Arch Edward H Angle
2. Pin and tube technique Edward H Angle
3. Edge wire technique Edward H Angle
4. Begg technique PR Begg
5. Straight wire technique Lawrence F Andrew
6. Lingual orthodontics Cruz
7. Invisalign technique Zia Chrishti
8. 3D modular orthodontics Wilson and Wilson
: Retainers
S. no Types of retainer Designed by
1. Hawleys retainer Hawleys
2. Begg retainer PR Begg
3. Kesling tooth position HD Kesling
4. Invisible retainer Osmu
EXAM-ORIENTED QUESTIONS
Long Essay or Long Questions
1. Define orthodontics and write in detail about history of orthodontics.
2. History of orthodontics
3. Angle’s contribution to orthodontics
4. Tweed’s contribution to orthodontics
Long Note or Short Essay
1. Orthodontics in 18th century
2. Orthodontics in 19th century
3. Orthodontics in 20th century. Followings are the researchers involved in the
development of various types of myofunctional appliances
( ) .
FIXED ORTHODONTIC TECHNIQUES
Fixed orthodontic appliance is an orthodontic device in
which attachments are fixed to the teeth and forces are
applied by arch wires or auxiliaries via these attachments.
Various fixed orthodontic techniques are evolved over the
years and followings are the researchers involved in the
formulation of fixed orthodontic techniques ( ) .
RETENTION IN ORTHODONTICS
The term “retention” has been defined as “the holding of
teeth in idealistic and functional positions” (Joondeph and
Riedel, ). Followings are the researchers involved in
the development of various types of retainers ( ) .
Changes in the areas of orthodontic practice include
a resurgence of treatment of the adult patients and its
concomitant expertise as the public becomes aware
of personal dental health and esthetics. Included also
are the invasion of areas that had not received much
attention in the past, namely, orthognathic surgery and
the problems associated with the temporomandibular
joint. Orthodontics has achieved the status of a recognized
specialty of dentistry because of a long period of
craftsmanship and professional expertise.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Enlow DH, Moyers RE, Hunter WS, et al. A procedure for the anal -
ysis of intrinsic factor form and growth. Am J Orthod ;56:6-14.
2. Graber TM. Orthodontics: Principles and Practice. WB Saunders,
.
3. Profitt WR. Contemporary Orthodontics. St Louis: CV Mosby, .
4. Quintero JC, et al. Craniofacial imaging in orthodontics: historical
perspective, current status and future develop-ments. Angle
Orthod ;69: - .
17
CHAPTER 2 HistoryRegulation
prior to 1900s
Orthodontics
up to 1970sOrthodontia up
to 1930s (“ia”
referred to a
medial condition)
Currently
Orthodontics and
Dentofacial
OrthopedicsHistory of Orthodontics
RetainersMyofunctional/
Functional
orthodontic
applianceClaspsAngle’s
contribution to
orthodonticContribution to
orthodontics in
18th centuryEvolution
of term
orthodontics
Fixed
orthodontic
techniquesExpansion
orthodontic
appliancesCephalometryContribution to
orthodontics in
19th centuryAncient
civilizationCHAPTER OVERVIEW
Expert I CONSULT
....... iidi~ books
Any screen.
Anytime.
Anywhere.
Activate the eBook version
of this title at no additional charge.
Expert Consult eBooks give you the power to browse and find content,
view enhanced images, share notes and highlights-both online and offline.
Unlock your eBook today.
Visit expertconsult.inkling..comfredeem
Scratch off your code
Type code into "Enter Code'• box
Click "Redeem"
Log in or Sign up
Go to "My Library"
It's that easy!
ELSEVIER For technical assistance:
email e:xpertconsult.help@elsevier.com
caD 1- - - (inside the US)
caD +1- - - (outside the US) Scan this QR code to redeem your
eBook through your mobile device:
Place Peel Off
Sticker Here
Use of the <:llrrent edlllon of the elec:U'onlc version of lhls book (eBook) Is subject to the terms of the nontransferable, limited license granted on
expertccnault.inkling.com. Access to the eBook is limited to the first individual who redeems the PIN, located on the inside cover of this book,
at eJCpertoonsult.inkling.oom and may not be transferred to another party by ntsale,lending, or other means.
2015v1.0
iSturdevant’s Art and Science
of Operative Dentistry
Seventh Edition
André V. Ritter, DDS, MS, MBA
homas P . Hinman Distinguished Professor
Department of Operative Dentistry
he University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina
Lee W. Boushell, DMD, MS
Associate Professor
Department of Operative Dentistry
he University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina
Ricardo Walter, DDS, MS
Clinical Associate Professor
Department of Operative Dentistry
he University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North CarolinaSturdevant’s Art and Science
of Operative Dentistry
Riverport Lane
St. Louis, Missouri
STURDEVANT’S ART AND SCIENCE OF OPERATIVE DENTISTRY,
SEVENTH EDITION ISBN: -0- - -5
Copyright © by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further information about the
Publisher’s permissions policies and our arrangements with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance Center
and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions .
his book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the Publisher (other
than as may be noted herein).
Notices
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evaluating and using
any information, methods, compounds or experiments described herein. Because of rapid advances in the
medical sciences, in particular, independent veriication of diagnoses and drug dosages should be made. To the
fullest extent of the law, no responsibility is assumed by Elsevier, authors, editors or contributors for any
injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from
any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.
Previous editions copyrighted , , , , , and .
International Standard Book Number: -0- - -5
Senior Content Strategist: Jennifer Flynn-Briggs
Senior Content Development Manager: Ellen Wurm-Cutter
Associate Content Development Specialist: Laura Klein
Publishing Services Manager: Julie Eddy
Senior Project Manager: David Stein
Design Direction: Bridget Hoette
Printed in China
Last digit is the print number: 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
his book is dedicated to the art and science of Operative Dentistry. Our focus with this
edition is to provide students, teachers, and practicing colleagues with a comprehensive and
evidence-based resource for Operative Dentistry and related disciplines.
We also dedicate the seventh edition to the editors and contributors of the previous editions.
Much of their work can still be found in this edition.
Finally, we dedicate this book to Drs. Cliford Sturdevant, Roger Barton, and John Brauer,
who were the editors for he Art and Science of Operative Dentistry, First Edition, . We
hope that they would be proud to see how far their legacy has extended.
vi CHAPTER Contributor
viContributors
Sumitha N. Ahmed, BDS, MS
Clinical Assistant Professor
Department of Operative Dentistry
he University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of
Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina
Lee W. Bouhell, DMD, MS
Associate Professor
Department of Operative Dentistry
he University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of
Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina
Terence E. Donovan, DDS
Professor
Department of Operative Dentistry
he University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of
Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina
Denni J. Fabinder, DDS
Clinical Professor
Cariology, Restorative Sciences, and Endodontics
University of Michigan School of Dentistry
Ann Arbor, Michigan
Andréa G. Ferreira Zandoná, DDS, MSD, PhD
Associate Professor
Department of Operative Dentistry
he University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of
Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina
Harald O. Heymann, DDS, MEd
Professor
Department of Operative Dentistry
he University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of
Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina
Patricia A. Miguez, DDS, MS, PhD
Assistant Professor
Department of Operative Dentistry
he University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of
Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North CarolinaThiago Morelli, DDS, MS
Clinical Assistant Professor
Department of Periodontology
he University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of
Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina
Giele F. Neiva, DDS, MS, MS
Clinical Associate Professor
Cariology, Restorative Sciences, and Endodontics
he University of Michigan School of Dentistry
Ann Arbor, Michigan
Gutavo Mui Stefan Oliveira, DDS, MS
Clinical Assistant Professor
Department of Operative Dentistry
he University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of
Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina
Joe C. Ontivero ,DDS, MS
Professor and Head, Esthetic Dentistry
Restorative Dentistry and Prosthodontics
University of Texas School of Dentistry at Houston
Houston, Texas
Rade D. Paravina, DDS, MS, PhD
Professor
Department of Restorative Dentistry and Prosthodontics
Director, Houston Center for Biomaterials and Biomimetics
(HCBB)
Ralph C. Cooley DDS Distinguished Professor in Biomaterials
University of Texas School of Dentistry at Houston
Houston, Texas
Jorge Perdigão, DMD, MS, PhD
Professor
Department of Restorative Sciences
Division of Operative Dentistry
University of Minnesota School of Dentistry
Minneapolis, Minnesota
Contributor vii
Richard B. Price, BDS, DDS, MS, PhD, FRCD(C), FDS
RCS (Edin)
Professor and Head Division of Fixed Prosthodontics
Dental Clinical Services
Dalhousie University
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada
André V. Ritter, DDS, MS, MBA
homas P . Hinman Distinguished Professor
Department of Operative Dentistry
he University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of
Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina
Frederick A. Rueggeberg, DDS, MS
Professor and Section Director, Dental Materials
Restorative Sciences
Dental College of Georgia at Augusta University
Augusta, Georgia
Daniel A. Shugar ,DDS, PhD, MPH
Professor Emeritus
Department of Operative Dentistry
he University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of
Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina
Gregory E. Smith, DDS, MSD
Professor Emeritus
Department of Restorative Sciences
College of Dentistry
University of Florida
Gainesville, Florida
John R. Sturdevant, DDS
Associate Professor
Department of Operative Dentistry
he University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of
Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina
Taieer A. Sulaiman, BDS (Hon ,)PhD
Assistant Professor
Department of Operative Dentistry
he University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of
Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North CarolinaEdward J. Swift, Jr., DMD, MS
Associate Dean for Education
Professor
Department of Operative Dentistry
he University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of
Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina
Ricardo Walter, DDS, MS
Clinical Associate Professor
Department of Operative Dentistry
he University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of
Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina
Aldridge D. Wilder, Jr., BS, DDS
Professor
Department of Operative Dentistry
he University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of
Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina
Contributors to Past Editions
Stephen C. Bayne, MS, PhD
Professor and Chair
Department of Cariology, Restorative Sciences, and
Endodontics
School of Dentistry
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, Michigan
R. Scott Eidon, DDS
Clinical Associate Professor
Department of Operative Dentistry
he University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of
Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina
Jefrey Y . Thompon, PhD
Professor
Section of Prosthodontics
Director
Biosciences Research Center
College of Dental Medicine
Nova Southeastern University
Ft. Lauderdale, Florida
viii CHAPTER Foreword
viiiForeword
Dr. Cliford Sturdevant had a brass plaque on his desk that read
“If it’s almost right it’s wrong!” his commitment to excellence
also was the mantra upon which his classic textbook, he Art and
Science of Operative Dentistry, was irst written and published in
. his textbook has been the basis for training dental students
in the ine art and clinical science of Operative Dentistry for 50
years. In light of this signiicant landmark, which coincides with
the publication of this new Seventh Edition, we believe it is
important to present the evolution of the various editions of the
textbook from a historical perspective.
he First Edition (Sturdevant, Barton, Brauer, ) was meant
“to present the signiicant aspects of Operative Dentistry and the
research indings in the basic and clinical sciences that have immedi -
ate application” in the ield of Operative Dentistry. It is important
to note that Dean Brauer pointed out in his preface that beyond
having the knowledge and skills needed to perform a procedure,
the practitioner must also have high moral and ethical standards,
essential and priceless ingredients. Since the First Edition, this
textbook series has always attempted to present artistic and scientiic
elements of Operative Dentistry in the context of ethical standards
for patient care.
It is also worth noting that the First Edition was printed and
bound in “landscape” format so that it could more easily be used
as a manual in the preclinical laboratory and would always remain
open to the desired page. he handmade 5X models used to illustrate
the various steps in cavity preparation were created by two dental
students enrolled at he University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill School of Dentistry during the writing of the First Edition.
Illustrations of these models have continued to be used in later
editions, and the models themselves have served as important
teaching materials for decades.
Although the techniques, materials, armamentarium, and
treatment options continue to evolve, many of the principles of
Operative Dentistry described in the First Edition are still pertinent
today. An understanding of these principles and the ability to
meticulously apply them are critical to providing the outstanding
dental treatment expected by our patients.
he Second Edition (Sturdevant, Barton, Sockwell, Strickland,
) expanded on many techniques (e.g., acid etching) using
experience and published research that had occurred since publica -
tion of the First Edition. he basics of occlusion were emphasized
and presented in a way that would be helpful to the dental student
and practitioner. A chapter on treatment planning and sequencing
of procedures, as well as a chapter providing a thorough treatise
on the use of pins, was included. Information on silicate cement,
self-curing acrylic resin, and the baked porcelain inlay was eliminated
for obvious reasons. A chapter on endodontic therapy and the
chapter on the “dental assistant” were no longer included. Chapters
on (1) tooth-colored restorations and (2) additional conservative and esthetic treatments explained the changes and improvements
that occurred in the areas of esthetic options available to patients.
In the chapter on gold inlay/onlay restorations, increased emphasis
was given to the gold onlay restorations for Class II cavity
preparations.
he hird Edition (Sturdevant, Roberson, Heymann, J. Stur -
devant, ) placed a new emphasis on cariology and the “medical
model of disease” with regard to risk assessment an d managing
the high-risk caries patient. This important concept laid the
foundation for what is still taught today with regard to identifying
risk factors and deining a treatment plan based on caries risk
assessment. he hird Edition also included new expanded chapters
on infection control, diagnosis and treatment planning, and dental
materials. In light of the growing interest in the area of esthetic
dentistry, a variety of conservative esthetic treatments were intro -
duced including vital bleaching, microabrasion and macroabrasion,
etched porcelain veneers, and the novel all-porcelain bonded pontic.
Additionally, an entirely new section on tooth-colored inlays and
onlays was included that chronicled both lab-processed resin and
ceramic restorations of this type and those fabricated cha irside
with CAD/CAM systems.
With the Fourth Edition of this text (Roberson, Heymann,
Swift, ), Dr. Cliford Sturdevant’s name was added to the
book title to honor his contributions to the textbook series and
the discipline of Operative Dentistry. In this edition, a particular
emphasis was placed on bonded esthetic restorations. Consequently,
an entirely new chapter was included on fundamental concepts
of enamel and dentin adhesion. his chapter was intended to
provide foundational information critical to the long-term success
of all types of bonded restorations.
he Fifth Edition (Roberson, Heymann, Swift, ) continued
with the renewed emphasis on the importance of adhesively bonded
restorations and focused on scientiic considerations for attaining
optimal success, particularly with posterior composites. Concepts
such as the “C Factor” and keys to reducing polymerization efects
were emphasized along with factors involved in reducing microleak -
age and recurrent decay.
he Sixth Edition (Heymann, Swift, Ritter, ) represented
a transition from a large printed edition, as in the past, to a smaller,
streamlined printed version that focused on concepts and techniques
immediately essential for learning contemporary Ope rative Dentistry.
he same amount of information was included, but many chapters
such as those addressing biomaterials, infection control, pain control,
bonded splints and bridges, direct gold restorations, and instruments
and equipment were available for the irst time in a supplemental
online format.
With this new Seventh Edition of Sturdevant’s Art and Science
of Operative Dentistry , fundamental concepts and principles of
contemporary Operative Dentistry are maintained and enhanced,
Foreword ix
but vital new areas of content also have been incorporated.
Diagnosis, classiication, and management of dental caries have
been signiicantly updated in light of the latest clinical and epi -
demiological research. Similarly, content on adhesive dentistry and
composite resins has been updated as a result of the evolving
science in these ields.
An entirely new chapter on light curing and its important role
in the clinical success of resin composite restorations has been
added. Moreover, a new scientiically based chapter details the
important elements of color and shade matching and systematically
reviews how the dental clinician is better able to understand the
many co-variables involved in color assessment. It also reviews
how best to improve shade matching of esthetic restorations to
tooth structure.
In an attempt to better optimize restorative treatment outcomes
involving periodontal challenges, a new chapter has been included
that addresses these principles. Periodontology Applied to Operative
Dentistry chronicles the various clinical considerations involving
conditions such as inadequate crown length, lack of root coverage,
and other vexing problems requiring interdisciplinary treatment
to optimize success.
Finally, the Seventh Edition of this text addresses the everevolving area of digital dentistry with a new chapter, Digital
Dentistry in Operative Dentistry. his chapter reviews the various
technologies involved in scanning and image capture for both
treatment planning and restorative applications. Additionally, the
authors review various types of digital restorative systems for both chairside and modem-linked laboratory-based fabrication of restora -
tions. In recognition of the rapid movement to digital dentistry,
this chapter is a vital addition to a textbook whose tradition has
been always to relect the latest technologies and research indings
in contemporary Operative Dentistry.
Since its inception 50 years ago, the Sturdevant text has been
a dynamic document, with content that has included innovative
information on the latest materials and techniques. Over this time
period, numerous internationally recognized experts have addressed
many speciic topics as authors and co-authors of various chapters.
It also should be pointed out that with all editions of the textbook,
the authors of the various chapters are themselves actively involved
in teaching students preclinical and clinical Operative Dentistry.
Moreover, they are “wet-ingered dentists” who also practice Opera -
tive Dentistry for their individual patients.
In summary, for 50 years Sturdevant’s Art and Science of Operative
Dentistry has been a major resource guiding educators in the teaching
of contemporary Operative Dentistry. Each edition of this text
has striven to incorporate the latest technologies and science based
on the available literature and supporting research. he Seventh
Edition is a superb addition to this tradition, which will most
assuredly uphold the standard of publication excellence that has
been the hallmark of the Sturdevant textbooks for half a century.
Harald O. Heymann, DDS, MEd
Kenneth N. May, Jr., DDS
x CHAPTER Preface
xPreface
Since the publication of the First E dition in , he University
of North Carolina’s he Art and Science of Operative Dentistry has
been considered a major Operative Dentistry textbook in many
countries, and it has been translated in several languages. he
widespread use of this textbook in dental education is a testimony
to both its success and its value for dental students and dental
educators alike.
With the Seventh Edition we attempted to elevate the level of
excellence this textbook series is known for. All relevant content
from the previous editions is still here (from cariology and treatment
planning to biomaterials and clinical techniques for amalgam and
composite restorations). However, most chapters were signiicantly
revised to relect current scientiic and clinical evidence, and several
chapters were virtually rewritten by new contributo rs who are
more engaged in the speciic content areas. he chapter on bio -
materials, in addition to being signiicantly revised, appears again
in print in the Seventh Edition, making it easier for the reader to
access the information while reading the print version of the
textbook. Additionally, many chapters were condensed into more
streamlined and concise single chapters (for example, three of the
“composite chapters” from the Sixth Edition are now concisely
presented in a single “composite chapter” in this new edition; a
similar approach was used for the “amalgam chapters”).
In addition, four new and relevant chapters were added (Light
Curing of Restorative Materials, Color and Shade Mat ching in
Operative Dentistry, Periodontology Applied to Operative Dentistry,
and Digital Dentistry in Operative Dentistry) to bring the textbook
in line with disciplines that ever more interface with Operative
Dentistry, emphasizing the increased role of an interdisciplinary
approach to modern Operative Dentistry. Each of these new chapters
is authored by recognized authorities in the respective topics, and
considerably broaden the scope of the Seventh Edition.
he new edition also features an Expert Consult website that
includes a full online version of the print text, as well as ive
additional online-only chapters and technique videos.
Expanding on a signiicant layout facelift that started with the
Sixth Edition, the Seventh Edition ofers an increased number of
color images, line drawings that were further revis ed and improved for increased text comprehension, and a reorganization of chapter
sequence. Furthermore, redundant and outdated information has
been deleted. All these updates enhance the user experience and
make the Seventh Edition an even user-friendlier textbook for the
wide range of readers—students, teachers, and practitioners/
colleagues.
Many hours of diligent work have been invested so as to ofer
you the best possible Operative Dentistry textbook at this point
in time. We have sought to honor the long-standing tradition of
he Art and Science of Operative Dentistry textbook series and to
bring you updated, clinically relevant and evidence-based informa -
tion. To publish this edition on the year we commem orate the
50th anniversary of the publication of the First Edition is a milestone
for Operative Dentistry in general and for he University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill’s Department of Operative Dentistry in
particular. We are honored to have had the opportunity to work
on and present the Seventh Edition.
he Editors
Dr. Clifford Sturdevant.
xiAcknowledgments
he editors would like to thank:
• Our spouses and families for their love, understanding, and
support during this revision.
• he University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill’s Operative
Dentistry staf, faculty, and graduate students, whose support
was invaluable to make this efort possible.
• he many colleagues who contributed with illustrations—their
names are referenced throughout the textbook.• he team at Elsevier (Jennifer Flynn-Briggs, Laura Klein, David
Stein, Ellen Wurm-Cutter, Julie Eddy, and Jodi Bernard) for
the support, encouragement, and expertise during the revision
process. heir professionalism and guidance are relected in
every page of this work.
xii CHAPTER Content
xiiContents
1. Clinical Signiicance of Dental Anatomy,
Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion, 1
Lee W. Boushell, John R. Sturdevant
2. Dental Caries: Etiology, Clinical Characteristics,
Risk Assessment, and Management, 40
Andréa G. Ferreira Zandoná, André V. Ritter, R. Scott Eidson
3. Patient Assessment, Examination, Diagnosis,
and Treatment Planning, 95
Lee W. Boushell, Daniel A. Shugars, R. Scott Eidson
4. Fundamentals of Tooth Preparation,
Lee W. Boushell, Ricardo Walter
5. Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and Dentin
Adhesion,
Jorge Perdigão, Ricardo Walter, Patricia A. Miguez, Edward J.
Swift, Jr.
6. Light Curing of Restorative Materials,
Richard B. Price, Frederick A. Rueggeberg
7. Color and Shade Matching in Operative
Dentistry,
Joe C. Ontiveros, Rade D. Paravina
8. Clinical Technique for Direct Composite Resin
and Glass Ionomer Restorations,
André V. Ritter, Ricardo Walter, Lee W. Boushell,
Sumitha N. Ahmed
9. Additional Conservative Esthetic
Procedures,
Harald O. Heymann, André V. Ritter10. Clinical Technique for Amalgam
Restorations,
Lee W. Boushell, Aldridge D. Wilder, Jr., Sumitha N. Ahmed
11. Periodontology Applied to Operative
Dentistry,
Patricia A. Miguez, Thiago Morelli
12. Digital Dentistry in Operative Dentistry,
Dennis J. Fasbinder, Gisele F. Neiva
13. Dental Biomaterials,
Terence E. Donovan, Taiseer A. Sulaiman, Gustavo Mussi Stefan
Oliveira, Stephen C. Bayne, Jefrey Y . Thompson
Online Only Chapter
14. Instruments and Equipment for Tooth
Preparation, e1
Terence E. Donovan, Lee W. Boushell, R. Scott Eidson
15. Preliminary Considerations for Operative
Dentistry, e23
Lee W. Boushell, Ricardo Walter, Aldridge D. Wilder, Jr.
16. Resin-Bonded Splints and Bridges, e52
Harald O. Heymann, André V. Ritter
17. Direct Gold Restorations, e69
Gregory E. Smith
18. Class II Cast-Metal Restorations, e94
John R. Sturdevant
Index,
11
Clinical Signiicance of Dental Anatomy,
Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion
LEE W. BOUSHELL, JOHN R. STURDEVANT
A thorough understanding of the histology, physiology, and
occlusal interactions of the dentition and supporting tissues
is essential for the restorative dentist. Knowledge of the
structures of teeth (enamel, dentin, cementum, and pulp) and
their relationships to each other and to the supporting structures
is necessary, especially when tr eating dental caries. he protective
function of the tooth form is revealed by its impact on masticatory
muscle activity, the supporting tissues (osseous and mucosal), and
the pulp. Proper tooth form contributes to healthy supporting
tissues. he contour and contact relationships of teeth with adjacent
and opposing teeth are major determinants of muscle function in
mastication, esthetics, speech, and protection. he relationships
of form to function are especially noteworthy when considering
the shape of the dental arch, proximal contacts, occlusal contacts,
and mandibular movement.
Teeth and Supporting Tiue
Dentition
Humans have primary and permanent dentitions. he primary
dentition consists of 10 maxillary and 10 mandibular teeth. Primary
teeth exfoliate and are replaced by the permanent denti tion, which
consists of 16 maxillary and 16 mandibular teeth.
Clae of Human Teeth: Form and Function
Human teeth are divided into classes on the basis of form and
function. he primary and permanent dentitions include the incisor,
canine, and molar classes. he fourth class, the premolar, is found
only in the permanent dentition ( Fig. 1.1 ). Tooth form predicts
the function; class traits are the characteristics that place teeth into
functional categories. Because the diet of humans consists of anim al
and plant foods, the human dentition is called omnivorous .
Incisors
Incisors are located near the entrance of the oral cavity and function
as cutting or shearing instruments for food (see Fig. 1.1 ). From a
proximal view, the crowns of these teeth have a relativel y triangular
shape, with a narrow incisal surface and a broad cervical base.
During mastication, incisors are used to shear (cut through) food. Incisors are essential for proper esthetics of the smile, facial soft
tissue contours (e.g., lip support), and speech (phonetics).
Canines
Canines possess the longest roots of all teeth and are located at
the corners of the dental arches. hey function in the seizing,
piercing, tearing, and cutting of food. From a proximal view, the
crown also has a triangular shape, with a thick incisal ridge. he
anatomic form of the crown and the length of the root make
canine teeth strong, stable abutments for ixed or removable
prostheses. Canines not only serve as important guides in occlusion,
because of their anchorage and position in the dental arches, but
also play a crucial role (along with the incisors) in the esthetics of
the smile and lip support.
Premolars
Premolars serve a dual role: (1) hey are similar to canines in the
tearing of food, and (2) they are similar to molars in the grinding
of food. Although irst premolars are angular, with their facial cusps
resembling canines, the lingual cusps of the maxillary premolars
and molars have a more rounded anatomic form (see Fig. 1.1 ). he
occlusal surfaces present a series of curves in the form of concavities
and convexities that should be maintained throughout life for correct
occlusal contacts and function. Although less visible than incisors
and canines, premolars still play an important role in esthetics.
Molars
Molars are large, multicusped, strongly anchored teeth located
nearest the temporomandibular joint (TMJ), which serves as the
fulcrum during function. hese teeth have a major role in the
crushing, grinding, and chewing of food to dimensions suitable
for swallowing. hey are well suited for this task because they have
broad occlusal surfaces and anchorage ( Figs. 1.2 and 1.3). Premolars
and molars are important in maintaining the vertical dimension
of the face (see Fig. 1.1 ).
Structure of Teeth
Teeth are composed of enamel, the pulp–dentin complex, and
cementum (see Fig. 1.3 ). Each of these structures is discussed
individually.
2 CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion
completion. he strategic placement of the grooves and fossae
complements the position of the opposing cusps so as to allow
movement of food to the facial and lingual surfaces during mastica -
tion. A functional cusp that opposes a groove (or fossa) occludes
on enamel inclines on each side of the groove and not in the depth
of the groove. his arrangement leaves a V-shaped escape path
between the cusp and its opposing groove for the movement of
food during chewing ( Fig. 1.4 ).
Enamel thickness varies in the area of these developmental
features and may approach zer o depending on the efectiveness of
adjacent cusp coalescence. Failure or compromised coalescence of
the enamel of the developmental lobes results in a deep invagination
in the groove area of the enamel surface and is termed issure .
Noncoalesced enamel at the deepest point of a fossa is termed pit.
Incisors
IncisorsCanine
CaninePremolars
PremolarsMolars
Molars
• Fig. 1.1 Maxillary and mandibular teeth in maximum intercuspal posi -
tion. The classes of teeth are incisors, canines, premolars, and molars.
Cusps of mandibular teeth are one half cusp anterior of corresponding
cusps of teeth in the maxillary arch. (From Logan BM, Reynolds P , Hutch -
ings RT: McMinn’s color atlas of head and neck anatomy , ed 4, Edinburgh,
, Mosby.)
• Fig. 1.2 Occlusal surfaces of maxillary and mandibular irst and second
molars after several years of use, showing rounded curved surfaces and
minimal wear.
3c
9
7
3a
1a23b
1
• Fig. 1.3 Cross section of the maxillary molar and its supporting struc -
tures. 1, Enamel; 1a, gnarled enamel; 2, dentin; 3a, pulp chamber; 3b,
pulp horn; 3c, pulp canal; 4, apical foramen; 5, cementum; 6, periodontal
ibers in periodontal ligament; 7, alveolar bone; 8, maxillary sinus; 9,
mucosa; 10, submucosa; 11, blood vessels; 12, gingiva; 13, lines of
Retzius; 14, dentinoenamel junction (DEJ).
• Fig. 1.4 Maxillary and mandibular irst molars in maximum intercuspal
contact. Note the grooves for escape of food. Enamel
Enamel formation, amelogenesis , is accomplished by cells called
ameloblasts . hese cells originate from the embryonic germ layer
known as ectoderm . Enamel covers the anatomic crown of the
tooth, varies in thickness in diferent areas, and is securely attached
to the dentin by the dentinoenamel junction (DEJ) (see Fig. 1.3 ).
It is thicker at the incisal and occlusal areas of the crown and
becomes progressively thinner until it terminates at the cemen -
toenamel junction (CEJ). he thickness also varies from one class
of tooth to another, averaging 2 mm at the incisal ridges of incisors,
2.3 to 2.5 mm at the cusps of premolars, and 2.5 to 3 mm at the
cusps of molars.
Cusps on the occlusal surfaces of posterior teeth begin as separate
ossiication centers, which form into developmental lobes. Adjacent
developmental lobes increase in size until they begin to coalesce.
Grooves and fossae result in the areas of coalescence (at the junction
of the developmental lobes of enamel) as cusp formation nears
CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion 3
arrangement for each group or layer of rods as they progress radially
from the dentin toward the enamel surface. hey initially follow
a curving path through one third of the enamel next to the DEJ.
After that, the rods usually follow a more direct path through the
remaining two thirds of the enamel to the enamel surface. Groups
of enamel rods may entwine with adjacent groups of rod s and
follow a curving irregular path toward the tooth surface. hese
constitute gnarled enamel , which occurs near the cervical regions
and also in incisal and occlusal areas ( Fig. 1.6 ). Gnarled enamel
is not subject to fracture as much as is regular enamel. his type
of enamel formation does not yield readily to the pressure of
bladed, hand-cutting instruments in tooth preparation. he orienta -
tion of the enamel rod heads and tails and the gnarling of enamel
rods provide strength by resisting, distributing, and dissipating
impact forces.
Changes in the direction of enamel rods, which minimize the
potential for fracture in the axial direction, produce an optical
appearance called Hunter-Schreger bands (Fig. 1.7 ). hese bands
appear to be composed of alternate light and dark zones of varying
widths that have slightly diferent permeability and organic content.
hese bands are found in diferent areas of each class of teeth.
Because the enamel rod orientation varies in each tooth, HunterSchreger bands also have a variation in the number present in each
tooth. In anterior teeth, they are located near the incisal surfaces.
hey increase in numbers and areas of teeth, from canines to
premolars. In molars, the bands occur from near the cervical region
to the cusp tips. In the primary dentition, the enamel rods in the
cervical and central parts of the crown are nearly perpendicular
to the long axis of the tooth and are similar in their direction to
permanent teeth in the occlusal two thirds of the crown.
Enamel rod diameter near the dentinal borders is about 4 μm
and about 8 μm near the surface. his diameter diference accom -
modates the larger outer surface of the enamel crown compared
with the dentinal surface at the DEJ. Enamel rods, in transverse
section, have a rounded head or body section and a tail section,
forming a repetitive series of interlocking rods. Microscopic
(~ ×) cross-sectional evaluation of enamel reveals that the
rounded head portion of each rod lies between the narrow tail
portions of two adjacent prisms ( Fig. 1.8 ). Generally, the rounded Fissures and/or pits represent non–self-cleansing areas where
acidogenic bioilm accumulation may predispose the tooth to dental
caries ( Fig. 1.5 ).
Chemically, enamel is a highly mineralized crystalline structure.
Hydroxyapatite, in the form of a crystalline lattice, is the largest
mineral constituent (90%–92% by volume). Other minerals and
trace elements are present in smaller amounts. he remaining
constituents of tooth enamel include organic matrix proteins
(1%–2%) and water (4%–12%) by volume.
Structurally, enamel is composed of millions of enamel rods
(or “prisms”), rod sheaths, and a cementing interrod substance.
Enamel rods, which are the largest structural compo nents, are
formed linearly by successive apposition of enamel in discrete
increments. he resulting variations in structure and mineralization
are called incremental striae of Retzius and may be considered growth
rings that form during amelogenesis (see Fig. 1.3 ). he striae of
Retzius appear as concentric circles in horizontal sections of a
tooth. In vertical sections, the striae are positioned transversely at
the cuspal and incisal areas in a symmetric arc pattern, descending
obliquely to the cervical region and terminating at the DEJ. When
these circles are incomplete at the enamel surface, a series of
alternating grooves, called imbrication lines of Pickerill , are formed.
Elevations between the grooves are called perikymata ; they are
continuous around a tooth and usually lie parallel to the CEJ and
each other. Rods vary in number from approximately 5 million
for a mandibular incisor to about 12 million for a maxillary molar.
In general, the rods are aligned perpendicularly to the DEJ and
the tooth surface in the primary and permanent dentitions except
in the cervical region of permanent teeth, where they are oriented
outward in a slightly apical direction. Microscopically, the enamel
surface initially has circular depressions indicating where the enamel
rods end. hese concavities vary in depth and shape, and gradually
wear smooth with age. Additionally, a structureless outer layer of
enamel about 30 μm thick may be commonly identiied toward
the cervical area of the tooth crown and less commonly on cusp
tips. here are no visible rod (prism) outlines in this area and all
of the apatite crystals are parallel to one another and perpendicular
to the striae of Retzius. his layer, referred to as prismless enamel ,
may be more heavily mineralized.
Each ameloblast forms an individual enamel rod with a speciic
length based on the speciic type of tooth and the speciic coronal
location within that tooth. Enamel rods follow a wavy, spiraling
course, producing an alternating clockwise and counterclockwise
e
df
c
tdec
dc
• Fig. 1.5 Fissure (f) at junction of lobes allows accumulation of food
and bacteria predisposing the tooth to dental caries (c). Enamel (e), dentin
(d), enamel caries lesion (ec), dentin caries lesion (dc), transparent dentin
(td); early enamel demineralization (arrow).
• Fig. 1.6 Gnarled enamel. (From Berkovitz BKB, Holland GR, Moxham
BJ: Oral anatomy, histology and embryology , ed 4, Edinburgh, ,
Mosby.)
4 CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion
Although enamel is a hard, dense structure, it is permeable to
certain ions and molecules. he route of passage may be through
structural units such as rod sheaths, enamel cracks, and other
defects that are hypomineralized and rich in organic content. Water
plays an important role as a transporting medium through the
small intercrystalline spaces. Enamel tufts are hypomineralized
structures of interrod substance between adjacent groups of enamel
rods that project from the DEJ ( Fig. 1.10 ). hese projections arise
in dentin, extend into enamel in the direction of the long axis of
the crown, and may play a role in the spread of den tal caries.
Enamel lamellae are thin, lealike faults between the enamel rod
groups that extend from the enamel surface toward the DEJ,
sometimes extending into dentin (see Fig. 1.10 ). hey contain
mostly organic material and may predispose the tooth to the entry
of bacteria and subsequent development of dental caries. Enamel
permeability decreases with age because of changes in the enamel
matrix, a decrease referred to as enamel maturation .
Enamel is soluble when exposed to acidic conditions, but the
dissolution is not uniform. Solubility of enamel increases from
the enamel surface to the DEJ. When luoride ions are present
during enamel formation or are topically applied to the enamel
surface, the solubility of surface enamel is decreased. Fluoride head portion is oriented in the incisal or occlusal direction; the
tail section is oriented cervically. he inal act of the ameloblasts,
upon the completion of enamel rod formation, is the secretion of
a membrane layer that covers the ends of the enamel rods. his
layer is referred to as Nasmyth membrane , or primary enamel cuticle .
Ameloblasts degenerate upon completion of Nasmyth membrane,
which covers the newly erupted tooth and is worn away by mas tication and cleaning. he membrane is replaced by an organic deposit
called the pellicle , which is a precipitate of salivary proteins.
Microorganisms may attach to the pellicle to form a bioilm
(bacterial plaque), which, if acidogenic in nature, may become a
precursor to dental disease.
Each enamel rod contains millions of small, elongated apatite
crystallites that vary in size and shape. he crystallites are tightly
packed in a distinct pattern of orientation that gives strength and
structural identity to the enamel rod. he long axis of the apatite
crystallites within the central region of the head (body) is aligned
almost parallel to the rod long axis, and the crystallites incline
with increasing angles (65 degrees) to the rod axis in the tail region.
he susceptibility of these crystallites to acidic conditions, from
the caries process or as a result of an etching procedure, may be
correlated with their orientation. Acid-induced min eral dissolution
(demineralization) occurs more in the head region of each rod.
he tail region and the periphery of the head region are relatively
resistant to acidic demineralization. he crystallites are irregular
in shape, with an average length of nm and an average width
of 20 to 40 nm. Each apatite crystallite is composed of thousands
of unit cells that have a highly ordered arrangement of atoms. A
crystallite may be unit cells long, 40 cells wide, and 20 cells
thick in a hexagonal coniguration ( Fig. 1.9 ). An organic matrix
surrounds individual crystals.
Alternating
Hunter-Schreger
bandsDentinEnamel
• Fig. 1.7 Photomicrograph of enamel Hunter-Schreger bands. Photo -
graphed obtained by relected light. (Modiied from Chiego DJ Jr: Essentials of oral histology and embryology: A clinical approach , ed 4, St Louis,
, Mosby.)
B
T
• Fig. 1.8 Electron micrograph of cross section of rods in mature human
enamel. Crystal orientation is different in “bodies” (B) than in “tails” (T).
Approximate level of magniication × . (From Meckel AH, Griebstein
WJ, Neal RJ: Structure of mature human dental enamel as observed by
electron microscopy, Arch Oral Biol 10(5): – , .)
CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion 5
elastic modulus, high compressive strength, and low tensile strength).
he ability of the enamel to withstand masticatory forces depends
on a stable attachment to the dentin by means of the DEJ. Dentin
is a more lexible substance that is strong and resilient (low elastic
modulus, high compressive strength, and high tensile strength),
which essentially increases the fracture toughness of the more
supericial enamel. he junction of enamel and dentin (DEJ) is
scalloped or wavy in outline, with the crest of the waves penetrating
toward enamel ( Fig. 1.11 ). he rounded projections of enamel it
into the shallow depressions of dentin. his interdigitation may
contribute to the durable connection of enamel to dentin. he
DEJ is approximately 2 μm wide and is comprised of a mineralized
complex of interwoven dentin and enamel matrix proteins. In
addition to the physical, scalloped relationship between the enamel
and dentin, an interphase matrix layer (made primarily of a ibrillary
collagen network) extends to μm from the DEJ into the
enamel. his matrix-modiied interphase layer is considered to
provide fracture propagation limiting properties to the interface
between the enamel and the DEJ and thus overall structural stability
of the enamel attachment to dentin.1 Enamel rods that lack a
dentin base because of caries or improper preparation design are
easily fractured away from neighboring rods. For optimal strength
in tooth preparation, all enamel rods should be supported by
dentin ( Fig. 1.12 ).concentration decreases toward the DEJ. Fluoride is able to afect
the chemical and physical properties of the apatite mineral and
inluence the hardness, chemical reactivity, and stability of enamel,
while preserving the apatite structures. T race amounts of luoride
stabilize enamel by lowering acid solubility, decreasing the rate of
demineralization, and enhancing the rate of remineralization.
Enamel is the hardest substance of the human body. Hardness
may vary over the external tooth surface according to the location;
also, it decreases inward, with hardness lowest at the DEJ. he
density of enamel also decreases from the surface to the DEJ.
Enamel is a rigid structure that is both strong and brittle (high
20 nm
• Fig. 1.9 Electron micrograph of mature, hexagon-shaped enamel crys -
tallites. (From Nanci A: Ten Cate’s oral histology: development, structure,
and function , ed 7, St Louis, , Mosby.)
Enamel
Lamella
Dentinoenamel
junction
Dentinal part
of lamella
Dentin
• Fig. 1.10 Microscopic view through lamella that goes from enamel
surface into dentin. Note the enamel tufts (arrow). (From Fehrenbach MJ,
Popowics T: Illustrated dental embryology, histology, and anatomy , ed 4,
St. Louis, , Saunders. Courtesy James McIntosh, PhD, Assistant
Professor Emeritus, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Baylor College
of Dentistry, Dallas, TX.)
E
D
• Fig. 1.11 Microscopic view of scalloped dentoenamel junction (DEJ;
arrow ). E, Enamel; D, dentin. (From Fehrenbach MJ, Popowics T: Illustrated dental embryology, histology, and anatomy , ed 4, St. Louis, ,
Saunders. Courtesy James McIntosh, PhD, Assistant Professor Emeri -
tus, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Baylor College of Dentistry,
Dallas, TX.)
B A
• Fig. 1.12 A, Enamel rods unsupported by dentin base are fractured
away readily by pressure from hand instrument. B, Cervical preparation
showing enamel rods supported by dentin base.
6 CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion
objective during operative procedures must be the preservation of
the health of the pulp.
Dentin formation, dentinogenesis , is accomplished by cells called
odontoblasts . Odontoblasts are considered part of pulp and dentin
tissues because their cell bodies are in the pulp cavity, but their
long, slender cytoplasmic cell processes (Tomes ibers) extend well
( – μm) into the tubules in the mineralized dentin ( Fig.
1.14).
Because of these odontoblastic cell processes, dent in is considered
a living tissue, with the capability of reacting to physiologic and
pathologic stimuli. Odontoblastic processes occasionally cross the
DEJ into enamel; these are termed enamel spindles when their ends
are thickened ( Fig. 1.15 ). Enamel spindles may serve as pain
receptors, explaining the sensitivity experienced by some patients
during tooth preparation that is limited to enamel only.
Dentin forms the largest portion of the tooth structure, extending
almost the full length of the tooth. Externally, dentin is covered
by enamel on the anatomic crown and cementum on the anatomic
root. Internally, dentin forms the walls of the pulp cavity (pulp
chamber and pulp canals) ( Fig. 1.16 ). Dentin formation begins
immediately before enamel formation. Odontoblasts generate an
extracellular collagen matrix as they begin to move away from
adjacent ameloblasts. Mineralization of the collagen matrix,
facilitated by modiication of the collagen matrix by various
noncollagenous proteins, gradually follows its secretion. he most
recently formed layer of dentin is always on the pulpal surface. Pulp–Dentin Complex
Pulp and dentin tissues are specialized connective tissues of
mesodermal origin, formed from the dental papilla of the tooth
bud. Many investigators consider these two tissues as a single
tissue, which forms the pulp–dentin complex, with mineralized
dentin constituting the mature end product of cell diferentiation
and maturation.
Dental pulp occupies the pulp cavity in the tooth and is a
unique, specialized organ of the human body that serves four
functions: (1) formative (developmental), (2) nutritive, (3) sensory
(protective), and (4) defensive/reparative. he formative function
is the production of primary and secondary dentin by odontoblasts.
he nutritive function supplies mineral ions, proteins, and water
to dentin through the blood supply to odontoblasts and their
processes. he sensory function is provided by nerve ibers within
the pulp that mediate the sensation of pain. Dentin nervous
nociceptors are unique because various stimuli elicit only pain as
a response. he pulp usually does not diferentiate between heat,
touch, pressure, or chemicals. Motor nerve ibers initiate relexes
in the muscles of the blood vessel walls for the control of circulation
in the pulp. he defensive/reparative function is discussed in the
subsequent section on The Pulp-Dentin Complex: Response to
Pathologic Challenge .
he pulp is circumscribed by dentin and is lined peripherally
by a cellular layer of odontoblasts adjacent to dentin. Anatomically,
the pulp is divided into (1) coronal pulp located in the pulp
chamber in the crown portion of the tooth, including the pulp
horns that are located beneath the incisal ridges and cusp tips,
and (2) radicular pulp located in the pulp canals in the root portion
of the tooth. he radicular pulp is continuous with the periapical
tissues through the apical foramen or foramina of the root. Accessory
canals may extend from the pulp canals laterally through the root
dentin to periodontal tissue. he shape of each pulp conforms
generally to the shape of each tooth (see Fig. 1.3 ).
he pulp contains nerves, arterioles, venules, capillaries, lymph
channels, connective tissue cells, intercellular substance, odonto -
blasts, ibroblasts, macrophages, collagen, and ine ibers.2 he
pulp is circumscribed peripherally by a specialized odontogenic
area composed of the odontoblasts, the cell-free zone, and the
cell-rich zone.
Knowledge of the contour and size of the pulp cavity is essential
during tooth preparation. In general, the pulp cavity is a mi niature
contour of the external surface of the tooth. Pulp cavity size varies
with tooth size in the same person and among individuals. With
advancing age, the pulp cavity usually decreases in size. Radiographs
are an invaluable aid in determining the size of the pulp cavity
and any existing pathologic condition ( Fig. 1.13 ). A primary
A B
• Fig. 1.13 Pulp cavity size. A, Premolar radiograph of young person. B, Premolar radiograph of older
person. Note the difference in the size of the pulp cavity (arrows).
d
pdtf
mfo
10 /H9262m
• Fig. 1.14 Odontoblasts (o) have cell processes (Tomes ibers [tf]) that
extend through the predentin (pd) into dentin (d). mf , Mineralization front.
CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion 7
odontoblast and is lined with a layer of peritubular dentin, which
is much more mineralized than the surrounding intertubular dentin
(see Fig. 1.18 ).
he surface area of dentin is much larger at the DEJ and
dentinocemental junction than it is on the pulp cavity side. Because
odontoblasts form dentin while progressing inward toward the
pulp, the tubules are forced closer together. he number of tubules
increases from 15, to 20, /mm2 at the DEJ to 45, to
65, /mm2 at the pulp.3 he lumen of the tubules also varies
from the DEJ to the pulp surface. In coronal dentin, the average
diameter of tubules at the DEJ is 0.5 to 0.9 μm, but this increases
to 2 to 3 μm near the pulp ( Fig. 1.19 ).his unmineralized zone of dentin is immediately next to the cell
bodies of odontoblasts and is called predentin (see Fig. 1.14 ). Dentin
formation begins at areas subjacent to the cusp tip or incisal ridge
and gradually spreads, at the rate of ~4 μm/day, to the apex of
the root (see Fig. 1.16 ). In contrast to enamel formation, dentin
formation continues after tooth eruption and throughout the life
of the pulp. he dentin forming the initial shape of the tooth is
called primary dentin and is usually completed 3 years after tooth
eruption (in the case of permanent teeth).
he dentinal tubules are small canals that remain from the
process of dentinogenesis and extend through the entire width of
dentin, from the pulp to the DEJ ( Figs. 1.17 and 1.18). Each
tubule contains the cytoplasmic cell process (Tomes iber) of an
AA
• Fig. 1.15 Longitudinal section of enamel. Odontoblastic processes
extend into enamel as enamel spindles (A). (From Berkovitz BKB, Holland
GR, Moxham BJ: Oral anatomy, histology and embryology , ed 4, Edin -
burgh, , Mosby. Courtesy of Dr. R. Sprinz.)
e
c
• Fig. 1.16 Pattern of formation of primary dentin. This igure also shows
enamel (e) covering the anatomic crown of the tooth and cementum (c)
covering the anatomic root.
T
• Fig. 1.17 Ground dentinal surface, acid-etched with 37% phosphoric
acid. The artiicial crack shows part of the dentinal tubules (T). The tubule
apertures are opened and widened by acid application. (From Brännström
M: Dentin and pulp in restorative dentistry , London, , Wolfe Medical.)
I
P
• Fig. 1.18 Dentinal tubules in cross section, 1.2 mm from pulp. Peri -
tubular dentin (P) is more mineralized than intertubular dentin (I). (From
Brännström M: Dentin and pulp in restorative dentistry , London, ,
Wolfe Medical.)
8 CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion
are seen in enamel, indicating minute fractures of that structure.
he craze lines usually are not clinically signiicant unless associated
with cracks in the underlying dentin. he ultimate tensile strength
of dentin is approximately 98 megapascals (MPa), whereas the
ultimate tensile strength of enamel is approximately 10 MPa. he
compressive strength of dentin and enamel are approximately
and MPa, respectively.5
During tooth preparation, dentin usually is distinguished from
enamel by (1) color and opacity, (2) relectance, (3) hardness, and
(4) sound. Dentin is normally yellow-white and slightly darker he course of the dentinal tubules is a slight S-curve in the
tooth crown, but the tubules are straighter in the incisal ridges,
cusps, and root areas ( Fig. 1.20 ). T ubules are generally oriented
perpendicular to the DEJ. Along the tubule walls are small lateral
openings called canaliculi or lateral canals. he lateral canals are
formed as a result of the presence of secondary (lateral) branches
of adjacent odontoblastic processes during dentinogenesis. Near
the DEJ, the tubules are divided into several branches, forming
an intercommunicating and anastomosing network ( Fig. 1.21 ).
After the primary dentin is formed, dentin deposition continues
at a reduced rate (~0.4 μm/day) even without obvious external
stimuli, although the rate and amount of this physiologic secondary
dentin vary considerably among individuals. In secondary dentin,
the tubules take a slightly diferent directional pattern in contrast
to the primary dentin ( Fig. 1.22 ). he secondary dentin forms on
all internal aspects of the pulp cavity, but in the pulp chamber, in
multirooted teeth, it tends to be thicker on the roof and loor than
on the side walls.4
he walls of the dentinal tubules (peritubular dentin) in the
primary dentin gradually thicken, through ongoing mineral deposi -
tion, with age. he dentin therefore becomes harder, denser, and,
because tubular luid low becomes more restricted as the lumen
spaces become smaller, less sensitive. he increased amount of
mineral in the primary dentin is deined as dentin sclerosis . Dentin
sclerosis resulting from aging is called physiologic dentin sclerosis.
Human dentin is composed of approximately 50% inorganic
material and 30% organic material by volume. he organic material
is approximately 90% type I collagen and 10% noncollagenous
proteins. Dentin is less mineralized than enamel but more mineral -
ized than cementum or bone. he mineral content of dentin
increases with age. he mineral phase is composed primarily of
hydroxyapatite crystallites, which are arranged in a less systematic
manner than are enamel crystallites. Dentinal crystallites are smaller
than enamel crystallites, having a length of 20 to nm and a
width of about 3 nm, which is similar to the size seen in bone
and cementum.4 Dentin is signiicantly softer than enamel but
harder than bone or cementum. he hardness of dentin averages
one ifth that of enamel, and its hardness near the DEJ is about
three times greater than near the pulp. Although dentin is a hard,
mineralized tissue, it is lexible, with a modulus of elasticity of
approximately 18 gigapascals (GPa).5 his lexibility helps support
the more brittle, less resilient enamel. Dentin is not as prone to
fracture as is the enamel rod structure. Often small “craze lines”
A
BC
D
• Fig. 1.19 Tubules in supericial dentin close to the dentoenamel junc -
tion (DEJ) (A) are smaller and more sparsely distributed compared with
deep dentin (B). The tubules in supericial root dentin (C) and deep root
dentin (D) are smaller and less numerous than those in comparable depths
of coronal dentin.
• Fig. 1.20 Ground section of human incisor. Course of dentinal tubules
is in a slight S-curve in the crown, but straight at the incisal tip and in the
root. (From Young B, Lowe JS, Stevens A, Heath JW: Wheater’s functional
histology: a text and colour atlas , ed 5, Edinburgh, , Churchill
Livingstone.)
CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion 9
to occur. hese components include water, matrix proteins, matrixmodifying proteins, and mineral ions. he vital dental pulp has a
slight positive pressure that results in continual dentinal luid low
toward the external surface of the tooth. Enamel and cementum,
though semipermeable, provide an efective layer serving to protect
the underlying dentin and limit tubular luid low. When enamel
or cementum is removed during tooth preparation, the protective
layer is lost, allowing increased tubular luid movement toward
the cut surface. Permeability studies of dentin indicate that tubules
are functionally much smaller than would be indicated by their
measured microscopic dimensions as a result of numerous constric -
tions along their paths (see Fig. 1.18 ).7 Dentin permeability is not
uniform throughout the tooth. Coronal dentin is much more
permeable than root dentin. here also are diferences within coronal
dentin ( Fig. 1.24 ).8 Dentin permeability primarily depends on the
remaining dentin thickness (i.e., length of the tubules ) and the
diameter of the tubules. Because the tubules are shorter, more than enamel. In older patients, dentin is darker, and it can become
brown or black when it has been exposed to oral luids, old
restorative materials, or slowly advancing caries. Dentin surfaces
are more opaque and dull, being less relective to light than similar
enamel surfaces, which appear shiny. Dentin is softer than enamel
and provides greater yield to the pressure of a sharp explorer tine,
which tends to catch and hold in dentin.
Dentin sensitivity is perceived whenever nociceptor aferent
nerve endings, in close proximity to odontoblastic processes within
the dental tubules, are depolarized. he nerve transduction is most
often interpreted by the central nervous system as pain. Physical,
thermal, chemical, bacterial, and traumatic stimuli are remote
from the nerve ibers and are detected through the luid-illed
dentinal tubules, although the precise mechanism of detection has
not been conclusively established. he most accepted theory of
stimulus detection is the hydrodynamic theory , which suggests that
stimulus-initiated rapid tubular luid movement within the dentinal
tubules accounts for nerve depolarization.6 Operative procedures
that involve cutting, drying, pressure changes, osmotic shifts, or
changes in temperature result in rapid tubular luid movement,
which is perceived as pain ( Fig. 1.23 ).
Dentinal tubules are illed with dentinal luid, a transudate of
plasma that contains all components necessary for mineralization
• Fig. 1.21 Ground section showing dentinal tubules and their lateral
branching close to the dentoenamel junction (DEJ). (From Berkovitz BKB,
Holland GR, Moxham BJ: Oral anatomy, histology, and embryology , ed 4,
Edinburgh, , Mosby.)
Primary
Secondary
PulpPrimary
Secondary
Pulp
• Fig. 1.22 Ground section of dentin with pulpal surface at right. Dentinal
tubules curve sharply as they move from primary to secondary dentin.
Dentinal tubules are more irregular in shape in secondary dentin. (From
Nanci A: Ten Cate’s oral histology: development, structure, and function ,
ed 8, St. Louis, , Mosby.)
Enamel or exposed dentin
Dentin
Predentin
Pulp
afferent
nerve
• Fig. 1.23 Stimuli that induce rapid luid movements in dentinal tubules
distort odontoblasts and afferent nerves (arrow), leading to a sensation of
pain. Many operative procedures such as cutting or air-drying induce rapid
luid movement.
D
D
• Fig. 1.24 Ground section of MOD (mesio-occluso-distal) tooth prepa -
ration of a third molar. Dark blue dye was placed in the pulp chamber
under pressure after tooth preparation. Dark areas of dye penetration (D)
show that the dentinal tubules of axial walls are much more permeable
than those of the pulpal loor of preparation.
10 CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion
remineralization of the intertubular dentin, in addition to the
mineral occlusion of the dentinal tubules, such that the inal
hardness of the dentin in this afected area is greater than normal
primary dentin. he increased overall mineralization of this cariesafected primary dentin is referred to as reactive dentin sclerosis .
Deep dentin formation processes occur simultaneously with
the pulpal inlammatory response and result in the generation of
tertiary dentin at the pulp–dentin interface. he net efect of these
processes is to increase the thickness/efectiveness of the dentin as
a protective barrier for the pulp tissue. T wo types of tertiary dentin
form in response to lesion formation. In the case of mild injury
(e.g., a shallow caries lesion), primary odontoblasts initiate increased
formation of dentin along the internal aspect of the dentin beneath
the afected area through secretion of reactionary tertiary dentin
(or “reactionary dentin”). Reactionary dentin is tubular in nature
and is continuous with primary and secondary dentin.
More severe injury (e.g., a deep caries lesion) causes the death
of the primary odontoblasts. When therapeutic steps successfully
resolve the injury, replacement cells (variously referred to as secondary
odontoblasts, odontoblast-like cells, or odontoblastoid cells ) diferentiate
from pulpal mesenchymal cells. The secondary odontoblasts
subsequently generate reparative tertiary dentin (or “reparative
dentin”) as a part of the ongoing host defense. Reparative dentin
usually appears as a localized dentin deposit on the wall of the
pulp cavity immediately subjacent to the area on the tooth that
had received the injury ( Fig. 1.27 ). Reparative dentin is generally
atubular and therefore structurally diferent from the primary and
secondary dentin.
Cementum
Cementum is a thin layer of hard dental tissue covering the anatomic
roots of teeth. It is formed by cells known as cementoblasts , which
develop from undiferentiated mesenchymal cells in the connective
tissue of the dental follicle. Cementum is slightly softer than dentin
and consists of about 45% to 50% inorganic material (hydroxy -
apatite) by weight and 50% to 55% organic matter and water by
weight. he organic portion is composed primarily of collagen
and protein polysaccharides. Sharpey ibers are portions of the
principal collagen ibers of the periodontal ligament embedded in
cementum and alveolar bone to attach the tooth to the alveolus
(Fig. 1.28 ). Cementum is avascular.
Cementum is yellow and slightly lighter in color than dentin.
It is formed continuously throughout life because, as the supericial
• Fig. 1.25 Horizontal section in the occlusal third of a molar crown.
Dark blue dye was placed in the pulp chamber under pressure. Deep
dentin areas (over pulp horns) are much more permeable than supericial
dentin. (From Pashley DH, Andringa HJ, Derkson GD, Derkson ME, Kal -
athoor SR: Regional variability in the permeability of human dentin, Arch
Oral Biol 32: – , , with permission from Pergamon, Oxford,
UK.)
c
• Fig. 1.26 Transparent dentin (arrow) beneath a caries lesion (c).
numerous, and larger in diameter closer to the pulp, deep dentin
is a less efective pulpal barrier compared with supericial dentin
(Fig. 1.25 ).
The Pulp–Dentin Complex: Response to
Pathologic Challenge
he pulp–dentin complex responds to tooth pathology through
pulpal immune-inlammation defense systems and dentin repair/
formation. he defensive and reparative functions of the pulp are
mediated by an extremely complex host-defense response to bacterial,
chemical, mechanical, and/or thermal irritation.9 Primary odon -
toblasts are the irst to respond to lesion formation and communicate
with the deeper pulp tissue (via cytokines and chemokines) such
that an adaptive and innate inlammatory reaction begins. Mild
to moderate injury normally causes a reversible inlammatory
response in the pulp, referred to as reversible pulpitis, which resolves
when the pathology is removed. Moderate to severe injury (e.g.,
deep caries) may cause the degeneration of the afected odontoblastic
processes and death of the corresponding primary odontoblasts.
Toxic bacterial products, molecules released from the demineralized
dentin matrix, and/or high concentrations of inlammatory response
mediators may signal death of the primary odontoblasts. In cases
of severe injury, an irreversible inlammatory response of the pulp
(irreversible pulpitis) will ultimately result in capillary dilation,
local edema, stagnation of blood low, anoxia, and ultimately pulpal
necrosis (see Chapter 2 ).
Very early host-defense processes in primary dentin seek to
block the advancement of a caries lesion by means of the precipita -
tion of mineral in the lumens of the dentinal tubules of the afected
area. he physical occlusion of the tubular lumens increases the
ability of light to pass through this localized region (i.e., increases
its transparency). his dentin is referred to as transparent dentin
(Fig. 1.26 ).10 Dentin in this area is not as hard as normal primary
dentin because of mineral loss in the intertubular dentin (see
Chapter 2 ). Successful host-defense repair processes result in the
CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion 11
Cementum is capable of repairing itself to a limited degree and is
not resorbed under normal conditions. Some resorption of the
apical portion of the root cementum and dentin may occur, however,
if orthodontic pressures are excessive and movement is too fast
(Fig. 1.29 ).
Physiology of Tooth Form
Function
Teeth serve four main functions: (1) mastication, (2) esthetics, (3)
speech, and (4) protection of supporting tissues. Normal tooth
form and proper alignment ensure eiciency in the incising and
reduction of food. he various tooth classes—incisors, canines,
premolars, and molars—perform speciic functions in the mastica -
tory process and in the coordination of the various muscles of
mastication. he form and alignment of anterior teeth contribute
to the esthetics of personal physical appearance. he form and
alignment of anterior and posterior teeth assist in the articulation
of certain sounds so as to efect proper speech. Finally, the form
and alignment of teeth assist in the development and protection
of supporting gingival tissue and alveolar bone.
Contours
Facial and lingual surfaces possess a degree of convexity that afords
protection and stimulation of supporting tissues during mastication.
he convexity generally is located at the cervical third of the crown
on the facial surfaces of all teeth and the lingual surfaces of incisors
and canines. Lingual surfaces of posterior teeth usually have their
height of contour in the middle third of the crown. Normal tooth
contours act in delecting food only to the extent that the passing
food stimulates (by gentle massage) and does not irritate (abrade)
supporting soft tissues. If these curvatures are too great, tissues
usually receive inadequate stimulation by the passage o f food. Too
little contour may result in trauma to the attachment apparatus.
Normal tooth contours must be recreated in the performance of
operative dental procedures. Improper location and degree of facial
or lingual convexities may result in iatrogenic injury, as illustrated
in Fig. 1.30 , in which the proper facial contour is disregarded in
the design of the cervical area of a mandibular molar restoration.
Overcontouring is the worst ofender, usually resulting in increased
plaque retention that leads to a chronic inlammatory state of the
gingiva.
Proper form of the proximal surfaces of teeth is just as important
to the maintenance of periodontal tissue health as is the proper
form of facial and lingual surfaces. he proximal height of contour
serves to provide (1) contacts with the proximal surfaces of adjacent
teeth, thus preventing food impaction, and (2) adequate embrasure layer of cementum ages, a new layer of cementum is deposited to
keep the attachment intact. Acellular cementum (i.e., there are no
cementoblasts) is predominately associated with the coronal half
of the root. Cellular cementum is more frequently associated with
the apical half of the root. Cementum on the root end surrounds
the apical foramen and may extend slightly onto the inner wall
of the pulp canal. Cementum thickness may increase on the root
end to compensate for attritional wear of the occlusal or incisal
surface and passive eruption of the tooth.
The cementodentinal junction is relatively smooth in the
permanent tooth. he attachment of cementum to dentin, although
not completely understood, is very durable. Cementum joins enamel
to form the CEJ. In about 10% of teeth, enamel and cementum
do not meet, and this can result in a sensitive area as the openings
of the dentinal tubules are not covered. Abrasion, erosion, caries,
scaling, and restoration inishing/polishing procedures may denude
dentin of its cementum covering. his may lead to sensitivity to
various stimuli (e.g., heat, cold, sweet substances, sour substances).
d
rd
p
• Fig. 1.27 Reparative dentin in response to a caries lesion. d, Dentin;
rd, reparative dentin; p, pulp. (From Trowbridge HO: Pulp biology: Pro -
gress during the past 25 years, Aust Endo J 29(1):5–12, .)
Fibers
perforating
the alveolar
boneRadicular dentin
Fibers
perforating
the cementum
• Fig. 1.28 Principal ibers of periodontal ligament continue into surface
layer of cementum as Sharpey ibers. (Modiied from Chiego DJ Jr: Essentials of oral histology and embryology: A clinical approach , ed 4, St Louis,
, Mosby.)
• Fig. 1.29 Radiograph showing root resorption on lateral incisor after
orthodontic tooth movement.
12 CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion
from the incisor region through all the remaining teeth, the contact
area is located near the junction of the incisal (o r occlusal) and
middle thirds or in the middle third. Proximal contact areas typically
are larger in the molar region, which helps prevent gingival food
impaction during mastication. Adjacent surfaces near the proximal
contacts (embrasures) usually have remarkable symmetry.
Embrasures
Embrasures are V-shaped spaces that originate at the proximal
contact areas between adjacent teeth and are named for the direction
toward which they radiate. hese embrasures are (1) facial, (2)
lingual, (3) incisal or occlusal, and (4) gingival (see Figs. 1.32
and 1.33).
Initially, the interdental papilla ills the gingival embrasure.
When the form and function of teeth are ideal and optimal oral
AB C
• Fig. 1.30 Contours. Arrows show pathways of food passing over facial
surface of mandibular molar during mastication. A, Overcontour delects
food from gingiva and results in understimulation of supporting tissues. B,
Undercontour of tooth may result in irritation of soft tissue. C, Correct
contour permits adequate stimulation and protection of supporting tissue.
• Fig. 1.31 Portion of the skull, showing triangular spaces beneath
proximal contact areas. These spaces are occupied by soft tissue and
bone for the support of teeth.
A BFacial embrasure
Lingual embrasure
• Fig. 1.32 Proximal contact areas. Black lines show positions of contact faciolingually. A, Maxillary
teeth. B, Mandibular teeth. Facial and lingual embrasures are indicated. space (immediately apical to the contacts) for gingival tissue,
supporting bone, blood vessels, and nerves that serve the supporting
structures ( Fig. 1.31 ).
Proximal Contact Area
When teeth initially erupt to make proximal contact with previously
erupted teeth, a contact point is present. he contact point increases
in size to become a proximal contact area as the two adjacent
tooth surfaces abrade each other during physiologic tooth movement
(Figs. 1.32 and 1.33).
he physiologic signiicance of properly formed and located
proximal contacts cannot be overemphasized; they promote normal
healthy interdental papillae illing the interproximal spaces. Improper
contacts may result in food impaction between teeth, potentially
increasing the risk of periodontal disease, caries, and tooth move -
ment. In addition, retention of food is objectionable because of
its physical presence and the halitosis that results from food
decomposition. Proximal contacts and interdigitation of maxillary
and mandibular teeth, through occlusal contact areas, stabilize and
maintain the integrity of the dental arches.
he proximal contact area is located in the incisal third of the
approximating surfaces of maxillary and mandibular central incisors
(see Fig. 1.33 ). It is positioned slightly facial to the center of the
proximal surface faciolingually (see Fig. 1.32 ). Proceeding posteriorly
CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion 13
health is maintained, the interdental papilla may continue in this
position throughout life. When the gingival embrasure is illed by
the papilla, trapping of food in this region is prevented. In a facio -
lingual vertical section, the papilla is seen to have a triangular
shape between anterior teeth, whereas in posterior teeth, the papilla
may be shaped like a mountain range, with facial and lingual peaks
and the col (“valley”) lying beneath the contact area ( Fig. 1.34 ).
his col, a central faciolingual concave area beneath the contact,
is more vulnerable to periodontal disease from incorrect contact
and embrasure form because it is covered by nonkeratinized
epithelium.
he correct relationships of embrasures, cusps to sulci, marginal
ridges, and grooves of adjacent and opposing teeth provide for the
escape of food from the occlusal surfaces during mastication. When
an embrasure is decreased in size or absent, additional stress is
created on teeth and the supporting structures during mastication.
Embrasures that are too large provide little protection to t he
supporting structures as food is forced into the interproximal space
by an opposing cusp ( Fig. 1.35 ). A prime example is the failure
to restore the distal cusp of a mandibular irst molar when placing
a restoration ( Fig. 1.36 ). Lingual embrasures are usually larger
than facial embrasures; and this allows more food to be displaced
lingually because the tongue can return the food to the occlusal
surface more easily than if the food is displaced facially into the
buccal vestibule (see Fig. 1.32 ). he marginal ridges of adjacent
posterior teeth should be at the same height to have proper contact
and embrasure forms. When this relationship is absent, it may
A
BIncisal embrasure
Occlusal embrasure
Gingival embrasure
• Fig. 1.33 Proximal contact areas. Black lines show positions of contact incisogingivally and occluso -
gingivally. Incisal, occlusal, and gingival embrasures are indicated. A, Maxillary teeth. B, Mandibular teeth.
Contact area
Col
Soft tissue outline
• Fig. 1.34 Relationship of ideal interdental papilla to molar contact area.
wy
y
w
xz
z
x
• Fig. 1.35 Embrasure form. w, Improper embrasure form caused by
overcontouring of restoration resulting in unhealthy gingiva from lack of
stimulation. x, Good embrasure form. y, Frictional wear of contact area
has resulted in decrease of embrasure dimension. z, When the embrasure
form is good, supporting tissues receive adequate stimulation from foods
during mastication.
x
y
• Fig. 1.36 Embrasure form. x, Portion of tooth that offers protection to
underlying supporting tissue during mastication. y, Restoration fails to
establish adequate contour for good embrasure form.
14 CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion
and the condyle make up the superior border of each ramus. he
mandible initially contains 10 mandibular primary teeth and later
16 mandibular permanent teeth in the alveolar process. Maxillary
and mandibular bones comprise approximately 38% to 43%
inorganic material and 34% organic material by volume. he
inorganic material is hydroxyapatite, and the organic material is
primarily type I collagen, which is surrounded by a ground substance
of glycoproteins and proteoglycans.
Oral Mucosa
he oral mucosa is the mucous membrane that covers all oral
structures except the clinical crowns of teeth. It is composed of
two layers: (1) the stratiied squamous epithelium and (2) the
supporting connective tissue, called lamina propria . (See the lamina
propria of the gingiva in Fig. 1.38 , indicator 8 .) he epithelium
may be keratinized, parakeratinized, or nonkeratini zed, depending
on its location. he lamina propria varies in thickness and supports
the epithelium. It may be attached to the periosteum of alveolar
bone, or it may be interposed over the submucosa, which may
vary in diferent regions of the mouth (e.g., the loor of the mouth,
the soft palate). he submucosa, consisting of connective tissues
varying in density and thickness, attaches the mucous membrane
to the underlying bony structures. he submucosa contains glands,
blood vessels, nerves, and adipose tissue.
Oral mucosa is classiied into three major functional types: (1)
masticatory mucosa, (2) lining or relective mucosa, and (3) special -
ized mucosa. he masticatory mucosa comprises the free and
attached gingiva (see Fig. 1.38 , indicators 6 and 9 ) and the mucosa cause an increase in the problems associated with inadequate
proximal contacts and faulty embrasure forms.
Preservation of the curvatures of opposing cusps and surfaces
in function maintains masticatory eiciency throughout life (see
Fig. 1.2 ). Correct anatomic form renders teeth more self-cl eansing
because of the smoothly rounded contours that are more exposed
to the cleansing action of foods and luids and the frictional
movement of the tongue, lips, and cheeks. Failure to understand
and adhere to correct anatomic form may contribute to the
breakdown of the restored system ( Fig. 1.37 ).
Maxilla and Mandible
he human maxilla is formed by two bones, the maxilla proper
and the premaxilla. hese two bones form the bulk of the upper
jaw and the major portion of the hard palate and help form the
loor of the orbit and the sides and base of the nasal cavity. hey
contain 10 maxillary primary teeth initially and later contain 16
maxillary permanent teeth in the alveolar process (see Figs. 1.1
and 1.3, label 7).
he mandible, or the lower jaw, is horseshoe shaped and relates
to the skull on either side via the TMJs. he mandible is composed
of a body of two horizontal portions joined at the midline symphysis
mandibulae and the rami, the vertical parts. he coronoid process
A
B
C
• Fig. 1.37 Poor anatomic restorative form. A, Radiograph of lat
contact/amalgam gingival excess and resultant vertical osseous loss. B,
Radiograph of restoration with amalgam gingival excess and absence of
contact resulting in osseous loss, adjacent root caries. C, Poor embrasure
form and restoration margins.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
• Fig. 1.38 Vertical section of a maxillary incisor illustrating supporting
structures: 1, enamel; 2, dentin; 3, pulp; 4, gingival sulcus; 5, free gingival
margin; 6, free gingiva; 7, free gingival groove; 8, lamina propria of gingiva;
9, attached gingiva; 10, mucogingival junction; 11, periodontal ligament;
12, alveolar bone; 13, cementum; 14, alveolar mucosa.
CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion 15
unless dictated by caries, previous restoration, esthetics, or other
preparation requirements.
Attachment Apparatus
he tooth root is attached to the alveolus (bony socket) by the
periodontal ligament (see Fig. 1.38 , indicator 11 ), which is a complex
connective tissue containing numerous cells, blood vessels, nerves,
and an extracellular substance consisting of ibers and ground
substance. Most of the ibers are collagen, and the ground substance
is composed of a variety of proteins and polysaccharides. he
periodontal ligament serves the following functions: (1) attachment
and support, (2) sensory, (3) nutritive, and (4) homeostatic. Bundles
of collagen ibers, known as principal ibers of the ligament , serve
to connect between cementum and alveolar bone so as to suspend
and support the tooth. Coordination of masticatory muscle function
is achieved, through an eicient proprioceptive mechanism, by
the sensory nerves located in the periodontal ligament. Blood
vessels supply the attachment apparatus with nutritive substances.
Specialized cells of the ligament function to resorb and replace
cementum, the periodontal ligament, and alveolar bone.
he alveolar process—a part of the maxilla and the mandible—
forms, supports, and lines the sockets into which the roots of teeth
it. Anatomically, no distinct boundary exists between the body
of the maxilla or the mandible and the alveolar process. he alveolar
process comprises thin, compact bone with many small openings
through which blood vessels, lymphatics, and nerves pass. he
inner wall of the bony socket consists of the thin lamella of bone
that surrounds the root of the tooth and is termed alveolar bone
proper . he second part of the bone is called supporting alveolar
bone, which surrounds and supports the alveolar bone proper.
Supporting bone is composed of two parts: (1) the cortical plate,
consisting of compact bone and forming the inner (lingual) and
outer (facial) plates of the alveolar process, and (2) the spongy
base that ills the area between the plates and the alveolar bone
proper.
Occlusion
Occlusion literally means “closing”; in dentistry, the term means
the contact of teeth in opposing dental arches when the jaws are
closed (static occlusal relationships) and during various jaw move -
ments (dynamic occlusal relationships). he size of the jaw and
the arrangement of teeth within the jaw are subject to a wide range
of variation. he locations of contacts between opposing teeth
(occlusal contacts) vary as a result of diferences in the sizes and
shapes of teeth and jaws and the relative position of the jaws. A
wide variety of occlusal schemes are found in healthy individuals.
Consequently, deinition of an ideal occlusal scheme is fraught
with diiculty.11 Repeated attempts have been made to describe
an ideal occlusal scheme, but these descriptions are so restrictive
that few individuals can be found to it the criteria. Failing to ind
a single adequate deinition of an ideal occlusal scheme has resulted
in the conclusion that “in the inal analysis, optimal function and
the absence of disease is the principal characteristic of a good
occlusion.”11 he dental relationships described in this section
conform to the concepts of normal, or usual, occlusal schemes
and include common variations of tooth-and-jaw relationships.
he masticatory system (muscles, TMJs, and teeth) is highly
adaptable and usually able to successfully function over a wide
range of diferences in jaw size and tooth alignment. Despite this
great adaptability, however, some patients are highly sensitive to
changes in tooth contacts (which inluence the masticatory muscles of the hard palate. he epithelium of these tissues is keratinized,
and the lamina propria is a dense, thick, irm connective tissue
containing collagen ibers. he hard palate has a distinct submucosa
except for a few narrow speciic zones. he dense lamina propria
of the attached gingiva is connected to the cementum and peri -
osteum of the bony alveolar process (see Fig. 1.38 , indicator 8 ).
he lining or relective mucosa covers the inside of the lips,
cheek, and vestibule, the lateral surfaces of the alveolar process
(except the mucosa of the hard palate), the loor of the mouth,
the soft palate, and the ventral surface of the tongue. he lining
mucosa is a thin, movable tissue with a relatively thick, nonkera -
tinized epithelium and a thin lamina propria. he submucosa
comprises mostly thin, loose connective tissue with muscle and
collagenous and elastic ibers, with diferent areas varying from
one another in their structures. he junction of the lining mucosa
and the masticatory mucosa is the mucogingival junction, located
at the apical border of the attached gingiva facially and lingually
in the mandibular arch and facially in the maxillary arch (see Fig.
1.38, indicator 10 ). he specialized mucosa covers the dorsum of
the tongue and the taste buds. he epithelium is nonkeratinized
except for the covering of the dermal iliform papillae.
Periodontium
he periodontium consists of the oral hard and soft tissues that
invest and support teeth. It may be divided into (1) the gingival
unit, consisting of free and attached gingiva and the alveolar mucosa,
and (2) the attachment apparatus, consisting of cementum, the
periodontal ligament, and the alveolar process (see Fig. 1.38 ).
Gingival Unit
As mentioned, the free gingiva and the attached gingiva together
form the masticatory mucosa. he free gingiva is the gingiva from
the marginal crest to the level of the base of the gingival sulcus
(see Fig. 1.38 , indicators 4 and 6 ). he gingival sulcus is the space
between the tooth and the free gingiva. he outer wall of the
sulcus (inner wall of the free gingiva) is lined with a thin, nonke -
ratinized epithelium. he outer aspect of the free gingiva in each
gingival embrasure is called gingival or interdental papilla . he free
gingival groove is a shallow groove that runs parallel to the marginal
crest of the free gingiva and usually indicates the level of the base
of the gingival sulcus (see Fig. 1.38 , indicator 7 ).
he attached gingiva, a dense connective tissue with keratinized,
stratiied, squamous epithelium, extends from the depth of the
gingival sulcus to the mucogingival junction. A dense network of
collagen ibers connects the attached gingiva irmly to cementum
and the periosteum of the alveolar process (bone).
he alveolar mucosa is a thin, soft tissue that is loosely attached
to the underlying alveolar bone (see Fig. 1.38 , indicators 12 and
14). It is covered by a thin, nonkeratinized epithelial layer. he
underlying submucosa contains loosely arranged collagen ibers,
elastic tissue, fat, and muscle tissue. he alveolar mucosa is delineated
from the attached gingiva by the mucogingival junction and
continues apically to the vestibular fornix and the inside of the
cheek.
Clinically, the level of the gingival attachment and gingival
sulcus is an important factor in restorative dentistry. Soft tissue
health must be maintained by teeth having the correct anatomic
form and position to prevent recession of the gingiva and possible
abrasion and erosion of the root surfaces. he margin of a tooth
preparation should not be positioned subgingivally (at levels between
the marginal crest of the free gingiva and the base of the sulcus)
16 CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion
contact , maximum closure , and maximum habitual intercuspation
(MHI) .
In Fig. 1.39C (proximal view), the mandibular facial occlusal
line and the maxillary central fossa occlusal line coincide exactly.
he maxillary lingual occlusal line and the mandibular central
fossa occlusal line identiied in Fig. 1.39A also are coincidental.
he cusps that contact opposing teeth along the central fossa occlusal
line are termed functional cusps (synonyms include supporting,
holding, or stamp cusps); the cusps that overlap opposing teeth
are termed nonfunctional cusps (synonyms include nonsupporting
or nonholding cusps). he mandibular facial occlusal line identiies
the mandibular functional cusps, whereas the maxill ary facial cusps
are nonfunctional cusps. hese terms are usually applied only to
posterior teeth to distinguish the functions of the two rows of
cusps. In some circumstances, the functional role of the cusps may
be reversed, as illustrated in Fig. 1.40C.2 . Posterior teeth are well
suited to crushing food because of the mutual cusp–fossa contacts
(Fig. 1.41D ).
In Fig. 1.39D , anterior teeth are seen to have a diferent relation -
ship in MI, but they also show the characteristic maxillary overlap.
Incisors are best suited to shearing food because of their overlap
and the sliding contact on the lingual surface of maxillary teeth.
In MI, mandibular incisors and canines contact the respective
lingual surfaces of their maxillary opponents. he amount of
horizontal (overjet) and vertical (overbite) overlap (see Fig. 1.40A.2 )
can signiicantly inluence mandibular movement and the cusp
design of restorations of posterior teeth. Variations in the growth
and development of the jaws and in the positions of anterior teeth
may result in open bite, in which vertical or horizontal discrepancies
prevent teeth from contacting (see Fig. 1.40A.3 ).
Anteroposterior Interarch Relationships
In Fig. 1.39E , the cusp interdigitation pattern of the irst molar
teeth is used to classify anteroposterior arch relationships using a
system developed by Angle.13 During the eruption of teeth, the
tooth cusps and fossae guide the teeth into maximal contact. hree
interdigitated relationships of the irst molars are commonly
observed. See Fig. 1.39F for an illustration of the occlusal contacts
that result from diferent molar positions. he location of the
mesiofacial cusp of the maxillary irst molar in relation to the
mandibular irst molar is used as an indicator in Angle classiication.
he most common molar relationship inds the maxillary mesiofacial
cusp located in the mesiofacial developmental groove of the
mandibular irst molar. his relationship is termed Angle Class I.
Slight posterior positioning of the mandibular irst molar results
in the mesiofacial cusp of the maxillary molar settling into the
facial embrasure between the mandibular irst molar and the
mandibular second premolar. his is termed Class II and occurs
in approximately 15% of the U.S. population. Anterior positioning
of the mandibular irst molar relative to the maxillary irst molar
is termed Class III and is the least common. In Class III relation -
ships, the mesiofacial cusp of the maxillary irst molar its into the
distofacial groove of the mandibular irst molar; this occurs in
approximately 3% of the U.S. population. Signiicant diferences
in these percentages occur in people in other countries and in
diferent ethnic groups.
Although Angle classiication is based on the relationship of
the cusps, Fig. 1.39G illustrates that the location of tooth roots
in alveolar bone determines the relative positions of the crowns
and cusps of teeth. When the mandible is proportionally similar
in size to the maxilla, a Class I molar relationship is formed; when
the mandible is proportionally smaller than the maxilla, a Class and TMJs), which may be brought about by orthodonti c and
restorative dental procedures.
Occlusal contact patterns vary with the position of the mandible.
Static occlusion is deined further by the use of reference positions
that include fully closed, terminal hinge (TH) closure, retruded,
protruded, and right and left lateral extremes. he number and
location of occlusal contacts between opposing teeth have important
efects on the amount and direction of muscle force applied during
mastication and other parafunctional activities such as mandibular
clenching, tooth grinding, or a combination of both (bruxism).
In extreme cases, these forces damage the teeth and/or their sup -
porting tissues. Forceful tooth contact occurs routinely near the
limits or borders of mandibular movement, showing the relevance
of these reference positions.12
Tooth contact during mandibular movement is termed dynamic
occlusal relationship . Gliding or sliding contacts occur during
mastication and other mandibular movements. Gliding contacts
may be advantageous or disadvantageous, depending on the teeth
involved, the position of the contacts, and the resultant masticatory
muscle response. he design of the restored tooth surface will have
important efects on the number and location of occlusal contacts,
and both static and dynamic relationships must be taken into
consideration. he following sections discuss common arrangements
and variations of teeth and the masticatory system. M astication
and the contacting relationships of anterior and posterior teeth are
described with reference to the potential restorative needs of teeth.
General Description
Tooth Alignment and Dental Arches
In Fig. 1.39A , the cusps have been drawn as blunt, rounded, or
pointed projections of the crowns of teeth. Posterior teeth have
one, two, or three cusps near the facial and lingual surfaces of
each tooth. Cusps are separated by distinct developmental grooves
and sometimes have additional supplemental grooves on cusp
inclines. Facial cusps are separated from the lingu al cusps by a
deep groove, termed central groove . If a tooth has multiple facial
cusps or multiple lingual cusps, the cusps are separated by facial
or lingual developmental grooves. he depressions between the
cusps are termed fossae (singular, fossa). Cusps in both arches are
aligned in a smooth curve. Usually, the maxillary arch is larger
than the mandibular arch, which results in maxillary cusps overlap -
ping mandibular cusps when the arches are in maximal occlusal
contact (see Fig. 1.39B ). In Fig. 1.39A , two curved lines have been
drawn over the teeth to aid in the visualization of the arch form.
hese curved lines identify the alignment of similarly functioning
cusps or fossae. On the left side of the arches, an imaginary arc
connecting the row of facial cusps in the mandibular arch have
been drawn and labeled facial occlusal line . Above that, an imaginary
line connecting the maxillary central fossae is labeled central fossa
occlusal line . he mandibular facial occlusal line and the maxillary
central fossa occlusal line coincide exactly when the mandibular
arch is fully closed into the maxillary arch. On the right side of
the dental arches, the maxillary lingual occlusal line and mandibular
central fossa occlusal line have been drawn and labeled. hese lines
also coincide when the mandible is fully closed.
In Fig. 1.39B , the dental arches are fully interdigitated, with
maxillary teeth overlapping mandibular teeth. he overlap of the
maxillary cusps may be observed directly when the jaws are closed.
Maximum intercuspation (MI) refers to the position of the mandible
when teeth are brought into full interdigitation with the maximal
number of teeth contacting. Synonyms for MI include intercuspal
CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion 17
Central fossa lineRight side
Facial occlusal line
F. Molar Classes I, II, and III relationshipsC. Molar viewA. Dental arch cusp and fossa alignmentB. Maximum intercuspation (MI): the teeth
in opposing arches are in maximal contact
D. Incisor view
E. Facial view of anterior-posterior variations1. The maxillary lingual occlusal line and the
mandibular central fossa line are coincident.
2. The mandibular facial occlusal line and the
maxillary central fossa line are coincident.
G. Skeletal Classes I, II, and III relationshipsLingual
occlusal lineLeft
Maxilla
MandibleCentral fossa line
Central fossa lineLingual occlusal line
Facial occlusal lineRight
Central
fossa line
Class I Class II Class III
Class IClass I
Class II
Class IIIClass II Class III
• Fig. 1.39 Dental arch relationships.
18 CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion
he overlap is characterized in two dimensions: (1) horizontal
overlap (overjet) and (2) vertical overlap (overbit e). Diferences in
the sizes of the mandible and the maxilla can result in clinically
signiicant variations in incisor relationships, including open bite
as a result of mandibular deiciency or excessive eruption of posterior
teeth, and crossbite as a result of mandibular growth excess (see II relationship is formed; and when the mandible is relatively
greater than the maxilla, a Class III relationship is formed.
Interarch Tooth Relationships
Fig. 1.40 illustrates the occlusal contact relationships of individual
teeth in more detail. In Fig. 1.40A.2 , incisor overlap is illustrated.
Horizontal
overlap
(overjet)
Open bite
(mandibular
deficiency)A.2 Incisor relationships
Vertical
overlap
(overbite)A.3 Variations in incisor relationships
B.2 Variations in premolar relationships
C.2 Variations in molar relationshipsTooth-to-tooth
cusp marginal
ridge
Normal Facial
crossbite
Facial-lingual
longitudinal
sectionMesial-distal
longitudinal
sectionC.1 Molar relationshipsB.1 Premolar relationships
Transverse arch
relationshipsProximal view
Lingual
crossbiteTooth-to-two-tooth
cusp marginal
ridgeTooth-to-tooth
cusp fossaOpen bite
(excessive
eruption of
posterior teeth)Crossbite
(mandibular
growth
excess)A.1
• Fig. 1.40 Tooth relationships.
CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion 19
Cusp ridgeInner inclines
Outer inclines
Each cusp has four ridges:
1. Outer incline (facial or lingual ridge)
2. Inner incline (triangular ridge)
3. Mesial cusp ridge
4. Distal cusp ridgeMarginal ridge
Outer inclines
Facial cusp ridges
Mesial and distal triangular fossaeInner inclines
Triangular ridgesCusp ridges
Mesial(2) (3)
Major developmental grooves separate cusps
Supplemental grooves on inner inclinesDrawing conventions: the height of the
marginal ridges and cusp ridges are
marked with a circumferential line that
outlines the occlusal table.
Cusp ridge names:
1. Outer inclines are named for their surface.
2. Inner inclines are triangular ridges named
for cusp.
3. Cusp ridges are named for their direction.
Pattern of cusps and grooves are
similar to mortar and pestle for
crushing food.
Mesial and distal triangular fossae
define marginal ridges and sharpen
occlusal contacts.
Supplemental grooves widen
pathways for opposing cusp
movement.BA
C
D
E
F(1)
(2) (3) (1)
• Fig. 1.41 Common features of all posterior teeth.
20 CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion
characteristic facial and lingual proiles of the cusps as viewed from
the facial or lingual aspect. At the base of the cusp, the mesial or
distal cusp ridge abuts to another cusp ridge, forming a develop -
mental groove, or the cusp ridge turns toward the center line of
the tooth and fuses with the marginal ridge. Marginal ridges are
elevated, the rounded ridges being located on the mesial and distal
edges of the tooth’s occlusal surface (see Fig. 1.41A ). he occlusal
table of posterior teeth is the area contained within the mesial and
distal cusp ridges and the marginal ridges of the tooth. he occlusal
table limits are indicated in the drawings by a circumferential line
connecting the highest points of the curvatures of the cusp ridges
and marginal ridges.
he unique shape of cusps produces the characteristic form of
individual posterior teeth. he mandibular irst molars have longer
triangular ridges on the distofacial cusps, causing a deviation of
the central groove (see Fig. 1.41B.2 ). he mesiolingual cusp of a
maxillary molar is much larger than the mesiofacial cusp . he
distal cusp ridge of the maxillary irst molar mesiolingual cusp
curves facially to fuse with the triangular ridge of the distofacial
cusp (see Fig. 1.41C.2 ). his junction forms the oblique ridge,
which is characteristic of maxillary molars. he transverse groove
crosses the oblique ridge where the distal cusp ridge of the mesio -
lingual cusp meets the triangular ridge of the distofacial cusp.
Functional Cusps
In Fig. 1.42 , the lingual occlusal line of maxillary teeth and the
facial occlusal line of mandibular teeth mark the locations of the
functional cusps. hese cusps contact opposing teeth in their
corresponding faciolingual center on a marginal ridge or a fossa.
Functional cusp–central fossa contact has been compared to a
mortar and pestle because the functional cusp cuts, crushes, and
grinds ibrous food against the ridges forming the concavity of
the fossa (see Fig. 1.41D ). Natural tooth form has multiple ridges
and grooves ideally suited to aid in the reduction of the food bolus
during chewing. During chewing, the highest forces and the longest
duration of contact occur at MI. Functional cusps also serve to
prevent drifting and passive eruption of teeth—hence the term
holding cusp . he functional cusps (see Fig. 1.42 ) are identiied by
ive characteristic features:14
1. hey contact the opposing tooth in MI.
2. hey maintain the vertical dimension of the face.
3. They are nearer the faciolingual center of the tooth than
nonfunctional cusps.
4. heir outer (facial) incline has the potential for contact.
5. hey have broader, more rounded cusp ridges with greater dentin
support than nonfunctional cusps.
Because the maxillary arch is larger than the mandibular arch,
the functional cusps are located on the maxillary lingual occlusal
line (see Fig. 1.42D ), whereas the mandibular functional cusps
are located on the mandibular facial occlusal line (see Fig. 1.42A
and B ). Functional cusps of both arches are more robust and better
suited to crushing food than are the nonfunctional cusps. he
lingual tilt of posterior teeth increases the relative height of the
functional cusps with respect to the nonfunctional cusps (see Fig.
1.42C ), and the central fossa contacts of the functional cusps are
obscured by the overlapping nonfunctional cusps (see Fig. 1.42E
and F ). A schematic showing removal of the nonfunctional cusps
allows the functional cusp–central fossa contacts to be studied (see
Fig. 1.42G and H ). During fabrication of restorations, it is
important that functional cusps are not contacting opposing teeth
in a manner that results in lateral delection. Rather, restorations
should provide contacts on plateaus or smoothly concave fossae Fig. 1.40A.3 ). hese variations have signiicant clinical efects on
the contacting relationships of posterior teeth and resultant mastica -
tory activity during various jaw movements because the anterior
teeth are not contributing to mandibular guidance.
Fig. 1.40B.1 illustrates a normal Class I occlusion, in which
each mandibular premolar is located one half of a tooth width
anterior to its maxillary antagonist. his relationship results in the
mandibular facial cusp contacting the maxillary premolar mesial
marginal ridge and the maxillary premolar lingual cusp contacting
the mandibular distal marginal ridge. Because only one antagonist
is contacted, this is termed tooth-to-tooth relationship . he most
stable maxillary/mandibular tooth relationship results from the
contact of the functional cusp tips against the two marginal ridges,
termed tooth-to-two-tooth contact . Variations in the mesiodistal root
position of teeth produce diferent relationships (see Fig. 1.40B.2 ).
When the mandible is slightly distal to the maxilla (termed Class
II tendency), each functional cusp tip occludes in a stable relation -
ship with the opposing mesial or distal fossa; this relationship is
a cusp–fossa contact.
Fig. 1.40C illustrates Class I molar relationships in more detail.
Fig. 1.40C.1 shows the mandibular facial cusp tips contacting the
maxillary marginal ridges and the central fossa triangular ridges.
A faciolingual longitudinal section reveals how the functional cusps
contact the opposing fossae and shows the efect of the develop -
mental grooves on reducing the height of the nonfunctional cusps
opposite the functional cusp tips. During lateral movements, the
functional cusp is able to move through the facial and lingual
developmental groove spaces without contact. Faciolingual position
variations are possible in molar relationships because of diferences
in the growth of the width of the maxilla or the mandible.
Fig. 1.40C.2 illustrates the normal molar contact position, facial
crossbite, and lingual crossbite relationships. Facial crossbite in
posterior teeth is characterized by the contact of the maxillary
facial cusps in the opposing mandibular central fossae and the
mandibular lingual cusps in the opposing maxillary central fossae.
Facial crossbite (also termed buccal crossbite ) results in the reversal
of roles of the cusps of the involved teeth. In this reversal example,
the mandibular lingual cusps and maxillary facial cusps become
functional cusps, and the maxillary lingual cusps and mandibular
facial cusps become nonfunctional cusps. Lingual crossbite results
in a poor molar relationship that provides little functional contact.
Posterior Cusp Characteristics
Four cusp ridges may be identiied as common features of all cusps.
he outer incline of a cusp faces the facial (or the lingual) surface
of the tooth and is named for its respective surface. In the example
using a mandibular second premolar (see Fig. 1.41A ), the facial
cusp ridge of the facial cusp is indicated by the line that points
to the outer incline of the cusp. he inner inclines of the posterior
cusps face the central fossa or the central groove of the tooth. he
inner incline cusp ridges are widest at the base and become narrower
as they approach the cusp tip. For this reason, they are termed
triangular ridges . he triangular ridge of the facial cusp of the
mandibular premolar is indicated by the arrow to the inner incline.
T riangular ridges are usually set of from the other cusp ridges by
one or more supplemental grooves. In Fig. 1.41B.1 and C.1 , the
outer inclines of the facial cusps of the mandibular and maxillary
irst molars are highlighted. In Fig. 1.41B.2 and C.2 , the triangular
ridges of the facial and lingual cusps are highlighted.
Mesial and distal cusp ridges extend from the cusp tip mesially
and distally and are named for their directions. Mesial and distal
cusp ridges extend downward from the cusp tips, forming the
CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion 21
20°Synonyms for
functional
cusps include:
1. Centric cusps
2. Holding cusps
3. Stamp cusps
The mandibular arch is smaller than
the maxillary arch, so the functional
cusps are located on the facial occlusal
line. The mandibular lingual cusps that
overlap the maxillary teeth are
nonsupporting cusps.Facial
occlusal lineFacial
occlusal line
Mandibular
functional
cusp in
opposing
maxillary
fossaLingual occlusal line
Mandibular functional cusps occluding in
opposing fossae and on marginal ridgesMaxillary functional cusps occluding in
opposing fossae and on marginal ridgesMandibular functional cusps are located
on the facial occlusal line.
Maxillary
functional cusp
in opposing
mandibular
fossaFunctional cusps are located on the
lingual occlusal line in maxillary arch.A. Mandibular arch B. Mandibular right quadrant
C. Proximal view of molar
teeth in occlusionD. Maxillary right quadrant
E. Lingual view of left dental arches in
occlusionF. Facial view of left dental arches in
occlusion
G. Mandibular nonfunctional cusps
removedH. Maxillary nonfunctional cusps removedFunctional cusp features:
1. Contact opposing tooth in MI
2. Support vertical dimension
3. Nearer faciolingual center of
tooth than nonsupporting
cusps
4. Outer incline has potential for
contact
5. More rounded than
nonsupporting cusps
• Fig. 1.42 Functional cusps.
22 CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion
anteroposterior, providing sliding movement between the disc and
the glenoid fossa. One condyle may move anteriorly, while the
other remains in the fossa. Anterior movement of only one condyle
produces reciprocal lateral rotation in the opposite TMJ.
he TMJ does not behave like a rigid joint as those on articulators
(mechanical devices used by dentists to simulate jaw movement
and reference positions [see the subsequent section on Articulators
and Mandibular Movement s]). Because soft tissues cover the two
articulating bones and an intervening disc composed of soft tissue
is present, some resilience is to be expected in the TMJs. In addition
to resilience, normal, healthy TMJs have lexibility, allowing small
posterolateral movements of the condyles. In healthy TMJs, the
movements are restricted to slightly less than 1 mm laterally and
a few tenths of a millimeter posteriorly.
When morphologic changes occur in the hard and soft tissues
of a TMJ because of disease, the disc–condyle relationship is possibly
altered in many ways, including distortion, perforation, or tearing
of the disc, and remodeling of the soft tissue articular surface
coverings or their bony support. Diseased TMJs have unusual
disc–condyle relationships, diferent geometry, and altered jaw
movements and reference positions. Textbooks on TMJ disorders
and occlusion should be consulted for information concerning the
evaluation of diseased joints.15 he remainder of this discussion
of the movement and position of the mandible is based on normal,
healthy TMJs and does not apply to diseased joints.
Review of Normal Masticatory Muscle Function and
Mandibular Movement
Masticatory muscles work together to allow controlled, subtle
movements of the mandible. he relative amount of muscle activity
depends on the interarch relationships of maxillary and mandibular
teeth as well as the amount of resistance to movement.16-19 Primary
muscles involved in mandibular movements include the anterior
temporalis, middle temporalis, posterior temporalis, supericial
masseter, deep masseter, superior lateral pterygoid, inferior lateral
pterygoid, medial pterygoid, and digastric muscles.17,18,20 he
suprahyoid, infrahyoid, mylohyoid, and geniohyoid muscles also
are involved in mandibular movements but not usually included
in routine clinical examinations.18,21 he relative amount of muscle
activity of the various muscles has been identiied through the use
of electromyographic technology, in which electrodes were placed
in the evaluated muscles,17,18,22 as well as on the skin immediately
adjacent to the muscles of interest.12,17,18,20,21-30 he strategic threedimensional arrangement of the muscles and the corr esponding
force vectors allow for the complete range of inely controlled
mandibular movements. he reader should consult an appropriate
human anatomy textbook to identify the location, size, shape,
three-dimensional orientation, and bony insertion of the various
muscles discussed in this section.
Simple jaw opening requires the activation of digastric and
inferior lateral pterygoid muscles.17,18,22 Fine control of opening is
accomplished by simultaneous mild antagonistic activity of the
medial pterygoid.17,18 When resistance is applied to jaw opening,
mild masseter activation allows further stabilization and ine
control.17,18
Jaw closure requires the activation of the masseter and medial
pterygoid.18 Once teeth come into contact, the temporalis (anterior,
middle, and posterior) muscles activate as well.17,18 he masseter,
medial pterygoid, and temporalis muscles act to elevate the mandible
and are generally referred to as elevator muscles . Clenching involves
maximum activation of the masseter and temporalis, moderate
activation of the medial pterygoid and superior lateral pterygoid, so that masticatory forces are directed approximately parallel to
the long axes of teeth (i.e., approximately perpendicular to the
occlusal plane).
Nonfunctional Cusps
Fig. 1.43 illustrates that the nonfunctional cusps form a lingual
occlusal line in the mandibular arch (see Fig. 1.43D ) and a facial
occlusal line in the maxillary arch (see Fig. 1.43B ). Nonfunctional
cusps overlap the opposing tooth without contacting the tooth.
Nonfunctional cusps are located, when viewed in the anteroposterior
plane, in facial (lingual) embrasures or in the developmental groove
of opposing teeth, creating an alternating arrangem ent when teeth
are in MI (see Fig. 1.43E and F ). he maxillary premolar non -
functional cusps also play an essential role in esthetics. In the
occlusal view, the nonfunctional cusps are farther from the facio -
lingual center of the tooth than are the functional cusps and have
less dentinal support. Nonfunctional cusps have sha rper cusp ridges
that may serve to shear food as they pass close to the functional
cusp ridges during chewing strokes. he overlap of the maxillary
nonfunctional cusps helps keep the soft tissue of the cheek out
and away from potential trauma from the occlusal table. Likewise,
the overlap of the mandibular nonfunctional cusps helps keep the
tongue out from the occlusal table. herefore, the position of the
maxillary and mandibular nonfunctional cusps help to prevent
self-injury during chewing.
Mechanics of Mandibular Motion
Mandible and Temporomandibular Joints
he mandible articulates with a depression in each temporal bone
called glenoid fossa . he joints are termed temporomandibular joints
(TMJs) because they are named for the two bones (temporal and
mandible) forming the articulation. he TMJs allow the mandible
to move in all three planes ( Fig. 1.44A ).
A TMJ is similar to a ball-and-socket joint, but it difers from
a true mechanical ball-and-socket joint in some very important
aspects. he ball part (the mandibular condyle) is smaller than the
socket (the glenoid fossa) (see Fig. 1.44B ). he space resulting
from the size diference is illed by a tough, pliable, and movable
stabilizer termed the articular disc . he disc separates the TMJ
into two articulating surfaces lubricated by synovial luid in the
superior and inferior joint spaces. Rotational opening of the
mandible occurs as the condyles rotate under the discs (see Fig.
1.44C ). Rotational movement occurs between the inferior surface
of the discs and the condyle. During wide opening or protrusion
of the mandible, the condyles move or slide anterio rly in addition
to the rotational opening (see Fig. 1.44D and E ). he TMJ is
referred to as a ginglymoarthrodial joint because it has hinge
(ginglymus) capability as well as sliding/gliding/translating (arthro -
dial) capability.
he discs move anteriorly with the condyles during opening
and produce a sliding movement in the superior joint space between
the superior surface of the discs and the articular eminences (see
Fig. 1.44B ). TMJs allow free movement of the condyles in the
anteroposterior direction but resist lateral displacement. he discs
are attached irmly to the medial and lateral poles of the condyles
in normal, healthy TMJs (see Fig. 1.45B ). he disc–condyle
arrangement of the TMJ allows simultaneous sliding and rotational
movement in the same joint.
Because the mandible is a semirigid, U-shaped bone with joints
on both ends, movement of one joint produces a reciprocal move -
ment in the other joint. he disc–condyle complex is free to move
CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion 23
The maxillary arch is larger than the
mandibular arch causing the maxillary
facial line (nonfunctional cusps) to
overlap the mandibular teeth.Facial
occlusal line
Mandibular
nonfunctional
cusp overlapping
maxillary tooth
20°
E. Views of left dental arches in occlusion
showing interdigitation of nonfunctional cusps
Nonfunctional cusp location:
1. Opposing embrasure
2. Opposing developmental grooveD. Mandibular left quadrant
Maxillary
nonfunctional
cusp overlapping
mandibular tooth
Nonfunctional cusp features:
1. Do not contact opposing tooth
in MI
2. Keep soft tissue of tongue or
cheek off occlusal . Farther from faciolingual center
of tooth than supporting cusps
4. Outer incline has no potential
for contact
5. Have sharper cusp ridges than
supporting cusps
F. Views of left dental arches in occlusion
showing facial and lingual occlusal linesMandibular nonfunctional cusps
are located on the lingual occlusal line.
Lingual
occlusal lineMaxillary nonfunctional cusps are
located on the facial occlusal line.
12 1
2A. Maxillary arch
C. Molar teeth in occlusionB. Maxillary left quadrant
• Fig. 1.43 Nonfunctional cusps.
24 CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion
Lateral movement is
approximately 10 mm.C Rotation about an axis
D Translation
ComplexE
Left lateral movementFMaximum opening is
approximately 50 mm.The mandible can protrude
approximately 10 mm.Hinge opening produces about 25 mm
of separation of the anterior teeth.Mandibular opening:Hinge
opening
Maximum
openingProtrusion
Translating
condyleTranslating
condyleRotating
condyleRotating
condyle
NW NW W WW /H11005 working side
NW /H11005 nonworking sideATemporomandibular joint sagittal section
Parasagittal
Transverse
(horizontal)
Coronal
(frontal)B
Superior joint space
Articular disc
Articular eminenceInferior joint spaceGlenoid fossa
External
auditory
meatusMidsagittal
Condyle
Lateral pterygoid muscle:
Superior head
Inferior head
• Fig. 1.44 Types and directions of mandibular movements.
CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion 25
MI
(CRO)
bB. Frontal viewDetermination of sagittal borders:
Superior - tooth contact
Posterior - joint ligaments
Inferior - muscle lengthening
Anterior - joint ligamentsc 10 mm, limit of protrusion
Posselt’s
diagramCRO
Limits of condyle motion:
10-12 mm anterior to CR
0.2 mm posterior to CR
5-6 mm vertical displacement
due to curvature of eminence
Normal TMJ flexibility
allows up to 1.5 mm of
lateral shifting (Bennett shift).10-12 mm
5-6 mm
TH, rotational
motion of condyles
a 25 mm, limit
of rotational opening
Advancing condyles
b 50 mm, limit of openingLeft TMJ, sagittal section
.75 mm .75 mm
Medial
poleLateral
pole
e d
Left TMJ, horizontal view
0.75 mm
10 mm
Condyle motion:
0.75 mm left/right
10-12 mm, limit of protrusion
anterior/posteriord e
cMI (CRO)Right Left
Borders are arcs of circles
based on rotation of the
condyles in retruded and
protruded positions.C. Horizontal viewd 10 mm right
lateral jaw movementSuperior border
determined by tooth
contact (canine guidance).
e 10 mm left
lateral jaw movementArticular eminence
Right LeftLeft TMJ, frontal sectionA. Sagittal view
• Fig. 1.45 Capacity of mandibular movement. (Mandible drawings are not to scale with border dia -
grams.) CO =MI (i.e., there is no functional shift and, therefore, is termed centric relation occlusion [CRO]).
26 CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion
During mastication, the typical mandibular movement involves
opening with corresponding bilateral anterior, inferior, and rotating
condylar motion.12,31 As closure begins, the entire mandible moves
laterally.12 As closure continues, the working-side condyle shifts
back to its terminal hinge position before the teeth occlude and
remains nearly stationary.12 As the closure continues, the workingside condyle shifts medially while the nonworking-side condyle
shifts superiorly, distally, and laterally to its terminal hinge position.12
he medial shift of the working-side condyle may be caused by
the inluence of the superior lateral pterygoid muscle contraction.
he opening and closing paths of the incisors vary from individual
to individual and also depend on the consistency of the food being
masticated.12 he realistic normal lower limit for the incisal opening
in patients between 10 and 70 years of age is 40 mm.32
To describe mandibular motion, its direction and length must
be speciied in three mutually perpendicular planes. By convention,
these planes are sagittal, coronal (frontal), and transverse (horizontal)
(see Fig. 1.44A ). he midsagittal plane is a vertical (longitudinal)
plane that passes through the center of the head in an anteroposterior
direction. A vertical plane of the center line, such as a section
through the TMJ, is termed parasagittal plane . he coronal plane
is a vertical plane perpendicular to the sagittal pl ane. he transverse
plane is a horizontal plane that passes from anterior to posterior
and is perpendicular to the sagittal and frontal plane s. Mandibular
motion is described in each of these planes.
Types of Motion
Centric relation (CR), in healthy TMJs, is the location of the mandible
when the condyles are positioned superiorly and anteriorly in the
glenoid fossae. In CR, the thinnest avascular portion of the TMJ
discs are in an anterosuperior position on the condylar head, and
are adjacent to the beginning of the slopes of the articular eminences
(see Fig. 1.44B ). his position is independent of tooth contacts.
Rotation is a simple motion of an object around an axis (see
Fig. 1.44C ). he mandible is capable of rotation about an axis
through centers located in the condyles. he attachments of the
discs to the poles of the condyles permit the condyles to rotate
under the discs. Rotation with the condyles positioned in CR is
termed terminal hinge (TH) movement . Maximum rotational opening
in TH is limited to approximately 25 mm measured between the
incisal edges of anterior teeth. Initial tooth contact during a TH
closure provides a reference point termed centric occlusion (CO) .
Many patients have a small slide from CO to MI, referred to as
a functional shift , which may have forward and lateral components.
CR is used in dentistry as a reproducible reference position for
major restorative reconstruction of the maxillary and mandibular
occlusal planes and also when fabricating full dentures. The
reproducibility of the CR position allows the establishment of
simultaneous contact of all functional cusps in maximum intercuspa -
tion while the mandible is in CR. his occlusion is termed centric
relation occlusion (CRO). CRO allows maximum osseous support
of the mandibular condyles and even distribution of occlusal loading
forces, generated by the elevator muscles, across the whole dentition.
he functional cusps in CRO are termed centric cusps . he non -
functional cusps in CRO are termed noncentric cusps .
Translation is the bodily movement of an object from one place
to another (see Fig. 1.44D ). he mandible is capable of translation
by the anterior movement of the disc–condyle complex from the
TH position forward and down the articular eminence and back.
Simultaneous, direct anterior movement of both condyles, or
mandibular forward thrusting, is termed protrusion . he pathway
followed by anterior teeth during protrusion may not be smooth and recruitment of the inferior lateral pterygoid, digastrics, and
mylohyoid muscles.17,18,22 In general, the supericial masseter has
slightly higher activity than the deep masseter during clenching.20
Coactivation of cooperating and antagonistic muscles allows for
controlled force to be applied to teeth.17
Protrusion requires maximum bilateral activation of the inferior
lateral pterygoid, with moderate activation of the medial pterygoid,
masseter, and digastric muscles. During protrusion minimal activa -
tion of the temporalis and superior lateral pterygoid occurs. he
superior lateral pterygoid has muscle ibers that insert into the
temporomandibular disc as well as the neck of the mandibular
condyle (see Fig. 1.44 ).22 It is important to note that minimal
activation of the superior lateral pterygoid is necessary if the
temporomandibular disc is to rotate to the top of the condylar
head as the condyle translates down the articular eminence during
mandibular protrusive or excursive movements.17
Incisal biting with posterior disclusion requires maximum
bilateral activity of the supericial masseter to force the incisors
toward each other, as well as maximum activity of the inferior
lateral pterygoid to maintain the protruded position of the condylar
head down the slope of the articular eminence.17 Incisal biting
also requires moderate activity of the anterior temporalis, medial
pterygoid, anterior digastric, and superior lateral pterygoid.17 Note
that the shift in the level of activity of the superior lateral pterygoid
from protrusion to incisal biting indicates a dual role in condylar
positioning and temporomandibular disc positioning or stabilization.
he middle and posterior temporalis regions have minimal activity
during incisal biting.18
Retrusion of the mandible requires bilateral maximum activation
of the posterior and middle temporalis as well as moderate activity
of the anterior temporalis and anterior digastric.17,18 he superior
lateral pterygoid is maximally active when the mandible is retruded
and posterior teeth are clenched.17 he masseter has minimal activity
in retrusion.17 he inferior lateral pterygoid and the medial pterygoid
have minimal to no activity during retrusion.17,18
Excursive movement of the mandible to the right requires
moderate to maximal activity of the left inferior lateral ptery -
goid and medial pterygoid muscles as well as the right posterior
temporalis, middle temporalis, and anterior digastric.17-19 In addi -
tion to these, the right superior lateral pterygoid , right anterior
temporalis, and left anterior digastric are minimally to moderately
active.17-19 Activation of the right superior lateral pterygoid pro -
vides resistance to right condyle distalization as well as positional
support of the right temporomandibular disc. he right supericial
masseter, right inferior lateral pterygoid, right medial pterygoid,
left superior lateral pterygoid, left anterior temporalis, left middle
temporalis, left posterior temporalis, and left supericial masseter
all have minimal activity.17-19 Minimal activity of the left superior
lateral pterygoid allows the disc to shift distally, as needed, so as
to remain between the condylar head and the articular eminence
while translation or rotation of the left condylar head occurs.
Activation of the elevator muscles on the left side provides for
the translating left condyle–disc complex to remain in contact
with the articular eminence. Movement of the mandible to the
left follows the same pattern of coordinated muscle activity except
in reverse.
Wide opening requires bilateral moderate to maximal activity
of the inferior lateral pterygoid and anterior digastric muscles.17
In addition to these, the medial pterygoid muscles are minimally
to moderately active.17 he temporalis, masseter, and superior lateral
pterygoid muscles have minimal to no activity during wide
opening.17,18
CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion 27
suggests blockage of condylar translation, usually the result of a
disc disorder(s). Limitation of opening in the 35to 45-mm range
suggests masticatory muscle hypertonicity. he line CRO -a-b
represents the maximum retruded opening path. his is the posterior
border, or the posterior limit of mandibular opening. he line b-c
represents the maximum protruded closure. his is achieved by a
forward thrust of the mandible that keeps the condyles in their
maximum anterior positions while closing the mandible.
Retrusion, or posterior movement of the mandible, results in
the irregular line c-CRO. he irregularities of the superior border
are caused by tooth contacts; the superior border is a toothdetermined border. Protrusion is a reference mandibular movement
starting from CRO and proceeding anteriorly to point c. Protrusive
mandibular movements are used by dentists to evaluate occlusal
relationships of teeth and restorations. he complete diagram,
CRO -a-b-cCRO, represents the maximum possible motion of
the incisor point in all directions in the sagittal plane. he area of
most interest to dentists is the superior border produced by tooth
contact. (Mandibular movement in the sagittal plane is illustrated
in more detail in Fig. 1.46 .)
he motion of the condyle point during chewing is strikingly
diferent from the motion of the incisor point. Motion of the
condyle point is a curved line that follows the articular eminence.
he maximum protrusion of the condyle point is 10 to 12 mm
anteriorly when following the downward curve of the articular
eminence. The condyle point does not drop away from the
eminence, as a result of controlled/coordinated elevator muscle
activity, during mandibular movements. Chewing movements in
the sagittal plane are characterized by a nearly vertical up-anddown motion of the incisor point, whereas the condyle points
move anteriorly and then return posteriorly over a curved surface
(see Fig. 1.46B ).
In the frontal view shown in Fig. 1.45B , the incisor point and
chin are capable of moving about 10 mm to the left or right. his
lateral movement—or excursion—is indicated by the lines MI -d
to the right and MI -e to the left. Points d and e indicate the limit
of the lateral motion of the incisor point. Lateral movement is
often described with respect to only one side of the mandible for
the purpose of deining the relative motion of mandibular teeth
to maxillary teeth. In a left lateral movement, the left mandibular
teeth move away from the midline, and the right mandibular teeth
move toward the midline.
Mandibular pathways directed away from the midline are termed
working (synonyms include laterotrusion and functional ), and
mandibular pathways directed toward the midline are termed
nonworking (synonyms include mediotrusion , nonfunctional , and
balancing ). The terms working and nonworking are based on
observations of chewing movements in which the mandible is seen
to shift during closure toward the side of the mouth containing
the food bolus. he side of the jaw where the bolus of food is
placed is termed the working side . he working side is used to
crush food, whereas the nonworking side is without a food bolus.
Working side also is used in reference to jaws or teeth when the
patient is not chewing (e.g., in guided test movements directed
laterally). he term also may identify a speciic side of the mandible
(i.e., the side toward which the mandible is moving). During
chewing, the working-side closures start from a lateral position
and are directed medially to MI.
he left lateral mandibular motion indicated by the line MI -e
(see Fig. 1.45B ) is the result of rotation of the left condyle (workingside condyle) and translation of the right condyle (nonworking-side
condyle) to its anterior limit (see Fig. 1.44F ). he translation of or straight because of contact between anterior teeth and sometimes
posterior teeth. (See the superior border of Posselt diagram in Fig.
1.45A .) Protrusion is limited to approximately 10 mm by the
ligamentous attachments of masticatory muscles and the TMJs.
Fig. 1.44E illustrates complex motion, which combines rotation
and translation in a single movement. Most mandibular movement
during speech, chewing, and swallowing consists of rotation and
translation. he combination of rotation and translation allows
the mandible to open 50 mm or more.
Fig. 1.44F illustrates the left lateral movement of the mandible.
It is the result of forward translation of the right condyle and
rotation of the left condyle. Right lateral movement of the mandible
is the result of forward translation of the left condyle and rotation
of the right condyle.
Capacity of Motion of the Mandible
In , Posselt recorded mandibular motion and developed a
diagram (termed Posselt diagram ) to illustrate it (see Fig. 1.45A ).33
By necessity, the original recordings of mandibular movement were
done outside of the mouth, which magniied the vertical dimension
but not the horizontal dimension. Modern systems using digital
computer techniques can record mandibular motion in actual time
and dimensions and then compute and draw the motion as it
occurred at any point in the mandible and teeth.12 his makes it
possible to accurately reconstruct mandibular motion simultaneously
at several points. hree of these points are particularly signiicant
clinically: incisor point, molar point, and condyle point ( Fig.
1.46A ).34 he incisor point is located on the midline of the mandible
at the junction of the facial surface of mandibular central incisors
and the incisal edge. he molar point is the tip of the mesiofacial
cusp of the mandibular irst molar on a speciied side. he condyle
point is the center of rotation of the mandibular condyle on the
speciied side.
Limits of Mandibular Motion: The Borders
In Fig. 1.45A , the limits for movement of the incisor point are
illustrated in the sagittal plane. he mandible is not drawn to scale
with the drawing of the sagittal borders. his particular diagram
is drawn in CRO (i.e., CO coincides with MI). he st arting point
for this diagram is CRO, the contact of all teeth when the condyles
are in CR. he posterior border of the diagram from CRO to a
in Fig. 1.45A is formed by the rotation of the mandible around
the condyle points. his border from CRO to a is the TH move -
ment. Hinge axis is the term used to describe an imaginary line
connecting the centers of rotation in the condyles (condyle points)
and is useful for reference to articulators (see upcoming section,
Articulators and Mandibular Movements ). he hinge-axis position
(also referred to as CR) is a reproducible reference position and
rotational, mandibular closure movement on this axis is used when
restorative procedures require recreation of the occlusal relationships
of multiple teeth. he inferior limit to this hinge opening occurs
at approximately 25 mm and is indicated by a in Fig. 1.45A . he
superior limit of the posterior border occurs at tooth contact and
is identiied as CRO.
At point a in Fig. 1.45A , further rotation of the condyles is
impossible because of the stretch limits of the joint capsule, liga -
mentous attachments to the condyles, and the mandible-opening
muscles. Further opening can be achieved only by translation of
the condyles anteriorly, producing the line a-b. Maximum opening
(point b) in adults is approximately 50 mm. hese measures are
important diagnostically. Mandibular opening limited to 25 mm
28 CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion
to the increased elevator muscle activity that occurs when posterior
teeth come into contact. When the canine guidance is shallow,
the occlusal surface of posterior teeth must be altered to prevent
potentially damaging contacts during lateral or protrusive
movements.
Flexibility in the TMJs allows the condyles to move slightly to
the working side during the closing stroke. his lateral shift of the
condylar head, illustrated in the frontal view of a right TMJ in
Fig. 1.45B , is termed Bennett shift or lateral shift and varies from
patient to patient (see Fig. 1.47B–D ). he magnitude of the shift
in normal TMJs varies from 0 to 1.5 and normally has little efect
on posterior teeth. Excessive lateral shift may be associated with
morphologic changes of the TMJs. Excessive lateral condylar shifting
coupled with shallow canine guidance poses a signiicant problem, the nonworking condyle in a right lateral motion of the mandible
can be seen in the horizontal view in Fig. 1.47A and B . he line
e-b in Fig. 1.45B is completed by mandibular opening that is the
result of rotation of both condyles and translation of the working
condyle to its maximum anterior position. he line b-d-MI rep -
resents similar motions on the right side.
he vertical displacement in the incisor point line from MI to
e or d, shown in Fig. 1.45B , is the result of teeth, usually canines,
gliding over each other. Vertical displacement of the mandible
secondary to gliding contact of canine teeth is termed canine
guidance and has signiicance for restorative procedures. he gliding
tooth contact supplied by canine guidance provides some of the
vertical separation of posterior teeth during lateral jaw movements
and prevents potentially damaging collisions of their cusps secondary
Working condyle
moves less anteriorly and
returns to posterior border
prior to final closure in MI.Nonworking condyle
moves further anteriorly and
returns to posterior border
only at final closure in MI.A. Orientation drawing of mandible
c
Pc
Condylar motion
during chewing
follows the articular
eminencem /H11005 molar point
i /H11005 incisor point
c /H11005 condyle point
Pc /H11005 pathway of
condyle point
TH /H11005 terminal hingeCentric occlusion (CO)Maximum
intercuspation (MI)
TH /H11005 posterior
borderB. Details near MI
Chewing does not
occur on TH
Chewing uses a
small portion of
the full capacity
for motion.TH TH
Anterior border
Condyle point
working side ( a)Molar point
bordersIncisor point
bordersC. Molar point borders
D. Details of condyle point motionNonworking molar closure
during chewing comes close
to the superior border.
Molar point borders
working sideMolar point borders
nonworking side
E. Details of molar point motion
TH TYPICAL CHEW
Right First Molar
Working Movement
33 3
44 4
55
5
66
6
77
7
88
8
7
9
82Condyle point
nonworking side ( e)m i
Scale
3 mmScale
1 cma
eChewing strokes at molar point
Working side approaches MI from posterior
Nonworking side approaches MI from anterior
• Fig. 1.46 Mandibular capacity for movement: sagittal view. CO ≠MI (i.e., there is a functional shift).
CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion 29
Lateral movement is produced by
anterior translation of one condyle,
producing rotation about the center
in the opposite condyle.
Flexibility of the TMJ
allows additional lateral
movement due to the
lateral shifting of the
condyles.
This is an example of a single
chewing stroke; the small numbers
are timing marks (50 msec).
Opposing maxillary teeth
with superimposed
working (W), nonworking (NW), and
protrusion (P) test
movements.Test movements such as this right lateral movement
are made in the direction opposite to the
corresponding chewing closure illustrated in B.Rotating
condyleTranslating
condyle
The approach to MI is
more distal than the test
movement because of the
increase in vertical
separation.
Effect of shifting at first molar:
1. Little change on working side
2. Wide lateral motion on nonworking side
Left lateral movement with shifting
The nonworking pathway
of the maxillary
mesiolingual cusp makes
a wider path over the
mandibular molar.Nonworking condyle movement:
1. Condylar translation with rotation about the center
of the opposite condyle
2. Solid line indicates the change in the condylar path
due to progressive shifting of the center of rotation in
the opposite condyle
3. Solid line indicates the condylar path resulting from
immediate shifting of the center of rotation of the
opposite condyle
4. Observed motion of the condyle during chewing:
note shifting as closing is initiated and the return to
normal position at the end of closureA
B
CDNWW
P
1 2 34a
b
cde1
1
2
2 22
23
3
4
4
5
6
7
8
• Fig. 1.47 Mandibular capacity for movement: horizontal view.
30 CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion
to the nearly vertical closing strokes at incisor point, the sagittal
closing strokes at the molar point involve an anterior component
on the working side and a posterior component on the nonworking
side. his diference in molar point movement is caused by the
deviation of the jaw to the working side during closure, illustrated
by the diference in motion of the working-side and nonworkin g-side
condyles. he nonworking-side closing strokes closely approach
the superior border, indicating the potential for undesirable posterior
tooth contact and increased elevator muscle activity (as well as
increased activity of the superior lateral pterygoid muscle) on the
nonworking side (see Fig. 1.46C ).
Horizontal View
Fig. 1.47A shows a horizontal view (or occlusal view when referring
to teeth) of the mandible with superimposed incisor, molar, and
condyle point test movements. Chewing movements are character -
ized by wide lateral movement of the mandible to the working
side during closure (see Fig. 1.47B ). When viewed from above,
the pathways of the molar and incisor points are typically in a
igure-8 pattern, with an S-shaped lateral opening motion and a
straight medial closing stroke. Important diferences exist in the
directions of closure for the molar point on the working and
nonworking sides. During closure on the working side (labeled b
in Fig. 1.47B ), mandibular teeth medially approach maxillary tee th
from a slightly posterior position and move slightly anteriorly into
MI. During closure on the nonworking side (the contralateral
side, labeled d in Fig. 1.47B ), mandibular molar teeth approach
the maxillary teeth in a medial-to-lateral direction from a slightly
anterior position and move slightly posteriorly into MI. he closing
strokes are the same pathways generated by guided (test) lateral
mandibular movements used to check the occlusion except the
directions traveled are opposite (see Fig. 1.47B , inset). On the
inset drawing of the maxillary left teeth in Fig. 1.47B , the working,
nonworking, and protrusive pathways are marked W, NW, and
P. hese are the guided test movements used by dentists to assess
the occlusal contact of teeth during function.
he horizontal, enlarged view of the mandible showing condyle
point movement (working side labeled a; nonworking side labeled
e) during chewing is important because it illustrates the lateral
shift of the condyles during the closing stroke (see Fig. 1.47B ).
Opening, in the typical chewing motion illustrated here, involves
movement of both condyle points on the midsagittal path, producing
the vertical drop in the incisor point seen in the sagittal view.
Lateral opening may be seen in normal children and adults with
worn and lattened teeth. As closing is initiated, the mandible
shifts laterally, moving both condyle points to the working side.
he nonworking condyle movement closely approaches its medial
border during the closing stroke (see Fig. 1.47C ). During inal
closure, when teeth are brought into MI, the condyle points return
to their starting positions. Contact and gliding on the inclines of
teeth are responsible for bringing the mandible into its inal, fully
closed position (MI).
Allowance for lateral displacement of the condyles during lateral
jaw movements is built into semiadjustable articulators in the form
of a Bennett angle or progressive lateral shift adjustment. he
progressive lateral shift allows the condyles to shift gradually during
lateral mandibular movement. As a result of mandibular movement
studies, more recent articulator models have replaced the progressive
lateral shift with immediate shift. Shifting of the mandible, as
depicted by the shift in the condyle points, results in a similar
shift at the teeth that cannot be simulated by progressive shift (see
Fig. 1.47C ).however, for restorative procedures because the resulting lateral
mandibular movements are lat; consequently, little separation of
posterior teeth occurs, resulting in increased contact of posterior
teeth as well as associated increased elevator muscle activity.
In Fig. 1.45C , the horizontal view illustrates the capability of
the mandible to translate anteriorly. Extreme left lateral motion
is indicated by MIe produced by rotation of the left condyle
(working condyle) and translation of the right condyle (nonworking
condyle) to its anterior limit. From point e, protrusion of the left
condyle moves the incisor point to c, the maximum protruded
position where both condyles have translated.
Sagittal View
In Fig. 1.46 , the drawing of the mandible is used to orient
the sagittal border diagrams in a patient who has a functional
shift between CO and MI. Recall CO is the tooth contact that
occurs when the TMJs are in CR and that, in many patients, a
small anterior or anterolateral slide may occur from CO to MI.
Projected below the mandible are diagrams of the incisor point
(i) and molar point ( m) borders (see Fig. 1.46A ). he molar point
borders are similar to the incisor point diagram bu t are shorter
in the vertical dimension because the molar point is closer to the
TMJ. Closure of the jaw on the posterior border is termed TH
closure . TH closure is a simple arc of a circle with a radius equal
to the length from the incisor point to the center of the hinge
axis (condyle point c). he area near MI is enlarged to illustrate
the details of the TH closure (see Fig. 1.46B ). CO and MI are
located fairly close to each other in this case. In the magniied
view, teeth may be seen to guide the mandible from CO to MI.
he gliding (sliding) functional shift typically is 1 to 2 mm long
and may occur on any of the posterior teeth. he horizontal
component of this slide varies and may only be a few tenths of a
millimeter. he primary concern is that the functional shift may
position the condyle(s) on the slope of the articula r eminence,
a position that requires constant protrusive muscle activity to
maintain.17,22
he clinical signiicance of the shift between CO and MI has
been a source of debate in dentistry, resulting in e xtensive literature
on the topic.35,36 Clinical ramiications may include an increased
risk of the development of pathologic changes in the TMJs and/
or pain associated with the muscles of mastication. It has been
observed that asymmetrical shifts between CO and MI were related
to symptoms and signs of temporomandibular disorders, whereas
symmetrical shifts were not.32 It has been noted that increasing
symptoms and signs of temporomandibular disorders were associated
with increasing functional shift distance from CO t o MI.37 However,
a shift of greater than 2 mm, mediotrusive posterior tooth interfer -
ences, and a large overjet were only weakly associated with mastica -
tory muscle pain, suggesting other factors in addition to occlusal
relationships may be involved.38,39 Failure to recognize that some
patients have damaged TMJs may further complicate the determina -
tion of the clinical signiicance of a CO–MI slide. Damage to the
TMJs as a consequence of arthritic processes or internal derange -
ments may change the relationship of CO to MI.
Chewing movements at the incisor point involve an almost
vertical opening and a loop slightly to the posterior on closing,
using only a small percentage of the total area of the sagittal border
diagram. During chewing, the only border contact occurs at MI.
he closing strokes never approach TH, indicating that at least
one condyle (on the nonworking side) remains advanced during
the closing stroke. he condyle point moves along the pathway
Pc during all movements other than TH (see Fig. 1.46 ). In contrast
CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion 31
and molar point tracings, indicating that lateral tooth gliding is
common during chewing. his gliding contact occurs on the teeth
having the highest projecting cusps that form the superior border
(usually canines).
he incisor point tracing is projected below the drawing of the
mandible in Fig. 1.48A . he chewing strokes show the gliding Frontal View
In Fig. 1.48A , lateral movement of the mandible on the superior
border is controlled by three elements—the rotating condyle, the
translating condyle, and the working-side canine. During chewing
closures, mandibular teeth approach maxillary teeth from a lateral
position. Frequent contact with the border occurs in the incisor
The superior border of the incisor point tracing is
determined by the canine teeth, but the molar point
superior border is influenced by the pathway of the
condyle point. Canine guidance and articular
eminence slope are mechanically coupled to produce
the superior border of the molar point tracing but they
do not contribute equally. The canine is primarily
responsible for the superior border of molar point on
the working pathway (away from the midline). The
nonworking side articular eminence has the dominant
influence on the nonworking pathway (toward the
midline) on the molar point superior border.
If the molar cusps are higher than the
border, then they will collide during
chewing. This is more likely to occur
on the nonworking side.
Working side
superior border
Nonworking side
superior border
Mandibular closure during chewing
approaches MI from a laterally shifted
position.
Chewing movements show frequent
encounters with the superior border in the
incisor point tracing suggesting frequent
contact of the canine teeth during closing.Incisor point tracingWorking sideNonworking sideWorking side canineRotating
condyle
Translating
condyleIn this right lateral movement, the canine
controls the final closing path on the
working side as indicated by the coincidence
of the closure tracing and the superior border.
A
BTYPICAL CHEW
Right First Molar
Working Movement
1
11
2
22
3
45
56
67
78
8
89
9
10
Scale
1 cm
• Fig. 1.48 Mandibular capacity for movement: frontal view.
32 CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion
as the mandible leaves or enters MI during protrusion and lateral
movements.
Lateral mandibular movements also produce separation of
posterior teeth. Horizontal guidance of the nonworking condyle
coupled with working-side canine guidance determines the amount
of vertical separation of posterior teeth on both sides as the mandible
leaves or enters MI during lateral movements (see Fig. 1.48 ). his
information may be used to design restorations with the proper
cusp location and height to avoid collisions during chewing and
other mandibular movements.
he slope of the articular eminence varies considerably among
individuals. he efect of diferent slopes may be evaluated by
altering the horizontal condylar guidance on articulators. Increasing
the horizontal condylar guidance increases the steepness of the
mandibular molar movement in protrusion. he movement of the
maxillary mesiolingual cusp relative to the mandibular molar is
plotted in Fig. 1.50E–G for 20-, 30-, and 50-degree slopes.44 he
efect of removing the anterior guidance ( a) is drawn on the same
grid. he loss of anterior guidance has the greatest efect when the
horizontal condylar guidance is shallow (20 degrees) and has the
least efect when the horizontal condylar guidance is steep (50
degrees). Anterior guidance has an additive efect on the molar
pathway at all degrees of horizontal guidance. his is an important
observation because alteration of the anterior guida nce may occur
during dental treatment that involves the guiding surfaces of the
anterior teeth. here may be a therapeutic advantage to increasing
anterior guidance, by restorative or orthodontic means, to facilitate
the separation of posterior teeth in patients who have shallow
horizontal guidance. he articulator may be used to diagnose the
need to alter the anterior guidance and to design restorations that
avoid cusp collisions in mandibular movements.
TMJ lateral shift may be measured clinically and transferred
to an adjustable articulator. A series of tracings of guided movements
from diferent patients is shown in Fig. 1.51A .45,46 All the tracings
are parallel after the irst few millimeters of movement. he dif -
ference from one patient to the next is the result of the amount
of lateral shift. Fig. 1.51B illustrates simulations of arcs at diferent
degrees of lateral shift; the similarity of lines a, b, and c to the
lines similarly marked in Fig. 1.51A should be noted. None of
the tracings of lateral condylar movement exhibits the “progressive”
lateral shift indicated by the dashed line in Fig. 1.51B . Fig. 1.51C
illustrates the underside of a condylar housing of an articulator.
Shifting the medial wall simulates TMJ lateral shift and allows
movements similar to those illustrated in Fig. 1.51A . Fig. 1.51D
illustrates how movements a, b, and c were made for Fig. 1.51B
by shifting the medial wall of the condylar housing on the articulator.
Increasing lateral shift of the TMJ results in signiicant changes
in movement of the molar point near MI (see Fig. 1.51E ). he
working-side movement is least afected because it is already a
directly lateral movement. he nonworking molar-point movement
is changed in the lateral and horizontal components. he lateral
pathway is extended progressively more laterally in patients with
excessive lateral shift of the TMJs. he horizontal efect is a “lat -
tening” of the pathway by reduction of the vertical separation.
hese efects are illustrated by tracings of molar-point movement
on an articulator as the amount of lateral shift is increased from
“a” to “b” to “c.” he efect of increasing lateral shift is to increase
the likelihood of collisions of the mesiolingual cusps of the maxillary
molars with the mandibular distofacial cusps of the molars on the
nonworking side (see Fig. 1.51E and F ). hese types of undesirable
contact between the opposing functional cusps are termed nonwork -
ing interferences .contact on the border. he incisor-point superior border is shaped
by the lingual surfaces of the guiding teeth, which most frequently
are maxillary canines. In Fig. 1.48B , the lateral side of the molarpoint superior border is shaped by the working-side tooth guidance,
which is usually the maxillary canine. he medial side of the
molar-point superior border is predominately formed by the
nonworking condyle moving down the articular eminence. he
shape of the superior border at the molar point is the critical factor
for determining the location and height of the molar cusps during
restorative procedures. It is easy to visualize the efect of changes
in the cusp height when viewing the close-up of molar teeth in
the magniied inset.
Articulators and Mandibular Movements
Figs. 1.49, 1.50, 1.51, and 1.52 illustrate the scientiic basis for
the use of articulators to aid in diagnostic evaluation of occlusion
and fabrication of dental restorations.37,40-42 In these igures, the
characteristics of chewing movements and dentist-guided test
movements are compared with the characteristics of movements
produced by simple articulators. his may be done by comparing
the cusp movement near MI produced by the articulator with
the cusp movement observed in chewing studies or guided move -
ments of patients. Additionally, the changes in cusp movement
near MI that occur because of variations in the adjustment of
articulators are discussed with respect to their efe cts on dental
restorations.
Fig. 1.49 illustrates the relationship between condylar movement
and articulator settings. Together, the horizontal condylar guidance
setting and the medial-wall setting of an articulator supply suicient
information to approximate the condyle movement near MI. he
horizontal condylar guidance setting approximates the slope of
the articular eminence; the medial-wall setting approximates the
lateral shift. Collectively, these two settings are referred to as posterior
guidance .
Posterior guidance alone is not suicient to simulate mandibular
movements near MI because tooth guidance also is involved in
forming the superior border. Full-arch casts mounted in the
articulator, with the use of techniques that correctly position the
maxillary cast relative to the artiicial TMJs, supply the information
concerning anterior guidance from canines and incisors. he
mechanical coupling of the anterior guidance and posterior guidance
settings provides suicient information to simulate the movement
of posterior teeth on the superior border.
Research has identiied that the slope of the articular eminence
ranges approximately 25 to 70 degrees from the axis-orbital
plane (see Fig. 1.50A and B ).43 Adjustable articulators have been
designed based on these observations and allow establishment
of patient-specific setting of horizontal condylar inclination.
Furthermore, left/right individual settings allow for diferences
that may exist in the relative movements of the two condyles (see
Fig. 1.50C and D ). he condyles move anteriorly and inferiorly
while in contact with the curved surface of the simulated articular
eminence within the condylar housing of the articulator. More
recent designs of semiadjustable articulators have adopted curved
surfaces to simulate the curvature of the articular eminence.
Only the first few millimeters of movement have significant
effects on the posterior teeth. Horizontal condylar guidance
(supplied by the articulator) and anterior guidance (supplied
by the mounted casts) are mechanically coupled to produce the
separation of posterior teeth. he combined guidance determines
the amount of (or lack of) vertical separation of posterior teeth
CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion 33
The combination of horizontal
condylar guidance and side
shift is sufficient to define the
components of condyle point motion.a60o90o
30o0oab
bTMJ sagittal sectionAdjustment of the articulator
condylar housing allows
analogous movement to a
in the upper left drawing.
The medial wall adjustment allows
movement analogous to condylar
movement shown in upper right
drawing ( b).
The vertical displacement of the condyle as
it moves over the articular eminence is
simulated by the horizontal condylar
guidance setting on the articulator.
The jaws and teeth are superimposed over an
articulator to illustrate the relationship of the
articulator to the patient.
The shifting of the condyles during lateral
movements is simulated by the Bennett
adjustment ( b).
The articulator serves to simulate movement of the
mandible. The axis-orbital plane is used as a
reference point for mounting the maxillary cast by
facebow transfer. The mandibular cast is mounted
with respect to the upper arch by use of bite records.
Consult other textbooks for the methods of bite
registration and facebow transfer.Opening Closing
• Fig. 1.49 Relationship between condylar movement and articulator settings.
34 CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion
6Mean = 40° 25°
70°
a
a
bab
a
babae
bab
30°
50° 20°EF
GD CA B Observed pathways
Axis-orbital planeEffect of adjustment
Working
condyle point ( a) movementorking Nonworking
condyle point ( e) movement
E, F, and G illustrate the combined effect of anterior and posterior
guidance on the superior border of molar point. The angulation of
the posterior guidance is indicated in degrees for each figure. The
absence of anterior guidance is indicated by a and presence of
anterior guidance by b. The tracing of the movement of the
mesiolingual cusp of the maxillary molar is made on the grid in each
figure. Note that the absence of anterior guidance reduces the
separation of the posterior teeth, but has the greatest effect when
the posterior guidance is shallow.80% of patients are between 1 and 4
20% of patients are between 2 and 3
1
2
3
4
11
22
33
44
5
78860o90o
30o0o
• Fig. 1.50 Horizontal condylar guidance.
CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion 35
Guided border movements:
1. Follow chewing pathway in reverse direction
2. Differences are due to amount of side shift
3. Progressive side shift was not observedSimulated movements:
1. Are arcs of circles
2. Differ by side shift
3. Are comparable to guided movements
A B
Simulated movements Guided border movements
Underside of condylar housing
condylar ball movement at extreme
side shiftAdjustment of the lateral shift to
produce simulated movements
above
Maxillary molar; showing
change in nonworking
movement of mandibular
distofacial cusp with
increasing lateral shiftCD
E Fab c ab c
d
c
a
bb
c
aa
b
ccabcLateral shift:
(a) minimal
(b) moderate
(c) extreme
(d) progressive
Mandibular molar; showing
change in nonworking
movement of maxillary
mesiolingual cusp with
increasing lateral shiftab
• Fig. 1.51 Lateral condylar guidance: the medial wall.
36 CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion
part of the preoperative evaluation of teeth to be restored. Anterior
teeth support gliding contacts, whereas posterior teeth support the
heavy forces applied during chewing and clenching. Fig. 1.52
shows a variety of tooth contact relationships. In Fig. 1.52A , a
right mandibular movement is illustrated, showing the separation Tooth Contacts During Mandibular Movements
Dentists must design restorations capable of withst anding the forces
of mastication. Evaluation of the location, direction, and area of
tooth contacts during various mandibular movements is an essential
RightZones of posterior contact:
1. Inner incline of nonfunctional
cusp
2. Central fossa contact area
3. Inner incline of functional
cusp
4. Functional cusp contact
area
5. Outer incline of functional
cusp1235
123454Separation of posterior teeth
on nonworking side
determined by slope of
articular eminence.Posterior guidance:
slope of articular eminence
Superior border
near MI is
determined by
canineIncisor point tracing
Proximal view
Left Maxillary canine
guidance for left
mandibular
movement
Undesirable
nonworking
contacts for right
mandibular
movement (zone 3)
MaxillaWNW
Pathways of mandibular
distofacial cusp tip in test
movements
MaxillaGroup function on working
side (zone 1)
Undesirable working
contacts for right
mandibular movement
(maxillary zone 1)
Nonworking contacts often are the result of shallow
posterior guidance and insufficient canine guidance
due to wear (see Fig. 1.46C).
Undesirable
nonworking
contacts for right
mandibular
movement (zone 3)
Mandibular canine guidance
for left mandibular movement
Left Right Left Right
Protrusive
contacts on
incisorsGroup function on mandibular
teeth (zone 5)Undesirable working
contacts for right
mandibular movements
(mandibular zone 1)Pathways of maxillary
mesiolingual cusp in
test movementsRight maxillary canine
guiding the mandibular
canineRight mandibular
movement
PProtrusive contacts
on incisors and canines
Excusive
canine guidanceA.B.
C. D.
E1. F1.
E2. F2.Canine guidance
Right Left
NW
WPMandibleCanine wear results
in group function
• Fig. 1.52 Tooth contacts during mandibular movement.
CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion 37
to teeth and supporting structures, or both in some patients. In
patients with shallow anterior guidance or open bite, restoration
without the introduction of undesirable tooth contacts is more
diicult. Articulator-mounted casts may be used to assess and solve
restorative problems that are diicult to manage by direct intraora l
techniques.
he preferred occlusal relationship for restorative purposes is
one that limits the working-side contact to canines only. his is
directly related to the observation that, compared with canine
guidance alone, guidance from canines and posterior teeth will
result in greater activation of the anterior temporalis muscle and
longer activation of the masseter and temporalis muscles during
excursive movements.27,30,47
Tooth contact posterior to the canine on the working side may
occur naturally in worn dentitions. As canines are shortened by
wear, separation of posterior teeth diminishes. Lateral mandibular
movements in worn dentitions successively bring into contact more
posterior teeth as the heights of canines decrease. Multiple tooth
contacts during lateral jaw movements are termed group function .
Right-sided group function is illustrated in Fig. 1.52E , compared
with left canine guidance contact in Fig. 1.52F . Because the amount
of torque and wear imposed on teeth increases closer to the muscle
attachments on the mandible, molar contact in group function is
undesirable (see Fig. 1.52E and F ). It has been observed that facial
cusps of the maxillary premolars and molars (Maxillary Zone 1,
nonfunctional cusps) and lingual cusps of mandibular molars
(Mandibular Zone 1, nonfunctional cusps) have incre ased incidence
of fracture.48 his inding is consistent with the increased elevator
muscle activity that occurs as posterior teeth come into contact
and that the bulk of dentin supporting the nonfunctional cusps
is considerably less than that of the functional maxillary and
mandibular cusps. Group function limited to premolars may be
a therapeutic goal when the bony support of canines is compromised
by periodontal disease or Class II occlusions in which canine
guidance is impossible.
he nonworking side is opposite the working side and normally
does not contain a food bolus during chewing. During chewing
closures, mandibular teeth on the nonworking side close from an
anteromedial position and approach MI by moving posterolaterally.
Contact of the molar cusps on the nonworking side may overload
these teeth, compromise the ipsilateral TMJ, or both because of
a resultant increase in the activity of the masseter, anterior tem -
poralis, and posterior temporalis muscles and the ipsilateral superior
lateral pterygoid.16-18,20 Each of these muscles counteracts the action
of the nonworking-side inferior lateral pterygoid, which is respon -
sible (along with the contralateral posterior temporalis and digastric
muscles) for efecting the down and forward translation of the
nonworking-side condyle. Additional activity of the ipsilateral
superior lateral pterygoid muscle should not occur during condylar
translation when the TMJ disc needs to rotate posteriorly toward
the top of the condylar head to maintain its position between the
condyle and the articular eminence. Great variation exists among
patients in the level of masticatory system tolerance to nonworkingside contacts. Questions remain as to whether the presence of a
nonworking-side posterior contact always represents an interference
to mandibular function. he predictable, normal physiologic muscle
response to nonworking-side tooth contact (along with the potential
negative sequelae of tooth wear, tooth fracture, masticatory muscle
pain and/or TMJ internal disc derangement) leads to the conclusion
that avoidance of these contacts is an important go al for restorative
procedures in the posterior dentition. Undesirable nonworking-side
contacts are illustrated in Fig. 1.52F .of the posterior teeth on the left, or nonworking, side. his separa -
tion of posterior teeth results from the combined efects of the
canine guidance and the slope of the articular eminence on the
nonworking side. he efect of the canine guidance is illustrated
in the incisor point tracing in Fig. 1.52B . he superior border on
either side of MI is determined by the shape of the lingual surfaces
of maxillary canine teeth. Guiding contact between the right canines
is illustrated in Fig. 1.52C . A variety of areas on posterior teeth
may contact opposing teeth during mandibular movements. In
Fig. 1.52D , the opposing surfaces of molar teeth are divided into
ive areas:
1. Inner incline of the nonfunctional cusp. his area has the potential
for undesirable contact in working-side movements by contacting
the outer aspect of the functional cusp (area 5).
2. Fossa or marginal ridge contact area. his is the main contact
area for the opposing functional cusp.
3. Inner incline of the functional cusp. his area has the potential
for undesirable contact during nonworking movements.
4. Contact area of the functional cusp. his is the main cusp contact
area.
5. Outer aspect of the functional cusp. his area sometimes participates
in working-side movements by contacting the inner incline of
the nonfunctional cusp (area 1).
Anterior Tooth Contacts
During anterior movement of the mandible (i.e., protrusion), the
lower anterior teeth glide along the lingual surfaces of maxillary
anterior teeth (see Fig. 1.52E and F ). he combination of the
anterior guidance (slope and vertical overlap of anterior teeth) and
the slope of the articular eminence (horizontal condylar guidance
on the articulator) determines the amount of vertical separation
of posterior teeth as the mandible moves anteriorly . Some texts
refer to this separation as disocclusion (or disclusion ) of posterior
teeth. Multiple contacts between the opposing dental arches on
anterior teeth are desirable in protrusion movements. With protru -
sion, multiple contacts serve to prevent excessive force on any
individual pair of gliding teeth. Posterior tooth contact during
protrusion is not desirable because it may overload the involved
teeth secondary to the increased elevator muscle activity that occurs
when posterior teeth come into contact. It has been shown that
when anterior teeth are in contact and posterior teeth are discluded,
elevator muscles are less active.16-19,23,27,30,47
Articulator-mounted casts may be used to assess the superior
border near MI, which is the critical zone for tooth contact. his
information is useful during the fabrication of indirect restorations
because the position and height of the restored cusps can be evalu -
ated and adjusted in the laboratory, which minimizes the chairside
time and efort required to adjust the completed restorations.
Posterior Tooth Contacts
In idealized occlusal schemes designed for restorative dentistry,
posterior teeth should contact only in MI such that the force that
results from maximum activation of the elevator muscles is
distributed evenly over multiple teeth.16-19,23,27,28,30,47 Any movement
of the mandible should result in the separation of posterior teeth
by the combined efects of anterior guidance and the slope of the
articular eminence (horizontal condylar guidance on the articulator).
he immediate separation of posterior teeth during protrusion or
excursion results in a decrease in the level of activity and force
being generated by the elevator muscles.16,18,19,21,23,27,30,47
Forceful contact of individual posterior tooth cusps during
chewing and clenching may lead to muscle discomfort, damage
38 CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion
10. Boushell LW, Nagaoka H, Nagaoka H, et al: Increased matrix
metalloproteinase-2 and bone sialoprotein response to human coronal
caries. Caries Res 45: – , , 1.
11. Mohl ND, Zarb GA, Carlsson GE, et al: he dentition. In Mohl
ND, Zarb GA, Carisson GE, et al, editors: A textbook of occlusion ,
Chicago, , Quintessence.
12. Gibbs CH, Messerman T, Reswick JB, et al: Functional movements
of the mandible. J Prosthet Dent 26(5): – , .
13. Angle EH: Classiication of malocclusion. Dent Cosmos 41: – ,
– , .
14. Kraus BS, Jorden E, Abrams L: Dental anatomy and occlusion , ed 1,
Baltimore, , Williams & Wilkins.
15. Dawson PE: Functional occlusion: from TMJ to smile design , St Louis,
, Mosby.
16. Belser UC, Hannam AG: he inluence of altered working-side
occlusal guidance on masticatory muscles and related jaw movement.
J Prosthet Dent 53(3): – , .
17. Gibbs CH, Mahan PE, Wilkinson TM, et al: EMG activity of the
superior belly of the lateral pterygoid muscle in relation to other jaw
muscles. J Prosthet Dent 51(5): – , .
18. Vitti M, Basmajian JV: Integrated actions of masticatory muscles:
simultaneous EMG from eight intramuscular electrodes. Anat Rec
: – , .
19. Williamson EH, Lundquist DO: Anterior guidance: its efect on
electromyographic activity of the temporal and masseter muscles. J
Prosthet Dent 49(6): – , .
20. Santana U, Mora MJ: Electromyographic analysis of the masticatory
muscles of patients after complete rehabilitation of occlusion with
protection by non-working side contacts. J Oral Rehabil 22:57–66,
.
21. Valenzuela S, Baeza M, Miralles R, et al: Laterotrusive occlusal
schemes and their efect on supraand infrahyoid electromyographic
activity. Angle Orthod 76(4): – , .
22. Mahan PE, Wilkinson TM, Gibbs CH, et al: Superior and inferior
bellies of the lateral pterygoid muscle and EMG act ivity at basic jaw
positions. J Prosthet Dent 50(5): – , .
23. Borromeo GL, Suvinen TI, Reade PC: A comparison of the efects
of group function and canine guidance interocclusal device on masseter
muscle electromyographic activity in normal subject s. J Prosthet Dent
74(2): – , .
24. Graham GS, Rugh JD: Maxillary splint occlusal guidance patterns
and electrographic activity of the jaw-closing muscles. J Prosthet Dent
59(1):73–77, .
25. Hannam AG, De Cou RE, Scott JD, et al: he relationship between
dental occlusion, muscle activity and associated jaw movement in
man. Arch Oral Biol 22:25–32, .
26. Leiva M, Miralles R, Palazzi C, et al: Efects of laterotrusive occlusal
scheme and body position on bilateral sternocleidomastoid EMG
activity. J Craniomandibular Practice 21(2):99– , .
27. Manns A, Chan C, Miralles R: Inluence of group function and
canine guidance on electromyographic activity of elevator muscles.
J Prosthet Dent 57(4): – , .
28. Manns A, Miralles R, Valdivia J, et al: Inluence of variation in
anteroposterior occlusal contacts on electromyographic activity. J
Prosthet Dent 61: – , .
29. Rugh JD, Drago CJ: Vertical dimension: a study of clinical rest
position and jaw muscle activity. J Prosthet Dent 45(6): – ,
.
30. Shupe RJ, Mohamed SE, Christensen LV, et al: Efects of occlusal
guidance on jaw muscle activity. J Prosthet Dent 51(6): – ,
.
31. Huang BY, Whittle T, Peck CC, et al: Ipsilateral interferences and
working-side condylar movements. Arch Oral Biol 51: – ,
.
32. Solberg WK, Woo MW, Houston JB: Prevalence of mandibular
dysfunction in young adults. J Am Dent Assoc 98:25–34, .
33. Posselt U: Studies in the mobility of the mandible. Acta Odont Scand
10(Suppl 10): .Neurologic Correlates and Control
of Mastication
his summary of neurologic control is based on an excellent review
by Lund.49 he control of mastication depends on sensory feedback.
Sensory feedback serves to control the coordination of the lips,
tongue, and mandibular movement during manipulation of the
food bolus through all stages of mastication and preparation for
swallowing. Physiologists divide an individual chewing cycle into
three components: opening , fast closing , and slow closing . he slowclosing segment of chewing is associated with the increased forces
required for crushing food. he central nervous system receives
several types of feedback from muscle spindles, periodontal receptors,
and touch receptors in the skin and mucosa. his feedb ack controls
the mandibular closing muscles during the slow-closing phase.
Sensory feedback often results in inhibition of movement (e.g.,
because of pain). During mastication, some sensory feedback from
teeth is excitatory, causing an increase in the closing force as the
food bolus is crushed. An upper limit must, however, be present
where inhibition occurs; this prevents the buildup of excessive
forces on teeth during the occlusal stage.
A group of neurons in the brainstem produces bursts of dis -
charges at regular intervals when excited by oral sensory stimuli.
hese bursts drive motor neurons to produce contractions of the
masticatory muscles at regular intervals, resulting in rhyt hmic
mandibular movement. he cluster of neurons in the brainstem
that drives the rhythmic chewing is termed central pattern generator .
he chewing cycles illustrated in Figs. 1.46, 1.47, and 1.48 are
caused by central pattern generator rhythms. Oral sensory feedback
can modify the basic central pattern generator pattern and is essential
for the coordination of the lips, tongue, and mandible. Sensory
input from the periodontal and mucosal receptors maintains the
rhythmic chewing. Coactivation of the opening and closing muscles
serves to protect the dentition from excessively forceful contact,
makes the mandible more rigid, and probably serves to brace the
condyles while the food is crushed.
References
1. Dusevich V, Xu C, Wang Y, et al: Identiication of a protein-containing
enamel matrix layer which bridges with the dentin-enamel junction
of adult human teeth. Arch Oral Biol 57(12): – , .
2. Digka A, Lyroudia K, Jirasek T, et al: Visualisation of human dental
pulp vasculature by immunohistochemical and immunoluorescent
detection of CD34: a comparative study. Aust Endod J 32: – ,
.
3. Garberoglio R, Brännström M: Scanning electron m icroscopic
investigation of human dentinal tubules. Arch Oral Biol 21: – ,
.
4. Scott JH, Symons NBB: Introduction to dental anatomy , ed 9, Phila -
delphia, , Churchill Livingstone.
5. Craig RG, Powers JM: Restorative dental materials , ed 12, St Louis,
, Mosby.
6. Brännström M: Dentin and pulp in restorative dentistry , London,
, Wolfe Medical.
7. Michelich V, Pashley DH, Whitford GM: Dentin permeability:
comparison of function versus anatomic tubular radii. J Dent Res
57: – , .
8. Sturdevant JR, Pashley DH: Regional dentin permeability of class I
and II cavity preparations (abstract no. ). J Dent Res 68: ,
.
9. Farges J-C, Alliot-Licht B, Renard E, et al: Dental pulp defence and
repair mechanisms in dental caries. Mediat Inlam . http://
dx.doi.org/10. / / . Article ID .
CHAPTER 1 Clinical Sig niicance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion 39
42. Mongelli de Fantini S, Batista de Paiva J, Neto JR, et al: Increase of
condylar displacement between centric relation and maximal habitual
intercuspation after occlusal splint therapy. Braz Oral Res 19(3):
– , .
43. Lundeen HC, Wirth CG: Condylar movement pattern s engraved in
plastic blocks. J Prosthet Dent 30: – , .
44. Lundeen HC, Shryock EF , Gibbs CH: An evaluation of mandibular
border movements: their character and signiicance. J Prosthet Dent
40: – , .
45. Lundeen TF , Mendosa MA: Comparison of Bennett shift measured
at the hinge axis and an arbitrary hinge axis position. J Prosthet Dent
51: – , .
46. Lundeen TF , Mendosa MA: Comparison of two methods for measure -
ment of immediate Bennett shift. J Prosthet Dent 51: – , .
47. Akoren AC, Karaagaclioglu L: Comparison of the electromyographic
activity of individuals with canine guidance and group function
occlusion. J Oral Rehabil 22:73–77, .
48. Bader JD, Martin JA, Shugars DA: Incidence rates for complete cusp
fracture. Comm Dent Oral Epidemiol 29: – , .
49. Lund JP: Mastication and its control by the brain stem. Crit Rev
Oral Biol Med 2:33–64, .34. Gibbs CH, Lundeen HC: Jaw movements and forces during chewing
and swallowing and their clinical signiicance. In Lundeen HC, Gibbs
CH, editors: Advances in occlusion , Bristol, , John Wright PSG.
35. Celenza FV, Nasedkin JN: Occlusion: the state of the art , Chicago,
, Quintessence.
36. Keshvad A, Winstanley RB: An appraisal of the literature on centric
relation. J Oral Rehabil 28:55–63, .
37. Crawford SD: Condylar axis position, as determined by the occlusion
and measured by the CPI instrument, and signs and symptoms of
temporomandibular dysfunction. Angle Orthod 69(2): – , .
38. Landi N, Manfredini D, Tognini F , et al: Quantiication of the relative
risk of multiple occlusal variables for muscle disorders of the sto -
matognathic system. J Prosthet Dent 92: – , .
39. Pahkala R, Qvarnstrom M: Can temporomandibular dysfunction
signs be predicted by early morphological or functional variables?
Eur J Orthod 26(4): – , .
40. Griiths RH: Report of the president’s conference on the examination,
diagnosis, and management of temporomandibular disorders. J Am
Dent Assoc :75–77, .
41. Kim SK, Kim KN, Chang IT, et al: A study of the efects of chewing
patterns on occlusal wear. J Oral Rehabil 28: – , .
40 CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management
Dental Caries: Etiology, Clinical
Characteristics, Risk Assessment, and
Management
ANDRÉA G. FERREIRA ZANDONÁ, ANDRÉ V. RITTER, R. SCOTT EIDSONa
This chapter presents basic deinitions and information on
dental caries, clinical characteristics of the caries lesion,
caries risk assessment, and caries management, in t he context
of clinical operative dentistry.
What I Dental Carie?
Dental caries is a preventable, chronic, and bioilm-mediated disease
modulated by diet. his multifactorial, oral disease is caused primar -
ily by an imbalance of the oral lora (bioilm) due to the presence
of fermentable dietary carbohydrates on the tooth surface over
time. T raditionally, this tooth-bioilm-carbohydrate interaction has
been illustrated by the classical Keyes-Jordan diagram ( Fig. 2.1 ).1
However, dental caries onset and activity are in fact much more
complex than this three-way interaction, as not all persons with
teeth, bioilm, and consuming carbohydrates will have caries lesions
over time. Several modifying risk and protective factors inluence
the dental caries process, as will be discussed later in this chapter.
At the tooth level, dental caries activity is characterized by
localized demineralization and loss of tooth structure, the caries
lesion (Figs. 2.2 and 2.3). In health, the microbiome is in symbiosis,
the oral commensals striving in a neutral pH. Some bacteria in
the bioilm metabolize reined carbohydrates for energy and produce
organic acid by-products. hese organic acids, if present in the
bioilm ecosystem for extended periods, can lower the pH in the
bioilm to below a critical level (5.5 for enamel, 6.2 for dentin).
his low pH has efects both on the bioilm composition and at
the tooth surface level ( Fig. 2.4 ). With extended periods of low
pH there is a shift in the microbiome to bacteria that are acidogenic
and acidophilic, causing a dysbiosis in the microbiome. his change
in turn will lead to further acidiication of the environment. he
low pH drives calcium and phosphate from the tooth to the bioilm
in an attempt to reach equilibrium, hence resulting in a net loss
of minerals by the tooth, or demineralization . When the pH in
the bioilm returns to neutral and the concentration of soluble
calcium and phosphate is supersaturated relative to that in the
tooth, mineral can then be added back to partially demineralized enamel in a process called remineralization . hus at the tooth
surface and subsurface level, dental caries lesions result from a
dynamic process of damage (demineralization) and restitution
(remineralization) of the tooth matter. hese events take place
several times a day over the life of the tooth and are modulated
by many factors including number and type of microbial lora in
the bioilm, diet, oral hygiene, genetics, dental anatomy, dentin
and enamel composition, use of luorides and other chemothera -
peutic agents, saliva composition, salivary low, and bufering
capacity. hese factors are highly individual and tooth speciic,
and will difer from person to person, tooth to tooth in the same
individual, and site to site on a same tooth. he balance between
demineralization and remineralization has been illustrate d in terms
of pathologic factors (i.e., those favoring demineralization) and
protective factors (i.e., those favoring remineralization) ( Fig. 2.5 ).2
Individuals in whom the balance tilts predominantly toward protec -
tive factors (remineralization) are much less likely to develop dental
caries lesions than those in which the balance is tilted toward
pathologic factors (demineralization). Understanding the balance
between demineralization and remineralization is key to caries
management.
Repeated demineralization events may result from a predomi -
nantly pathologic environment causing the localized dissolution
and destruction of the calciied dental tissues, evidenced as a caries
lesion. he ongoing demineralization at the enamel subsurface
level leads to a collapse of the surface and hence the formation of
a cavitation in the enamel surface. Severe demineralization of dentin
results in the exposure of the protein matrix, which is denatured
initially by host matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and subsequently
degraded by MMPs and other bacterial proteases. Demineralization
of the inorganic phase (dentin mineral), and denaturation and
degradation of the organic phase (primarily dentin collagen) result
in dentin cavitation.3
It is essential to understand that caries lesions, or cavitations
in teeth, are signs of an underlying condition, an imbalance between
protective and pathologic factors favoring the latter. In clinical
practice it is very easy to lose sight of this fact and focus entirely
on the restorative treatment of caries lesions, failing to treat the
underlying cause of the disease ( ). Although symptomatic
treatment is important for many reasons, failure to identify and aDr. Eidson was an inactive author in this edition.
CHAPTER 2 Dental Caries: Etiology, Clinical Characteristics, Risk Assessment, and Management
Primary modifying factors:
• Tooth anatomy
• Saliva
• Biofilm pH
• Biofilm composition
• Use of fluoride
• Diet specifics
• Oral hygiene
• Immune system
• Genetic factors Secondary modifying factors:
• Socioeconomic status
• Education
• Life-style
• Environment
•Age(?)
• Ethnic group (?)
• Occupation
'----+-- CARIES*
*In the absence of protective factors
and if other risk factors are present
• Fig. 2. 1 Modified Keyes-Jordan diagram. As a simplified description, dental caries is a result of the
interaction of cariogenic oral flora (biofilm) with fermentable dietary carbohydrates on the tooth surface
(host) over time. However, dental caries onset and activity are, in fact, much more complex, as not all
persons with teeth, biofilm, and who are consuming carbohydrates will have caries over time. Several
modifying risk factors and protective factors influence the dental caries process. (Modified from Keyes
PH, Jordan HV: Factors influencing initiation, transmission and inhibition of dental caries. In Harris RJ,
editor: Mechanisms of hard tissue destruction, New York, , Academic Press.)
a
b
I a
10 11
8 9 12
B
• Fig. 2.2 A, Young adult with multiple active initial and cavitated caries
lesions involving teeth No. 8 through 10. B, Cavitated areas (a) are sur­
rounded by areas of extensive demineralization that are chalky and opaque
(b). Some areas of initial (noncavitated) caries have superficial stain. 22
21 23 24 25
B
• Fig. 2.3 Extensive active caries in a young adult (same patient as in
Fig. 2.2). A, Mirror view of teeth No. 20 through 22. B, Cavitated lesions
(a) are surrounded by extensive areas of chalky, opaque demineralized
areas (b). The presence of smooth-surface lesions such as these is associ­
ated with rampant caries. Occlusal and interproximal smooth-surface
caries usually occur in advance of facial smooth-surface lesions. The
presence of these types of lesions should alert the dentist to the possibility
of a high caries risk patient and possibly extensive caries activity elsewhere
in the mouth. The interproximal gingiva is swollen red and would bleed
easily on probing. These gingival changes are the consequence of long­
standing irritation from the biofilm adherent to the teeth.
42 CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management
Moderate/frequent
acidificationMild/infrequent
acidification
Acid-induced
adaptation/selectionAcid-induced
adaptation/selection
Severe/prolonged
acidificationIncrease in MS
and non-mutans
aciduric bacteria“low-pH” non-MS
and actinomyces
Aciduric stageAcidogenic stageDominance on non-MS and actinomycesDynamic stability stage
Net mineral loss
(lesion initiation/progression)
Surface feature dull/rough (enamel)
dull/soft (dentin)Net mineral gain(lesion regression/arrest)Surface
feature shiny/smooth (enamel)
shiny/hard (dentin)
• Fig. 2.4 This diagram illustrates how the diet affects the bioilm and consequences on the tooth
surface. In health, the bioilm is in symbiosis. A person who has only occasional consumption of ferment -
able carbohydrates will have a resident microbiome dominated by nonmutans streptococci and actino -
myces in a dynamic stability stage that is adapting to the relatively minor changes in pH. As the diet
changes to more frequent exposures to fermentable carbohydrates, the microbiome adapts to the more
acidic environment in an acidogenic stage, where bacteria that favor low pH lourish. In diets with frequent
exposures to fermentable carbohydrates this constant acid-induced adaptation and selection of the
microbiome continues and leads to an aciduric stage where there is an increase in MS and nonmutans
aciduric bacteria, thus leading to a dysbiosis of the microbiome. At one end of the spectrum, in an envi -
ronment with severe and prolonged acidiication and aciduric bacteria, there is a net mineral loss at the
tooth surface, enamel, or dentin, causing lesion initiation or lesion progression, while at the other end of
the spectrum with only mild acidiication there is a net mineral gain at the tooth surface and consequently
lesion regression or arrest. Certainly this is a simpliied explanation of the changes in the bioilm as the
microbiome adapts to the acidic environment due to cariogenic diets, which does not consider the many
other factors that are at play to either halt the process or boost the process. (From Takahashi N1, Nyvad
B. The role of bacteria in the caries process: ecological perspectives, J Dent Res 90(3): – , .
1.5 L of saliva a day, very
little of which occurs during sleep. he lushing efect of this salivary
low is, by itself, adequate to remove virtually all microorganisms
not adherent to an oral surface. he lushing is most efective
during mastication or oral stimulation, both of which produce
large volumes of saliva. Large volumes of saliva also can dilute and
bufer bioilm acids.
Direct Antibacterial Activity
Salivary glands produce an impressive array of antimicrobial products
(see ). Lysozyme, lactoperoxidase, lactoferrin, and agglutinins possess antibacterial activity. hese salivary proteins are not
part of the immune system but are part of an overall protection
scheme for mucous membranes that occurs in addition to immu -
nologic control. hese protective proteins are present continuously
at relatively uniform levels, have a broad spectrum of activity, and
do not possess the “memory” of immunologic mechanisms. However,
it is important to note that the normal resident oral lora apparently
has developed resistance to most of these antibacterial
mechanisms.
Although the antibacterial proteins in saliva play an important
role in the protection of soft tissue in the oral cavity from infection
by pathogens, they have little efect on dental caries because similar
levels of antibacterial proteins can be found in caries-active and
caries-free individuals.11,12 It is suggested that dental caries suscep -
tibility in healthy individuals is not related to saliva composition.
CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management 59
Medications With Potential to Cause Hyposalivation or Dry Mouth (Xerostomia)
Action/Medication Group Medicaments
Sympathomimetic
Antidepressants Venlafaxine
Duloxetine
Reboxetine
Bupropion
Anticholinergic
Tricyclic antidepressants Amitriptyline
Clomipramine
Amoxapine
Protriptyline
Doxepin
Imipramine
Trimipramine
Nortriptyline
Desipramine
Muscarinic receptor antagonists Oxybutynin
Alpha-receptor antagonists Tamsulosin
Terazosin
Antipsychotics Promazine
Trilupromazine
Mesoridazine
Thioridazine
Clozapine
Olanzapine
Antihistamines Aziridine
Brompheniramine
Chlorpheniramine
Cyproheptadine
Dexchlorpheniramine
Hydroxyzine
Phenindamine
Cetirizine
LoratadineAction/Medication Group Medicaments
Anticholinergic, Dehydration
Diuretics Furosemide
Bumetanide
Torsemide
Ethacrynic acid
Sympathomimetic
Antihypertensive agents Metoprolol
Moxonidine
Rilmenidine
Appetite suppressants Fenluramine
Sibutramine
Phentermine
Decongestants Pseudoephedrine
Bronchodilators Tiotropium
Skeletal muscle relaxants Tizanidine
Antimigraine agents Rizatriptan
Synergistic Mechanism
Opioids, hypnotics Opium
Cannabis
Tramadol
Diazepam
Unknown
H2 antagonists, proton pump inhibitors Cimetidine
Ranitidine
Famotidine
Nizatidine
Omeprazole
Cytotoxic drugs Fluorouracil
Anti-HIV drugs, protease inhibitors Didanosine
Adapted from the Kois Center, Support Materials, Always Pages, http://koiscenter.com/store/supmatlist.aspx , accessed January 13, .
Individuals with decreased salivary production (owing to illness,
medication, or irradiation) may hav e signiicantly higher caries
susceptibility (see ).
Bufer Capacity
he volume and bufering capacity of saliva available to tooth
surfaces have major roles in dental caries protection.13 he bufering
capacity of saliva is determined primarily by the concentration of
bicarbonate ion. Bufering capacity can be estimated by titration
techniques and may be a useful method for assessment of saliva
in caries-active patients. Simple commercial kits are available for
chairside tests. he beneit of the bufering is to reduce the potential
for acid formation; however, in pathogenic bioilms there are highly
compartmentalized clusters of acidic pH and neutral pH that make
neutralization by saliva diicult. ,
In addition to bufers, saliva contains molecules that contribute
to increasing bioilm pH. hese include urea and sialin, the latter
of which is a tetrapeptide that contains lysine and arginine.
Hydrolysis of either of these basic compounds results in production
of ammonia, causing the pH to increase.Because saliva is crucial in controlling the oral lora and the
mineral content of teeth, salivary testing should be done on patients
with signs and symptoms of hyposalivation. Signs include lack of
saliva pool on the loor of the mouth, gingivitis and mucositis
(including burning mouth syndrome), cheilitis (inlammation and
issuring of the lips and/or the tongue), issure in the soft mucosa,
fungal infections in the mouth such as thrush, glossodynia (painful
tongue), sialadenitis (salivary gland infection), saliva that see ms
thick and stringy, and several caries lesions especially in uncommon
areas such as the lower central incisors. Symptoms include com -
plaints of “cotton mouth” (xerostomia); bad breath; diiculty
chewing, speaking, and swallowing; a changed sense of taste; and
problems wearing dentures.
Remineralization
Saliva and bioilm luid are supersaturated with calcium and phos -
phate ions. Without a means to control precipitation of these ions,
the teeth literally would become encrusted with mineral deposits.
Saliva contains statherin, a proline-rich peptide that stabilizes
calcium and phosphate ions and prevents excessive deposition of
60 CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management
these ions on teeth.14 his supersaturated state of the saliva provides
a constant opportunity for remineralizing enamel and can help
protect teeth in times of cariogenic challenges.
Diet and Dental Carie
High-frequency exposure to fermentable carbohydrates such as
sucrose may be the most important factor in producing cariogenic
bioilm and ultimately caries lesions. Frequent ingestion of ferment -
able carbohydrates begins a series of changes in the local tooth
environment, essentially changing the composition of the bioilm,
thus favoring the growth of highly acidogenic bacteria that eventually
leads to caries lesion formation (see Fig. 2.4 ). In contrast, when
ingestion of fermentable carbohydrates is severely restricted or
absent, bioilm growth typically does not lead to caries lesions.
Dietary sucrose plays a leading role in the development of pathogenic
bioilms and may be the most important factor in disruption of
the normal healthy ecology of dental bioilm communities. Sucrose
in particular allows the formation of extracellular polysaccharides,
which render the bioilm viscous and sticky. Because the eventual
metabolic product of cariogenic diet is acid, in addition to caries
lesions the exposure to acidity from other sources (e.g., dried fruits,
fruit drinks, or other acidic foods and drinks) also may result in
dental erosion. he dietary emphasis must include all intakes that
result in acidity, not just sucrose.
Clinical Characteritic of the Carie Leion
As discussed, the caries lesion results from disequilibrium between
the demineralization and remineralization processes. However,
caries lesions appear in a variety of diferent clinical presentations
depending on lesion location, severity, and progression rate or
activity of the demineralization process, among other factors.
Clinically, caries lesions can be present on various tooth surfaces,
can be cavitated or noncavitated, active or inactive, and vary
depending on their severity (initial, moderate, or severe). For a
complete description of current caries classiication criteria based
on lesion severity and activity, see Chapter 3 . he following sections
will summarize these characteristics.
Clinical Site for Carie Initiation
he characteristics of a caries lesion vary with the nature of the
surface on which the lesion develops. here are three distinctly
diferent clinical sites for caries lesion initiation: (1) developmental
pits and issures of enamel, which are the most susceptible sites;
(2) smooth enamel surfaces that shelter cariogenic bioilm; and
(3) root surfaces (see Fig. 2.15 ). Each of these areas has distinct
surface morphology and environmental conditions. Consequently
each area has a distinct bioilm population. he diagnosis, treatment,
and prevention of these diferent lesion types should take into
account the diferent etiologic factors operating at each site.
Pits and Fissures
Bacteria rapidly colonize the pits and issures of newly erupted
teeth. he type and nature of the organisms prevalent in the oral
cavity determine the type of organisms colonizing pits and issures
and are instrumental in determining the outcome of the coloniza -
tion. Large variations exist in the microlora found in pits and
issures, suggesting that each site can be considered a separate
ecologic system. Numerous gram-positive cocci, especially S. sanguis ,
are found in the pits and issures of newly erupted teeth, whereas large numbers of MS usually are found in carious pits and
issures.
he shape of the pits and issures contributes to their high
susceptibility to caries lesion. he long, narrow issure prevents
adequate bioilm removal (see Fig. 2.13 ). Considerable morphologic
variation exists in these structures. Some pits and issures end
blindly, others open near the dentin, and others penetrate entirely
through the enamel.
Pit-and-issure caries lesions typically “expand” as they penetrate
into the enamel. he entry site may appear much smaller than the
actual lesion, making clinical detection diicult. Caries lesions of
pits and issures develop from demineralization on their walls,
known as wall lesions (see Fig. 2.16A–C ). Progression of the dis -
solution of the walls of a pit-and-issure lesion is similar in principle
to that of the smooth-surface lesion because a wide susceptible
surface area extends inward, paralleling the enamel rods. A lesion
originating in a pit or issure afects a greater area of the denti -
noenamel junction (DEJ) than does a comparable smoo th-surface
lesion. In cross section, the gross appearance of a pit-and-issure
lesion is an inverted V with a narrow entrance and a progressively
wider area of involvement closer to the DEJ (see Fig. 2.16D ).
Smooth Enamel Surfaces
he smooth enamel surfaces of teeth present a less favorable site
for cariogenic bioilm attachment. Cariogenic bioilm usually
develops only on the smooth surfaces that are near the gingiva or
are under proximal contacts. he proximal surfaces are particularly
susceptible to caries lesion formation because of the extra shelter
provided to resident cariogenic bioilm owing to the proximal
contact area immediately occlusal to it ( Fig. 2.22 and 2.23). Lesions
starting on smooth enamel surfaces have a broad area of origin
and a conical, or pointed, extension toward the DEJ. he path of
ingress of the lesion is roughly parallel to the long axis of the
enamel rods in the region. A cross section of the enamel portion
of a smooth-surface lesion shows a V shape, with a wide area of
origin and the apex of the V directed toward the DEJ. After the
demineralization reaches the DEJ, when there is enamel cavitation
and bacterial contamination, the bacterial metabolic activity within
the lesion causes rapid dentin demineralization both laterally and
pulpally (see Fig. 2.22 ). ,
• Fig. 2.23 Extracted tooth showing extensive caries lesion just gingival
to the proximal contact area. (Note the slightly “lat” contact area adjacent
to marginal ridge.)
CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management 61
B
a
Ab c d
• Fig. 2.24 A, Cross section of small caries lesion in enamel examined by transmitted light ( ×).
Surface (a) appears to be intact. Body of lesion (b) shows enhancement of striae of Retzius. Dark zone
(c) surrounds body of lesion, whereas translucent zone (d) is evident over entire advancing front of lesion.
B, The porosity of the lesion changes across the different zones. Thus a sharp explorer can easily pen -
etrate the outer enamel and cause a small cavitation on an active lesion. (A, From Silverstone LM, et al.
editors: Dental caries, London and Basingstoke, , Macmillan, Ltd. Reproduced with permission of
Palgrave Macmillan. B, Courtesy Dr. Masatoshi Ando.)
Root Surfaces
he root surface is rougher than enamel and readily allows cariogenic
biofilm formation in the absence of good oral hygiene. The
cementum covering the root surface is extremely thin and provides
little resistance to caries lesion activity. In addition, the critical
pH for dentin is higher than for enamel, so demineralization is
likely to start even before the pH reaches the critical level for
enamel (pH = 5.5). Root caries lesions have less w ell-deined margins
than coronal caries lesions, tend to be U shaped in cross section,
and progress more rapidly than coronal caries lesions because of
the lack of protection from an enamel covering. In recent years,
the prevalence of root caries has increased signiicantly because of
the increasing number of older persons who retain more teeth,
experience gingival recession, and usually have cariogenic bioilm
on the exposed root surfaces.15-18
Carie Leion Progreion
he progression and morphology of the caries lesion vary depending
on the site of origin and the conditions in the mouth (see Figs. 2.15, 2.16, and 2.22 ). he time for progression from a noncavitated
caries lesion to a cavitated caries lesion on smooth surfaces is
estimated to be 18 months ( ± 6 months).19 Peak rates for the
incidence of new lesions occur 3 years after the eruption of the
tooth. Occlusal pit-and-issure lesions develop in less time than
smooth-surface caries lesions. Poor oral hygiene and frequent
exposures to sucrose-containing or acidic food can produce
noncavitated initial (“white spot”) lesions (irst clinical evidence
of demineralization) in 3 weeks. Radiation-induced hyposalivation
(dry mouth) can lead to development of caries lesions in 3 months
from the onset of the radiation. Caries lesion progression in healthy
individuals is usually slow compared with the progression in
compromised persons.
Enamel Carie Leion
An understanding of the enamel composition and histology is
helpful to understand enamel caries histopathology (see Chapter
1; Figs. 2.24, 2.25, and 2.26 ). On clean, dry teeth the earliest
evidence of caries lesion on the smooth enamel surface of a crown
62 CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management
• Fig. 2.25 Microradiograph ( ×) of cross section of small caries lesion
in enamel. Well-mineralized surface (s) is evident. Alternating radiolucent and
radiopaque lines indicate demineralization between enamel rods. (From
Silverstone LM, et al, editors: Dental caries , London and Basingstoke, ,
Macmillan, Ltd. Reproduced with permission of Palgrave Macmillan.)
AB C
44
33
2 2zp
tz1
1
• Fig. 2.26 A, Cross section of initial caries lesion in enamel examined in quinoline with polarized light
( ×). Advancing front of lesion appears as a dark band below body of lesion. B, Same section after
exposure to artiicial calcifying solution examined in quinoline and polarized light. Dark zone (DZ) covers
a much greater area after remineralization has occurred ( ×). C, Schematic diagram of A and B. Left
side indicates small extent of zones 1 and 2 before remineralization. Small circles indicate relative sizes
of pores in each zone. Right side indicates increase in zone 2, the dark zone, after remineralization. This
micropore system must have been created where previously the pores were much larger. (From Silverstone
LM, et al, editors: Dental caries , London and Basingstoke, , Macmillan, Ltd. Reproduced with permis -
sion of Palgrave Macmillan. C was redrawn.)is the initial lesion or a “white spot” ( Fig. 2.27 ; see also Figs. 2.2
and 2.3). hese lesions usually are observed on the facial and
lingual surfaces of teeth. Initial lesions are chalky white, opaque
areas that are revealed only when the tooth surface is desiccated
and are termed noncavitated enamel caries lesions or initial lesions .
hese areas of enamel lose their translucency because of the extensive
subsurface porosity caused by demineralization. Care must be
exercised in distinguishing white spots of initial caries lesions from
developmental white spot hypocalci ications or other developmental
defects of enamel. Initial (white spot) caries lesions partially or
totally disappear visually when the enamel is hydrated (wet), whereas
hypocalciied enamel is afected less by drying and wetting ( Table
2.5). Hypocalciied enamel does not represent a clinical problem
except for its potential esthetically objectionable appearance. he
surface texture of an initial lesion is unaltered and is undetectable
by tactile examination with an explorer. A more advanced lesion
develops an irregular surface that is rougher than the unafected,
normal enamel. Softened chalky enamel that can be chipped away
with an explorer is a sign of active caries. However, injudicious
use of an explorer tip can cause actual cavitation in a previously
noncavitated area, requiring, in most cases, restorative intervention.
Similar initial lesions occur on the proximal smooth surfaces,
although their detection by visual examination is more challenging.
Tooth separation with orthodontic separators can facilitate visual
s
i ic c
• Fig. 2.27 Facial and lingual smooth-surface caries. This patient has high caries activity with rapidly
advancing caries lesions. Cariogenic bioilm extends entirely around the cervical areas of the posterior
teeth. Several levels of caries involvement can be seen, including cavitation (c); initial (noncavitated) white
spot lesions (i); and stained, roughened, partially remineralized initial (noncavitated) lesions (s).
CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management 63
Clinical Characteristics of Normal and Altered Enamel
Hydrated Desiccated Surface Texture Surface Hardness
Normal Enamel Translucent Translucent Smooth Hard
Hypocalciied Enamel Opaque Opaque Smooth Hard
Active Initial Caries Translucent (early lesions) Opaque Rough Softened
Opaque (more established initial lesions) Opaque Rough Softened
Arrested Initial Caries Shiny and/or dark Shiny and/or dark Smooth Hard
Active Moderate Caries Opaque Opaque Rough Softened
Arrested Moderate Caries Shiny and/or dark Shiny and/or dark Smooth Hard
Active Advanced Caries Opaque Opaque Rough Softened
Arrested Advanced Caries Shiny and/or dark Shiny and/or dark Smooth Leathery or hard
examination of proximal tooth surfaces. Initial enamel lesions
sometimes may be seen on radiographs as a faint radiolucency that
is limited to the supericial enamel. When a proximal lesion is
clearly visible radiographically, the lesion may have advanced
signiicantly, and histologic alteration of the unde rlying dentin
probably already has occurred, whether the lesion is cavitated or
not ( Fig. 2.28 ).
12 3a 3b 4aHistopathology
4b 56
Bitewing 4 Naked eye
?
Cavity
Key to histopathologyWhite spot Naked eye
Spaces
1%
2-4%
5-25%
25%Demineralization
1
2
3
4Organic change
—
—
—
1Probe
Translucent zone
Dark zone
Body of lesion
Organic change
• Fig. 2.28 Schematic representation of developmental stages of enamel caries lesion correlated with
radiographic and clinical examination. Cavitation occurs late in development of the lesion. Before cavitation
remineralization is possible, lesion arrest is possible at any stage given the right conditions. (Redrawn
from Darling AI: The pathology and prevention of caries, Br Dent J : – , . Reproduced by
kind permission of the editor.)
It has been shown experimentally and clinically that initial
enamel caries lesions can remineralize20,21 whether the dentin is
involved or not. and list the characteristics of
enamel at various stages of demineralization. Initial, noncavitated
enamel lesions retain most of the original crystalline framework
of the enamel rods, and the etched crystallites serve as nucleating
agents for remineralization. Calcium and phosphate ions from
64 CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management
Clinical Signiicance of Enamel Lesions
Bioilm Enamel StructureNonrestorative, Therapeutic
Treatment (e.g., Remineralization,
Antimicrobial, pH control) Restorative Treatment
Normal Enamel Normal Normal Not indicated Not indicated
Hypocalciied Enamel Normal Abnormal, but not weakened Not indicated Only for esthetics
Noncavitated Caries Cariogenic Porous, weakened Yes Not indicated
Active Caries Cariogenic Cavitated, very weak Yes Yes
Inactive Caries Normal Remineralized, strong Not indicated Only for esthetics
saliva can penetrate the enamel surface and precipitate on the
highly reactive crystalline surfaces in the enamel lesion. The
supersaturation of saliva with calcium and phosphate ions serves
as the driving force for the remineralization process. Ar tiicial and
natural caries lesions of human enamel have been shown to regress
to earlier histologic stages after exposure to conditions that promote
remineralization. he presence of trace amounts of luoride ions
during this remineralization process greatly enhances the precipita -
tion of calcium and phosphate, resulting in the remineralized enamel
becoming more resistant to subsequent caries activity because of
the incorporation of more acid-resistant luorapatite ( Fig. 2.29 ).
Remineralized (arrested) lesions may be observed clinically as either
intact, smooth white lesions or discolored, usually brown or black,
spots ( Fig. 2.30 ). he change in color is presumably caused by
trapped organic debris and metallic ions within the enamel. hese
discolored, remineralized, arrested caries lesion areas are more
resistant to subsequent caries activity than the adjacent unafected
enamel. hey should not be restored unless they are esthetically
objectionable.
Cavitated enamel lesions can be initially detected as subtle
breakdown of the enamel surface. hese lesions are very sensitive
12 34 50Tooth
resistanceLocal mechanism of enamel adaptation to the cariogenic challengeSaliva-biofilm substrate activity
Mineralization cariogenic challengeMineralization-demineralization cycles
• Fig. 2.29 Diagrammatic representation of enamel adaptation reaction.
Enamel interacts with its luid environment in periods of undersaturation
and supersaturation, presented here as periodic cycles. Undersaturation
periods dissolve most soluble mineral at the site of cariogenic attack,
whereas periods of supersaturation deposit most insoluble minerals if their
ionic components are present in immediate luid environment. As a result,
under favorable conditions of remineralization, each cycle could lead
toward higher enamel resistance to a subsequent challenge. (Redrawn
from Koulouirides T: In Menaker L, editor: The biologic basis of dental
caries , New York, , Harper & Row.)to probing and can be easily enlarged by using sharp explorers
and excessive probing force. More advanced cavitated enamel lesions
are more obviously detected as enamel breakdown. Although
theoretically any caries lesion given the right conditions can be
arrested and have their progression to larger lesions forestalled,
once cavitation occurs removal of the bioilm is more diicult and
many will require a sealant or restorative intervention. When the
tooth surface cavitates, a more retentive site becomes available to
the bioilm community. he cavitation of the tooth surface produces
a synergistic acceleration of the growth of the cariogenic bioilm
community and the expansion of the demineralization with ensuing
expanded cavitation. his sheltered, highly acidic, and anaerobic
environment provides an ideal niche for cariogenic bacteria. his
situation results in a rapid and progressive destruction of the tooth
structure.
Dentin Carie Leion
An understanding of the dentin composition and histology is helpful
to understand the histopathology of dentin caries lesions (see
Chapter 1 ; Fig. 2.31 ). Progression of dental caries in dentin is
diferent from progression in enamel because of the structural
diferences of dentin ( Figs. 2.32, 2.33, and 2.34 ; see also Fig.
2.31). Dentin contains much less mineral and possesses microscopic
tubules that provide a pathway for the ingress of bacteria and
egress of minerals.
When enamel demineralization advances to the DEJ, r apid
lateral expansion of the caries lesion along the DEJ may occur if
there is bacterial contamination. his process is still poorly under -
stood, but it likely occurs only when there is enamel cavitation.
For many years this “lateral spread” has been attributed to the
DEJ’s lower mineral content compared to primary dentin. More
recently, it has been shown that a high concentration of MMPs
is found at the DEJ. MMPs are implied in dentin caries lesion
progression, although this may be a host defense mechanism and
not necessarily linked to an increase in caries susceptibility. What
is known is that the increased susceptibility to demineralization
observed at the DEJ on lesions that have reached dentin is a result
of bacterial metabolic activity within the dentinal lesion. -
Increasing demineralization of the body of the enamel lesion
results in the weakening and eventual collapse of the surface enamel.
he resulting cavitation provides an even more protective and
retentive habitat for the cariogenic bioilm, accelerating the progres -
sion of the lesion. he DEJ provides less resistance to the carious
process than either enamel or dentin. he dentin contamination
by bacterial metabolites leads to the lateral spread of the lesion at
CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management 65
Arrested
caries
Radiographic
burnoutStained
A
C
EB
D
• Fig. 2.30 A and B, Example of arrested caries lesion on the mesial surface of a mandibular second
molar. The area below the proximal contact (A and B, mirror view of tooth No. 18) is partly opaque and
stained. Clinically the surface is hard and intact, yet the area is more radiolucent than the enamel above
or below the stain. C and D, In a different clinical case, caries diagnosis based only on the radiograph
would lead to a false-positive diagnosis (i.e., caries lesion present when it is not). The radiolucency is
caused by the broad area of subsurface demineralization that extends from the facial to the lingual line
angles. The x-ray beam was directed parallel to the long axis of demineralization and consequently pro -
duced a sharply demarcated zone of radiolucency in the enamel. This example illustrates the shortcomings
of radiographic diagnosis. Were there not visual access to the mesial surface of the second molar, it
would be easy to diagnose active caries incorrectly and consequently restore the tooth. E, Cavitated
inactive (arrested) enamel caries lesion on the cervical one third of a central incisor of a 27-year-old patient
with low caries risk. This lesion, if not esthetically offensive, does not require a restoration and should be
monitored.
the DEJ, producing the characteristic second cone of caries activity
in dentin (see Figs. 2.16 and 2.22). Figs. 2.31 , 2.35, 2.36, 2.37,
and 2.38 illustrate advanced lesions with soft, infected dentin.
Because of these characteristics, dentin caries is V shaped in cross
section with a wide base at the DEJ and the apex directed pulpally.
Caries lesions advance more rapidly in dentin than in enamel
because dentin provides much less resistance to acid demineralization
owing to less mineralized content and the presence and orientation
of the dentinal tubules.
he dental caries process produces a variety of responses in
dentin including pain, sensitivity, demineralization, and remineralization. Often pain is not reported even when caries
lesions invade dentin except when deep lesions bring the bacterial
infection close to the pulp. Episodes of short-duration pain may
be felt occasionally during earlier stages of dentin caries lesion
progression. he pain is caused by stimulation of pulp tissue by
the rapid movement o f luid through the dentinal tubules that
have been opened to the oral environment by cavitation. When
bacterial invasion of the dentin is close to the pulp, toxins and
possibly a few bacteria enter the pulp, resulting in inlammation
of the pulpal tissues, increased pulpal pressure, and thus pulpal
pain.
66 CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management
A
BOdontoblast Tubulea
12 3b
• Fig. 2.31 Normal and carious dentin. A, Normal dentin has character -
istic tubules that follow a wavy path from the external surface of dentin,
below enamel or cementum, to the inner surface of dentin in the pulp
tissue of the pulp chamber or pulp canal. Dentin is formed from the exter -
nal surface and grows inward. As dentin grows, odontoblasts become
increasingly compressed in the shrinking pulp chamber, and the number
of associated tubules becomes more concentrated per unit area. The
more recently formed dentin near the pulp (a) has large tubules with little
or no peritubular dentin and calciied intertubular dentin illed with collagen
ibers. Older dentin, closer to the external surface (b), is characterized by
smaller, more widely separated tubules and a greater mineral content in
intertubular dentin. The older dentin tubules are lined by a uniform layer
of mineral termed peritubular dentin . These changes occur gradually from
the inner surface to the external surface of the dentin. Horizontal lines
indicate predentin; diagonal lines indicate increasing density of minerals;
darker horizontal lines indicate densely mineralized dentin and increased
thickness of peritubular dentin. The transition in mineral content is gradual,
as indicated in Fig. 2.25 . B, Carious dentin undergoes several changes.
The most supericial infected zone of carious dentin (3) is characterized
by bacteria illing the tubules and granular material in the intertubular
space. The granular material contains very little mineral and lacks charac -
teristic cross-banding of collagen. As bacteria invade dentinal tubules, if
carbohydrates are available, they can produce enough lactic acid to
remove peritubular dentin. This doubles or triples the outer diameter of
the tubules in infected dentin zone. Pulpal to (below) the infected dentin
is a zone where the dentin appears transparent in mounted whole speci -
mens. This zone (2) is the advancing demineralization front, affected
carious dentin, and is characterized by loss of mineral in the intertubular
and peritubular dentin. Many crystals can be detected in the lumen of the
tubules in this zone. The crystals in the tubule lumen render the refractive
index of the lumen similar to that of the intertubular dentin, making the
zone transparent. Normal dentin (1) is found pulpal to (below) transparent
dentin.
• Fig. 2.32 Cross section of demineralized specimen of advanced caries
in dentin. Reparative dentin (A) can be seen adjacent to the most advanced
portion of lesion. (From Boyle P: Kornfeld’s histopathology of the teeth
and their surrounding structures , Philadelphia, , Lea & Febiger.)
Bacterial biofilm
Zone 1: Hard Dentin
(Reparative dentin)Zone 2: Firm Dentin
(Affected dentin/
inner carious dentin)Zone 3: Soft Dentin
(Infected dentin/
outer carious dentin)
• Fig. 2.33 Cross section of occlusal caries. The occlusal enamel
appears intact, with a small opening in the occlusal issure. Enamel is
darkened where it is undermined by demineralization. The surface of
enamel may not be clinically cavitated, but usually some discoloration is
observed at the entrance of the issure. The lesion is illed with a bacterial
plug containing high numbers of MS and lactobacilli. When there is a break
in the enamel, the dentin underneath the enamel will be highly contami -
nated below the plug. Deeper dentin is not as heavily contaminated but
is extensively demineralized. Reparative dentin is being formed below the
lesion.
he pulp–dentin complex reacts to caries activity by attempting
to initiate remineralization and blocking of the open tubules. hese
reactions result from odontoblastic activity and the physical process
of demineralization and remineralization. he pulp–dentin complex
reaction occurs even before the lesion has reached the dentin.
Dentin can react defensively (by repair) to low-intensity and
moderate-intensity caries lesion progression as long as the pulp
remains vital and has adequate blood circulation. Dentin reaction
can happen through remineralization of intertubular dentin and apposition of peritubular dentin or by reparative dentin, as described
in the next paragraphs.
In slowly advancing caries lesions, a vital pulp can repair
demineralized dentin by remineralization of the intertubular dentin
and by apposition of peritubular dentin. Initial stages of caries
lesions or mild caries activity produce long-term, low-level acid
demineralization of dentin. Direct exposure of the pulp tissue to
microorganisms is not a prer equisite for an inlammatory response.
Toxins and other metabolic by-products, especially hydrogen ion,
CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management 67
• Fig. 2.34 A cross section of a caries lesion in dentin and the histologic and clinical manifestations
(adapted from Ogawa et al, ). The most supericial outer layer of dentin is heavily contaminated,
necrotic, with irreversible demineralization and denatured collagen ibers. Clinically this is very soft, wet
dentin. This soft, contaminated layer gets progressively harder as the dentin approaches the pulp. The
still demineralized dentin (formerly affected dentin) can feel leathery to the touch or irm, but not as hard
as sound dentin or tertiary dentin (closest to the pulp, dentin formed in reaction to the caries process).
During caries excavation, the goal is to remove only the soft, outer carious dentin (infected dentin), while
the inner carious dentin (affected dentin) is remineralizable and can be maintained. (For orientation of
layers on tooth, see Fig 2.35 .) (Modiied from Ogawa K, Yamashita Y, Ichijo T, et al: The ultrastructure
and hardness of the transparent layer of human carious dentin. J Dent Res 62(1):7–10, .)
C
B
A
• Fig. 2.35 A, Rampant caries in a preschool child. B, Rampant
caries in a school-age child. C, Rampant caries in an adult. (A, From
Dean JA, Avery DR, McDonald RE: McDonald and Avery’s dentistry
for the child and adolescent , ed 9, St Louis, , Mosby.)
can penetrate via the dentinal tubules to the pulp. Even when the
lesion is limited to enamel, the pulp can be shown to respond
with inlammatory cells.22,23 Dentin responds to the stimulus of
its irst caries demineralization episode by deposition of crystalline
material from the intertubular dentin in the lumen of the tubules
in the advanced demineralization front (formally called afected
dentin) (see Figs. 2.31 and 2.34). he refractive index of the dentin
changes and the intertubular dentin with more mineral content than normal dentin is termed sclerotic dentin . he apparent function
of the sclerotic dentin is to wall of a lesion by blocking (sealing)
the tubules. he permeability of sclerotic dentin is greatly reduced
compared with that of normal dentin because of the decrease in
the tubule lumen diameter.24 Hypermineralized areas may be seen
on radiographs as zones of increased radiopacity (often S shaped,
following the course of the tubules) ahead of the advancing, infected
portion of the lesion. Sclerotic dentin formation may also be seen
A B
D C
Dark areas indicate caries
• Fig. 2.36 Rampant caries in a 21-year-old man. Although occlusal and interproximal lesions exist in
the patient, the progress of the occlusal lesions produced the most tooth destruction. The potential for
developing occlusal lesions could have been reduced by earlier application of sealants. This extensive
amount of caries was the result of the patient’s excessive fear of bad breath. In an attempt to keep his
breath smelling fresh, he kept sugar-containing breath mints in his mouth most of the day. (Dark areas in
B and D indicate caries.)
• Fig. 2.37 Acute, rampant caries in both anterior (A) and posterior (B)
teeth.
• Fig. 2.38 Advance cavitated active caries lesions on a 35-year-old
patient with high caries risk. (Courtesy Dr. Ayesha Swarn, DDS, Operative
Dentistry Graduate Program at UNC School of Dentistry.)
CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management 69
under an old restoration. Sclerotic dentin is usually shiny and
darker in color but feels hard to the explorer tip. By contras t,
normal, freshly cut dentin lacks a shiny, r elective surface and
allows some penetration from a sharp explorer tip. his repair by
sclerotic dentin occurs only if the tooth pulp is vital.
When these afected tubules become completely occluded by the
mineral precipitate, they appear clear when a histologic section of
the tooth is evaluated. his portion of dentin has been termed
translucent dentin (see Zones of Dentinal Caries Lesions) and is the
result of mineral loss in the intertubular dentin and precipitation
of this mineral in the tubule lumen. Consequently, translucent dentin
is softer than normal dentin (see Fig. 2.34 )25 and is called “irm”
(afected) dentin, in contrast to sound dentin that is “hard” dentin.
More intense caries activity results in bacterial i nvasion of dentin.
he most supericial (closer to the tooth surface) zone of the carious
dentin is the necrotic zone. his very soft (infected) dentin contains
a wide variety of pathogenic materials or irritants, including high
acid levels, hydrolytic enzymes, bacteria, and bacterial cellular
debris. hese materials can cause the degeneration and death of
odontoblasts and their tubular extensions below the lesion and a
mild inlammation of the pulp. he pulp may be irritated suiciently
from high acid levels or bacterial enzyme production to cause the
formation (from undiferentiated mesenchymal cells) of replacement
odontoblasts (secondary odontoblasts). hese cells produce r eparative
dentin (reactionary or tertiary dentin) on the afected portion of
the pulp chamber wall (see Figs. 2.31B and 2.33). his dentin is
diferent from the normal dentinal apposition that occurs throughout
the life of the tooth by primary (original) odontoblasts. he structure
of reparative dentin varies from well-organized tubular dentin (less
often) to very irregular atubular dentin (more often), depending
on the severity of the stimulus. Reparative dentin is an efective
barrier allowing limited difusion of material through the tubules
and is an important step in the repair of dentin. Severe stimuli
also can result in the formation within the pulp chamber of unattached dentin, termed pulp stones , in addition to reparative dentin.
he success of dentinal reparative responses, either by remineraliza -
tion of intertubular dentin and apposition of peritubular dentin or
by reparative dentin, depends on the severity of the caries challenge
and the ability of the pulp to respond. he pulpal blood supply
may be the most important limiting factor to the pulpal responses.
Acute, rapidly advancing caries lesions with high levels of acid produc -
tion overpower host defenses of the pulp and result in infection,
abscess, and death of the pulp. Compared with other oral tissues,
the pulp is poorly tolerant of inlammation. Small, localized infections
in the pulp produce an inlammatory response involving capillary
dilation, local edema, and stagnation of blood low. Because the
pulp is contained in a sealed chamber, and its blood is supplied
through narrow root canals, any stagnation of blood low can result
in local anoxia and necrosis. he local necrosis leads to more inlam -
mation, edema, and stagnation of blood low in the immediately
adjacent pulp tissue, which becomes necrotic in a cascading process
that rapidly spreads to involve the entire pulp.
Maintenance of pulp vitality depends on the adequac y of pulpal
blood supply. Recently erupted teeth with large pulp chambers
and short, wide canals with large apical foramina have a much
more favorable prognosis for surviving pulpal inlammation than
fully formed teeth with small pulp chambers and small apical
foramina.
Zones of Dentin Caries Lesions
Although enamel and dentin have distinct characteristics, the
reaction observed in dentin is a direct response of the pulp to external insults to the enamel. Since enamel is a microporous
solid, stimuli in the tooth surface are transmitted to the pulp. he
irst defense of the pulp is tubular sclerosis, which consists of
mineral deposition in the peritubular dentin and in the dentinal
tubule’s lumen. Wear and age can also cause tubular sclerosis. his
process only occurs in vital pulps. Caries progression in dentin
proceeds through three changes: (1) Weak organic ac ids demineralize
dentin and expose its organic matrix; (2) the organic matrix of
dentin, particularly collagen, is denatured and degraded; and (3)
the loss of matrix structural integrity is followed by invasion of
bacteria. hree diferent zones of dentin have been described in
moderate and advanced caries lesions (see Figs. 2.33 and 2.35):
• Soft Dentin (formerly infected dentin). Also called outer carious
dentin , soft (infected) dentin is primarily characterized by
bacterial contamination. his is the carious dentin closer to the
tooth surface, characterized by the presence of bacteria, low
mineral content, and irreversibly denatured collagen. Histologi -
cally this zone may be referred to as necrotic and contaminated .
While soft dentin typically does not self-repair, the advance
front of the soft dentin zone (near irm dentin) is characterized
by supericial bacterial invasion and the caries process can still
be stalled when a good restorative seal is obtained. Clinically,
soft dentin lacks structure and can be easily excavated with
hand and rotary instrumentation.
• Firm Dentin (formerly a fected dentin). Also called inner
carious dentin , irm (afected) dentin is primarily characterized
by demineralization of intertubular dentin and of initial forma -
tion of intratubular ine crystals at the advancing front of the
caries lesion . As the tubule lumen becomes illed with minerals
it will give a “transparent” appearance in a section observed in
a light microscope. Histologically this zone may be referred to
as demineralized. Because of the caries demineralization process,
irm dentin is softer than hard, normal dentin. Although organic
acids attack the mineral and organic contents of dentin, the
collagen cross-linking remains intact in this zone and can serve
as a template for remineralization of intertubular dentin.
herefore, provided that the pulp remains vital, irm (afected)
dentin is remineralizable. Clinically, irm dentin is resistant to
hand excavation and can only be removed by exerting pressure.
he transition between soft and irm dentin can have a leathe ry
texture, particularly in slowly advancing lesions, and has been
called leathery dentin . Clinically, leathery dentin does not deform
upon pressure from an instrument but can be excavated with
hand instruments such as spoons and curette without much
pressure.
• Hard Dentin. Hard dentin represents the deepest zone of a
caries lesion—assuming the lesion has not yet reached the
pulp—and may include tertiary dentin , sclerotic dentin, and
normal (or sound) dentin. Clinically this dentin is hard, cannot
be easily penetrated with a blunt explorer, and can only be
removed by a bur or a sharp cutting instrument. (See deinitions
in Box 2.1 for histologic characteristics of hard, tertiary, and
sclerotic dentin.)
hese dentin caries zones are most clearly distinguished in slowly
advancing lesions. In rapidly progressing caries lesions (see Figs.
2.36, 2.37, and 2.38 ), the diference between the zones becomes
less distinct.
Carie Rik Aement and Management
Although it is very important to detect caries lesions, caries detection
and caries diagnosis are not exclusively a tooth-centered process.
70 CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management
lesions being detected for the patient over the last 2 to 3 years
along with past history of caries lesions in the patient’s
lifetime.39
Historically, dentistry has used a surgical model for dental caries
management, which mainly contemplated the biomechanical
excision (removal, excavation) of caries lesions and the restoration
of the resultant tooth preparation to form and function with a
restorative material. Management of caries disease by a surgical
model consisted of detecting cavitations and “treating” them with
excavation and restorations. Eventually it became apparent that
dealing only with the end result of the disease and not addressing
its etiology for each individual patient was not successful in control -
ling the caries disease process. Since surgical management alone
was not successful, a system has been developed using caries
management strategies. his system looks at individualized caries
risk assessments and uses this information to design treatment
plans according to the risk assessment indings. hese assessments
look at each patient’s unique set of pathologic and protective factors.
Caries management by risk assessment (CAMBRA) represents a
management philosophy that manages the caries disease process
using a medical model. his process provides an individualized
evaluation of a patient’s pathologic factors and protective factors
and assesses the patient’s risk for developing future disease. he
risk assessment is then used to develop an individualized evidencebased caries management plan that involves aspects of nonsurgical
therapeutics and dental surgical interventions. Both risk assessment
and patient-centered interventions are based on the concept of
caries balance as discussed earlier in this chapter (see Fig. 2.1 ).
he caries balance model is based on minimizing pathologic factors
while maximizing protective factors to attain a balance that favors
no disease occurring, or health. With the use of CAMBRA for
patient management, mounting evidence suggests that early damage
to teeth may be reversed and that the incidence of disease manifesta -
tions can be signiicantly reduced or prevented. CAMBRA is a
concept that has gained interest in the United States, and is evolving
into the standard of care in caries management.4,41, , Additionally,
the International Caries Classiication and Management System
(ICCMS) - has endeavored to merge caries detection and
assessment with an individualized management plan. Another caries
risk assessment method that has been validated for children is the
Cariogram. ,
Carie Rik Aement
he clinical examination process for diagnosis and detection of
caries lesions is discussed in detail in Chapter 3 . he caries risk
assessment is an important part of this overall process of patient
care. he clinician must gather all appropriate data from both the
interview with the patient and the clinical examination for caries
detection to formulate an individualized caries risk assessment.
Part of the caries risk assessment identiies the risk (causative)
factors, but does not predict the caries outcome. Risk factors can
exist for a patient without the disease being expressed at the time
of the examination. he predictive model part of the risk assessment
looks at the assessment of caries progression in the future. Risk
factors are associated with the variables that have value for prediction
purposes, which means that the risk factor is present before the
disease occurs. As discussed, risk indicators are existing signs of
the disease process. hey are examples of what is happening with
the patient’s current state of oral health, not how disease occurred.
Risk indicators are clinical observations and detection modalities
used to identify risk-level status. Examples include visible cavitations It is critical to remember that clinicians treat the entire patient
and not just individual teeth and caries lesions. As noted earlier
in this chapter, dental caries is a multifactorial medical disease
process, and the caries lesions are the expression of a disease process
that involves the patient as a whole. Equally important in the
management of the caries disease is the ability to individualize
caries diagnosis and treatment or interventions for each patient.
To do this, the clinician must formulate a caries risk assessment
proile that is based on the individual patient’s current risk factors
and risk indicators. A risk factor is deined as an environmental,
behavioral, or biologic factor that directly increases the probability
that a disease will occur and the absence or removal of which
reduces the possibility of disease.37,38 Risk factors are part of the
causal chain of the disease process, or they expose the host to the
causal chain; but once the disease occurs, removal of a risk factor
may not always result in the disease process being halted. Any
deinition of risk factor must clearly establish that the exposure
has occurred before the outcome or before the conditions are
established that make the outcome likely. his means that longi -
tudinal studies are necessary to demonstrate risk factors. Terms
such as risk indicators and risk markers are also used in the caries
literature to refer to risk factors, putative risk factors, or something
else entirely. Risk indicators may refer to existing signs of the disease
process, or signs that the disease process has occurred, but are not
part of the disease causal chain. For example, exis ting caries lesions
would be risk indicators, as they indicate a risk status, but are not
per se part of the causal chain so they are not risk factors. Multiple
risk factors (and indicators) have been studied, reviewed, and
validated in the assessment of risk for development of future caries
disease, but caries risk assessment is not an exact science. Because
caries is a complex multifactorial disease, no single risk factor (or
indicator, or marker) is highly predictive of future caries. However,
caries risk assessment is necessary to identify what (if any) interven -
tions are needed to lower the patient’s caries risk and activity—which
is the ultimate goal of caries management when using the medical
model.39,40 A discussion of diferent risk factors will be included
in this section of the chapter.
Caries risk assessments are speciic for adults and adolescents
older than 6 years and for children under 6 years of age. It is very
important to spend time with the patient to uncover all relevant
risk factors and indicators currently present. Some risk and protective
factors can be adjusted and modiied by either the patient or the
clinician, such as sucrose intake and luoride exposure; other risk
factors are not easily modiiable, such as hyposalivation as the
result of a needed medication or an existing condition such as
Sjögren syndrome. Understanding and controlling risk factors and
protective factors can be very important in the prevention of new
caries lesion formation and to slow or arrest the progression of
existing caries lesions.
No consensus exists on exactly how to deine the risk categories
for caries risk assessments. Examples of terms used to describe risk
assessment are “at risk,” “low risk,” “medium risk,” “high risk,”
and “extreme risk.” Assignment of these terms is typically based
on the subjective judgment of the clinician with general rules
applied, based on the clinician’s previous clinical experiences and
training. If a clinician inds no detectable or active caries lesions
and minimum or no identiiable risk factors, that patient would
be assigned a low caries risk . In this situation, in the current state
of the patient’s health, the protective factors for not developing
caries lesions outweigh the risk factors that could lead to new
caries lesions. he strongest predictor for caries risk for patients
in the at-risk and high-risk categories are the number of caries
CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management 71
in pits and issures or in proximal surfaces of teeth, brown spots,
active initial lesions, or cavitated lesions on free smooth surfaces,
as well as any restorations in the past 3 years. he ideal caries risk
assessment method should be inexpensive and easy to use but at
the same time have high predictive value. It should be valuable in
decision making for caries management in the use of nonsurgical
therapeutics and surgical interventions that serve the patient in a
cost-efective and health-promoting manner.
One of the roles of caries risk assessment in caries management
is to assist in determining the current caries lesion activity. Caries
lesions may be detected signiicantly before frank cavitation occurs.
he diagnosis of caries lesions should include whether they are
actively progressing. An inactive lesion may be visible clinically or
radiographically; however, it may not be active or progressing over
time. With a positive shift in protective factors, change in oral
hygiene, or reduction of pathologic factors, it is possible for caries
lesions to change in density, size, hardness, and clinical appearance.
hese inactive lesions are arrested and may not require operative
intervention. Assessment by the clinician of all the pathologic and
protective factors in the patient’s current history will greatly aid
in the decision regarding current activity. A thorough risk assessment
allows for a more predictive analysis of current and future disease
activity and assists in deciding on nonsurgical or surgical interven -
tions. Caries risk assessment helps the clinician to identify the
etiologic causes of the disease for a speciic patient at a speciic
point in time, and to determine the frequency and treatment
protocols for patient follow-up visits. Restorative decisions in terms
of material used and cavity preparation design are also inluenced
by the information gathered in the risk assessment process. he
data gathered establish an important baseline for use in future
reassessments to help the clinician and the patient measure the
efectiveness of the caries management treatment protocol used
for the patient. he systematic use of risk assessment proiles is
essential in uncovering risk factors that are present before disease
manifestation. his information may be useful in the prevention
of caries lesions in patients who have risk factors present but no
disease expression and then experience a lifestyle change that adds
additional risk factors. he new risk factors then b ecome a tipping
point for the caries balance equation toward disease expression.
For instance, a patient who frequently consumes high-sugar soft
drinks during the day (risk factor) suddenly is prescribed a
hyposalivation-inducing medication (additional risk factor) that
increases caries risk. he informed patient would have the option
of making the decision to eliminate a modiiable risk factor (soft
drinks) before expression of the disease and before the introduction
of the hyposalivation-inducing medication considering this risk
assessment.
he incorporation of risk assessments in routine patient care
and in each patient’s caries management program is necessary
because of the multifactorial nature of the caries disease. No one
factor is able to predict the probability of a patient developing
caries lesions. When developing a preventive and restorative caries
management plan, consideration of the whole patient is essential
to successful outcomes. In addition, recorded speciic risk assessment
proiles provide patients with an educational tool that empowers
them to be an important part of managing their disease. Finally,
risk assessments provide a means for both the clinician and the
patient to monitor and measure the proposed caries management
protocols over time and evaluate and adjust the protocols as needed.
Risk assessments lead to better treatment outcomes for patients.
Knowing certain factors pertaining to the patient’s history is
key in establishing a caries risk assessment. Factors that have been identiied as contributing to caries risk include age, gender, luoride
exposure, home care, smoking habits, alcohol intake, medications,
dietary habits, economic and educational status, and general health.
Increased smoking, alcohol consumption, use of medications, and
sucrose intake result in increased risk for caries development.42
Children and older adults have increased risks. Decreased luoride
exposure, lower economic status, and lower educational attainment
also increase risk. Poor general health also increases the risk. A
strong body of evidence suggests that past caries experience is the
best predictor of future caries activity.43 Information that is
important and obtained in the patient history interview would be
biologic and environmental factors that include, but are not limited
to, medical history including current and past diseases, current
medications, and history of hyposalivation from medications or
conditions; dental history including past history of dental caries,
dental phobias, and history of dental conditions; current home
care practices and how well this is done; current diet and exposure
to sucrose and other fermentable carbohydrates; and current
exposure to topical luoride products in toothpaste, mouth rinses,
and luoridated water supply. Some of these factors are explored
in more detail in the following sections.
Fig. 2.39A and B present two examples of caries risk assessment
forms that can be used as part of the initial caries diagnosis process;
Fig. 2.39C is an example of a caries assessment form that can be
used to facilitate communication of the indings with patients.
his latter caries assessment form is a useful tool to measure changes
and determine the efectiveness of caries management procedures.
All of these forms can be incorporated into an electronic patient
management system for increased eiciency.
Social, Economic, and Education Status
Social status and economic status are not directly involved in the
disease process but are important because they afect the expression
and management of the caries disease. he socioeconomic status
and educational status of the patient have implications on the
necessary compliance and behavioral changes that can decrease
risk for caries development. Socioeconomic status and educational
status are predictive at the population level but are generally inac -
curate at the individual level.
Diet Analysis
Increased frequency of sugar intake in the form of fermentable
carbohydrates increases risk for caries by modifying the bioilm to
support a lower pH environment. he frequent use of candies and
lozenges during the day or night increases the risk. Sugar-containing
acidic beverages, including sport drinks, fruit juices, and soft drinks,
all contribute to increased risk. Frequent ingestion of fermentable
carbohydrates can change the microbiome proile of the bioilm
favoring acidogenic and aciduric bacteria and by inluencing the
pH of the bioilm to support cariogenic bacteria (see Fig. 2.4 ).
Salivary Analysis
Salivary low rate, bufering capacity, and pH all can be measured
by various methods (tests). he caries risk predictive value for these
tests is not fully demonstrated by strong evidence in all circum -
stances. Patients with normal salivary low and adequate bufering
capacity may still develop and/or have caries. However, when
patients have dry mouth symptoms and a salivary low analysis
leads to a diagnosis of hyposalivation, the decreased salivary low
is a predictive risk factor for root caries in older patients with
recession and for increased caries in general in other populations.
As discussed, saliva has numerous efects in protection against
72 CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management
A
• Fig. 2.39 A, Example of a caries risk assessment form recommended by the American Dental Asso -
ciation. B, Example of a caries risk assessment form used by the University of North Carolina, Department
of Operative Dentistry. C, Another caries assessment form used by the University of North Carolina,
Department of Operative Dentistry. This form is very useful for patient communication and compliance.
(A, Copyright , the American Dental Association.)
CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management 73
Caries Risk Initial Assessment Risk Low Ri sk At Risk High Risk
Name__________________________________ _
Risk Rating Scor e £ 3≥4 and £8 ≥9
Date___________________________________ _
Patient In terview Assessment
Dental History Risk Rating
1. Had non emerge ncy dental care in last year yes no -1
2. Brushes te eth at least tw ice daily yes no -3
3. Us es fluoridated toothpaste or product daily yes no -3
4. New caries lesions within the last 3 year s yes no 8
5. Patient has teeth sensitive to hot, cold, sw eets yes no 3
6. Patient avoids br ushing any part of mouth yes no 3
Dietary Assessmen t
1. Water supply currently fluoridated yes no -2
2. Freq uent snacking with sugary foods,
acidic foods, fe rmentabl e carb food s yes no 8
3. Sugary dr inks includ ing soft drinks,
juice, sports drinks, medicinal syrups yes no 8
4. Tobacco use of any kind yes no 3
5. Ex cessiv e alcoho l or recreational drug use yes no 8
6. Eating diso rders yes no 5
Xerostomia A ssessmen t
1. Patient is aware of dry mo uth or reduced saliva yes no 10
2. Medications taken that r educe sali vary flow yes no 8
3. Medical conditions affecting salivary flow /content yes no 8
4. Sa liva flow or cont ent visibl y abnor mal yes no 10
Patient Clinical A ssessm ent
Clinical Oral Findings
1. Read ily visi ble biof ilm/plaque yes no 5
2. Visibl e cavitated le sions yes no 10
3. Interpro ximal enamel lesions or ra diolucen cies yes no 10
4. Visibl e white spot s yes no 5
5. Visibl e brow n spots or non cavita ted ca ries le sions yes no 3
6. Deep pits or grooves yes no 5
7. Radi ographi c cavitated lesion s yes no 10
8. Res torations with overhangs
and/or marg in concerns or open contacts yes no 3
9. Prosthe sis ortho, fix ed, or removable yes no 3
10. Clini cian’s impressi on of patient’s risk low at risk high
Patient Compliance A ssessmen t
Patient’s attitude and general assessment of patient’s abilit y to comp ly for each of the foll owing cat egories:
Oral hygiene compliance patient limitation s yes no
Dietary recommendation patient limitation s yes no
Therapeutic home care products limitation s yes no
Special needs health care (physical or mental compliance issues) yes no
Patient Clinical In Office Tests Indicated From Risk Score
Cariscr een Meterc ompleted at risk low risk reading ______________ _
GC America Saliva Chec kc ompleted at risk low risk
GC America Strep Mutans complete d at risk low risk
GC America Plaque Indicator complete d at risk low risk
UNC Biologic Testing Lab complete d at risk low risk
Notes fr om oral finding s, patien t’s atti tude, office te sts, special circumstances that would influe nce caries risk or managementXerostomia Assessments with scor es of 8-10
indicate baseline salivary testing is requir ed
Clinical Assessments with scores of 10 indicate that baseline bacter ial testing is required
This is clinician’s asse ssment of any pe rceived
limitation s for t he patient to comply with oral hygiene, dietary, or using home care pro ducts. C ould
be lifestyle, physical, or economic reasons.
Describe in bo x below.Supplemental notes for dental histor y
Supplemental notes for dietar y assessment
This is clinician’s impre ssion of patient’s
risk if differ ent than w ould be indicate d by
risk factors ma rked. Describe in bo x below.Risk Rating Total =
B
• Fig. 2.39, cont’d Continued
74 CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management
Caries Assessment Testing Results PREPARED BY
________________________ .PREPARED FOR
Name ________________________
Date_ ________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________________________________
Your Risk Scores:
Your dental condition score is based on current areas of decay, number of cavities in
the last three years, exposed root surfaces, crowns and fillings that are defective. Your
score will also be higher if you wear partial dentures or other appliances. Existing Dental Conditions Risk predicts your likelihood of developing future disease. Green is lo w risk and means you are unlikely to develop a
cavity whereas red means you are very likely to develop a ca vity unless your risk factors are managed. We will use
these results to work with you to develop an individualized plan to control your disease.
Saliva Assessment Testing
Saliva pH Testing
>6.8 6.0-6.6 <5.8
Saliva Flow and Buffering Your saliva is the main protective factor in the caries risk disease state equation. Yellow
and Red results can produce an increased incidence of cavities. If the pH of the saliva
is low, it sets the stage for the bacteria to grow that cause cavities to form in your
mouth. If the quantity of the saliva is below normal, the healing ability of the saliva to
remineralize your teeth after acidic food and beverages is greatly reduced. This can, in
most incidences, result in a dry mouth that is uncomfortable when eating and lead to an
increase in cavities on the roots and other surfaces of your teeth. Any change in saliva
content, amount, or pH can increase your risk for cavities to form even if you have not
had cavities in the past. New medications and medical conditions can cause your saliva to change rapidly.
Plaque pH Testing
Biofilm Activity >6.8 6.0-6.6 <5.8 Plaque or biofilm is the mass of bacteria that is always changing and clings to the surfaces of your teeth. Plaque is one of the main risk factors that result in cavities. For
plaque to produce the acid that dissolves your teeth and form cavities, it has to be in
an acidic state, or in other words, have a low pH. The more acidic, the more damage
that can result. The type of bacteria in the plaque also influences how easy it is for the
damage to occur. The biofilm activity measures the amount of the “bad” bacteri a
present in the plaque. The higher the number, the more bacteria are present that cause
the cavities to form. The amount of plaque on your teeth means more bacteria are
present in your mouth. More bacteria produce higher amounts of acid to demineralize
your teeth and cause them to decay. < - >
Visible Plaque
Low High
Dietary Habits Plaque Assessment Testing
Frequency of Snacking
< 1 2-3 >3 A key factor in how you control your disease and prevent cavities is how you eat and
what beverages you consume. Snacking with sweet foods or high carbohydrate foods
that can form sugars causes the plaque to become acidic. This results in more bacteria
forming that produce even more acid. All of this acid dissolves your teeth and forms
the cavities. Sweetened drinks or drinks high in acid content also produce low pH
plaque and more bacteria. Soft drinks and sports drinks like Gatorade are very low in
pH. The more you drink, the more acid the plaque and bacteria produce to cause the
cavities in your teeth. Frequency of sweetened beverages and sport drinks
< 1 2-3 >3 Normal Abnormal
C
• Fig. 2.39, cont’d
CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management 75
surrogate measur e of caries activity has also not been identiied to
be a strong predictor of risk. Although these bacterial tests may
be useful for patient communication by providing insight into the
speciics of the bioilm (bacterial types and resultant environment),
the predictive value (for caries risk) of the evidence of the tests
requires further validation by controlled research studies.
Rik Aement Conideration for Children
Under 6 Year Old
In addition to all the above mentioned risk factors for adults and
adolescents, there are age-speciic risk factors and indicators that
should be considered for children under 6 years. hese include
presence of active caries in the primary caregiver in the past year,
feeding on demand past 1 year of age, bedtime bottl e or sippy
cup with anything other than water, no supervised brushing, and
severe enamel hypoplasia.
Carie Management and Protocol or Strategie
for Prevention
Caries risk assessment is only meaningful if used in conjunction
with a corresponding caries management program. he caries
prevention or management program should comprise a menu of
prevention therapies and interventions that should be recommended
on the basis of the level of caries risk ( and Box 2.2 ) and
address the patient’s risk factors. However, as discussed in the
previous section, no caries risk assessment system is perfect.
herefore, in addition to the outcome of the caries risk assessment
tool, the clinician needs to use his or her best clinical judgment,
coupled with the best available research evidence, to design a
preventive or therapeutic program that works for the patient.
Needless to say, this is a dynamic process, so monitoring and caries, including inhibition of bacteria, eliminating (clearing of)
bacteria from the tooth surface, dilution of bacter ial products,
bufering of bacterial acids, and ofering a reparative environment
with necessary calcium and phosphate minerals after bacteriainduced demineralization. Since all of these beneits are missing
when patients have salivary hypofunction, patients with “dry mouth”
are at higher risk for caries. hese patients are more susceptible to
dietary changes that are associated with lower pH foods and bever -
ages or foods and beverages containing fermentable carbohydrates,
since the protective factors of saliva are diminish ed in patients
with hyposalivation.
Dental Clinical Analysis (Dental Exam)
he dental examination identiies risk indicators more than risk
factors. his is important as many of the indicators are directly
related to the current caries activity. Risk indicators and current
caries activity drive the decision-making process toward the type
of intervention that the clinician would prescribe. Visible cavitated
caries lesions and active initial lesions on teeth are both indicators
of caries risk. Visible bioilm may also be considered a risk factor
for caries development. Other examination indings that would
inluence increased risk for caries are exposed root surfaces; deep
pits or grooves; ixed, removable prosthesis or orthodontic appliances
used; and existing restorations with open contacts, open margins,
rough surfaces, or overhangs.
Bacterial Bioilm Analysis
Use of supplemental tests to analyze the bacterial component of
the bioilm has little value to determine the patient’s risk level.
For example, the presence of MS or lactobacilli in saliva or plaque
as a sole predictor for caries in primary teeth has been shown to
have low sensitivity but high speciicity. he measurement of
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) activity of the bioilm bacteria as a
Suggested Risk-Based Interventions for Adultsa
Caries Risk Category Ofice-Based Interventions Home-Based Interventions
High
3-month recare examination and oral prophylaxis
Fluoride varnish at each recare visit
Individualized oral hygiene instructions and use of
specialized cleaning aids (e.g., powered
toothbrush, Waterpik)
Dietary counseling
Bitewing radiographs every 6–12 monthsbBrush with prescription luoride dentifrice (e.g., 1/1%/ ppm NaF)
Use sugar substitutes (e.g., xylitol, erythritol)
Apply calcium-phosphate compounds (e.g., MI Paste)
On selected cases use agents to modulate a dysbiotic microbiome
(e.g., xylitol gum or lozenge, chlorhexidine rinse). Use agents to
encourage a healthy microbiome (probiotics, prebiotics, like arginine)
If xerostomic, increase salivary function (e.g., xylitol gum, rinses, oral
moisturizers)
Moderate
4–6 month recare examination and oral prophylaxis
Fluoride varnish at each recall
Reinforce proper oral hygiene
Dietary counselingBrush with luoride dentifrice (e.g., ppm luoride)
OTC luoride rinse (e.g., 0.05% NaF)
Low
9–12 month recare examination and oral prophylaxis
Reinforce good oral hygieneBrush with luoride dentifrice
NaF, Sodium luoride; OTC, over the counter; ppm, parts per million.
aThese are general guidelines and should be customized based on the speciic patient’s needs and on weight of individual risk factors uncovered with a caries risk assessment instrument.
bData from US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Food and Drug Administration; and American Dental Association, Council on Dental Beneit Programs, Council on
Scientiic Affairs. The selection of patients for dental radiographic examinations. Rev. ed. .
Available at www.ada.org/prof/resources/topics/radiography.asp . Accessed January 20, .
Modiied from Shugars DA, Bader JD: MetLife quality resource guide: risk-based management of dental caries in adults, ed 3, Bridgewater, NJ, – , Metropolitan Life Insurance Co., p. 6.
76 CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management
1. A comprehensive oral and radiographic evaluation is conducted charting
caries lesions, periodontal pocket probing, existing restorations, and oral
cancer exam; the medical and dental histories are reviewed. In this
hypothetical patient, multiple caries lesions, poor oral hygiene, and
generalized marginal gingivitis are noted.
2. A caries risk assessment is completed with emphasis on discovering the
risk factors that are contributing to the causative aspect of the caries
problem and discovering the risk factors for the patient that are predictors
of future caries risk. A discussion of these risk factors with the patient is
essential for understanding of the caries disease process and the patient’s
role and the provider’s role in controlling the disease.
3. Diagnosis and treatment planning procedures are completed and
discussed with the patient.
4. Nonoperative and operative treatments will be completed in three phases:
(i) a control phase, (ii) a deinitive treatment phase, and (iii) a maintenance
reassessment phase.
5. CONTROL PHASE (2–4 weeks):
a. Oral hygiene procedures are explained and reviewed at each patient
visit. The frequency of the visits in this initial phase is determined by
severity of the disease. This could be weekly or more frequent,
depending on the provider’s evaluation. When attempting behavior
modiication, repetition is essential. Review of patient’s current home
care techniques and frequency of home care are reviewed along with
lifestyle issues that might impede compliance. Use of a powered
toothbrush and an oral irrigator for possibly improving patient
compliance and technique are discussed. Evaluation of the patient’s
motivation along with the person’s mental and physical capacity to
comply with recommendations for home care must be noted and
considered by the provider. Speciic recommendations are listed for the
patient to use at home, and the patient agrees that this is practical for
his or her life situation.
b. Prescription luoride toothpaste is prescribed ( parts per million
[ppm]) and the patient is instructed to brush with it three times per day
and to use according to given instructions (do not rinse after use, only
expectorate excess). Any products used for home care should be
carefully reviewed for the pH of the product. Products with pH lower
than 6 should be carefully considered whether their use would
contribute to the pH shift of the bioilm to pathologic for caries lesion
formation.
c. A diet analysis is completed, analyzed, and reviewed with the patient.
Cariogenic foods and beverages are identiied and alternatives
suggested. Also acidic foods and beverages that are contributing to the
pH shift to a lower oral pH environment are identiied and discussed.
Options for foods that have impact to raise the oral pH are suggested,
such as foods rich in arginine. Again the patient’s motivation and
abilities to it the necessary diet modiications into his or her lifestyle
must be evaluated and discussed.
d. A microbiologic survey may be completed for patient motivation. This
can be accomplished using either the adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
chairside device or formal saliva samples to identify speciic mutans
streptococci (MS) and lactobacilli counts.
e. A saliva analysis is conducted to determine stimulated low rate,
salivary pH and buffering capacity, and viscosity. Treatment protocols
for hyposalivation are recommended for patients with an analysis that
indicates deiciencies in the above areas. Patients with low salivary pH
would need to use baking soda rinses during the day and use xylitol
gum or other recommended products to raise pH levels, increase low,
and increase buffering capacity.
f. Caries control (described elsewhere in this chapter) is completed. This
may involve use of silver diamine luoride (SDF) for cavitated lesions or
partial caries removal and interim restoration of all cavitated caries
lesions (usually during one appointment and restoring with glass
ionomer) or a combination of both. This is critical to reduce the
bacterial load and prevent further progression on the lesion.Sample Preventive Protocol for a High-Risk Patient With Cavitated Caries Lesions • BOX 2.2
g. A prophylaxis is performed and 5% sodium luoride (NaF) varnish is
applied to all teeth.
h. If SDF is used, the lesion should be reassessed 1 to 2 weeks after irst
application to determine if it has arrested. If the lesion has not arrested
a new application of SDF is advised. Lesions that will not be restored
need to have a new SDF application every 6 months.
i. The microbiologic testing, if done, may be repeated 2 to 4 weeks after
initiation of treatment. A reduction in counts can be a great
motivational tool for patients to continue with their modiications in
behavior (diet or oral hygiene). Diet analysis is followed up and
reviewed again. Successes in diet modiications are positively
reinforced. Shortcomings in diet modiications are discussed and
options explored with the patient to rectify diet issues, where needed.
Home care regimens are reviewed again with patients and reined. It is
important to listen to the patient and work to incorporate diet and
home care into the patient’s lifestyle and abilities to mentally and
physically comply with the recommendations.
6. DEFINITIVE TREATMENT PHASE:
a. The glass ionomer provisional restorations are replaced (usually by
quadrants) with deinitive restorations.
b. Oral hygiene procedures are reinforced at each visit. Flossing and
brushing three times per day with prescription toothpaste is
recommended.
c. Patients with root caries may beneit from chewing xylitol chewing
gum with at least 1 gram of xylitol per piece three to six times per day,
preferably after meals and snacks.
d. Some patients with low salivary low or low salivary buffering capacity
may beneit from applying casein phosphopeptide–amorphous calcium
phosphates (CPP-ACP) to teeth after brushing and lossing prior to
retiring to bed.
e. If reduced salivary low rates are considered to be a major etiologic
factor, the patient should be instructed to chew sugar-free mints
several times a day or use other recommended products for
xerostomia treatment. Prescribing pilocarpine or other salivary
stimulant should be considered.
f. When all deinitive restorations are completed, the patient then enters
the maintenance reassessment phase.
7. MAINTENANCE REASSESSMENT PHASE:
a. The patient should be recalled every 3 months. Oral hygiene and home
care procedures are reviewed and evaluated. Recommendations for
improvement and modiications to home care are evaluated and
discussed.
b. Prophylaxis followed by luoride varnish application is accomplished.
c. Caries risk assessment is completed again; changes are noted in risk
factors that have been controlled and those risk factors still listed as
causative and predictive factors.
d. Diet analysis and recommendations from previous visits are reviewed
and evaluated.
e. Patient continues use of prescription -ppm toothpaste, CPP-ACP
paste, and xylitol chewing gum as advised. Any other recommendations
to changes or additions to the product protocols are reviewed,
discussed, and implemented.
f. Every 6 months, salivary evaluations are repeated. Microbiologic
evaluations may also be repeated to keep patient motivation.
g. Bitewing radiographs are taken on an annual basis or more frequently
if new lesions continue to be detected.
h. It is critical for the patient to understand that caries is a disease that is
only controlled and not “cured.” The protocol that is determined to be
currently successful may have to be periodically reviewed, updated,
and changed. More importantly, the patient will be much like a patient
with diabetes, requiring lifetime medication and therapy, diet control,
and lifestyle management for disease stability, and will need to be
dedicated to a lifetime of careful management of caries risk factors to
keep the disease controlled.
CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management 77
he e fectiveness of a patient’s immune system depends on over all
health status. Patients undergoing radiation or chemotherapy
treatment have signiicantly decreased immunocompetence and
are at risk for increased caries.
Medically compromised patients should be examined for changes
in the following: plaque index, salivary analysis, o ral mucosa, gingiva,
and teeth. Early signs of increased risk include increased bioilm;
pufy, bleeding gingiva; dry mouth with red, glossy mucosa; and
initial caries lesions on teeth. Decreased saliva low is common
during acute and chronic systemic illnesses and is responsible for
the dramatic increase in bioilm. Ambulatory patients with chronic
illnesses often take multiple medications, which individually or in
combination may reduce salivary low signiicantly (see ).
Saliva should be tested for low and bufering capacities when
signs or symptoms are detected from an oral examination.
Diet
Dietary sucrose has two important detrimental efects on how
bioilm afects caries. First, frequent ingestion of foods containing
sucrose provides a change in the bioilm proile from a noncariogenic
bioilm to a cariogenic bioilm. Second, mature bioilm exposed
frequently to sucrose rapidly metabolizes it into organic acids,
resulting in a profound and prolonged decline in pH. Caries activity
is most strongly stimulated by the frequency, rather than the
quantity, of sucrose ingested. he message that excessive and frequent
sucrose intake can cause caries has been widely disseminated and
is well known by laypeople. Despite this knowledge, dietary
modiication for the purpose of caries control has failed as a public
health measure. For an individual patient, dietary modiication
may be efective if the patient is properly motivated and supervised.
Evidence of new caries activity in adolescent and adult patients
indicates the need for dietary counseling. he goals of dietary
counseling should be to identify the sources of sucrose and acidic
foods in the diet and to reduce the frequency of ingestion of both.
Minor dietary changes such as substitution of sugar-fre e foods for
snacks are more likely to be accepted than more dramatic changes.
Rampant (or acute) caries (a rapidly developing process usually
involving several teeth) is a sign of gross dietary inadequacy, a periodic reassessment and reevaluation of the disease activity and
prevention or management program are critical.
Management of dental caries and its consequences remains the
predominant activity of dentists; however, preventive and diagnostic
services are increasing.44,45 Although these activities relate to a
variety of dental problems, diagnosis and prevention of caries are
major parts of these increases. In a modern practice model, the
restoration of a caries lesion can no longer be considered a cure
for dental caries. Rather, the practitioner must identify patients
who have active caries lesions and patients at high risk for caries
and institute appropriate preventive and treatment measures. his
section presents some measures that may reduce the likelihood of
a patient developing caries lesions. Depending on the risk status
of the patient and the risk factors at play for the speciic patient,
the dentist must decide which of these to institute. With this
paradigm shift, dentistry is focusing increasingly on limiting the
need for restorative treatment.
Preventive treatment methods are designed to limit tooth
demineralization caused by cariogenic bacteria, preventing initial
lesions and progression of initial lesions into cavitated lesions.
hese methods include (1) limiting pathogen growth and altering
metabolism of the bioilm, (2) increasing the resistance of the
tooth surface to demineralization, and (3) increasing bioilm pH.
A caries prevention and management program is a complex process
involving multiple interrelated factors ( Tables 2.8, 2.9, 2.10, and
2.11; see also and Box 2.2 ). he primary goals of a caries
prevention program are (1) to modulate the bioilm into a non -
pathogenic bioilm and (2) to create an environment conducive
to remineralization. Prevention should start with a consideration
to maintain the patient with a noncariogenic bioilm. Although
the general health of the patient, luoride exposure history, and
function of the immune system and salivary glands have a signiicant
impact on the patient’s caries risk, the patient may have little
control over these factors. he patient usually is capable of control -
ling other factors such as diet, oral hygiene, use of agents to modulate
the bioilm, and dental care (which may include use of sealants
and restorations). his section presents a variety of factors that
may have an impact on caries prevention.
General Health
he patient’s general health has a signiicant impact on overall
caries risk. Declining health signals the need for increased preventive
measures, including more frequent recalls. Every patient has an
efective surveillance and destruction system for “foreign” bacteria. Health History Factors Associated With
Increased Caries Risk
History Factor Risk-Increasing Observations
Age Childhood, adolescence, senescence
Fluoride exposure No luoride in public water supply
No luoride toothpaste
Smoking Risk increases with amount smoked
Alcohol Risk increases with amount consumed
General health Chronic illness and debilitation decreases
ability to give self-care
Medication Medications that reduce salivary lowClinical Examination Findings Associated
With Increased Caries Risk
Clinical Examination Risk-Increasing Findings
General appearance Appearance: sick, obese, or malnourished
Mental or physical
disabilityInability or unwillingness to comply with
dietary and oral hygiene instruction
Mucosal membranes Dry, red, glossy mucosa, suggesting
decreased salivary low
Active caries lesions Cavitation and softening of enamel and
dentin; circumferential chalky opacity at
gingival margins
Plaque bioilm High plaque scores
Gingiva Puffy, swollen, and inlamed gingiva; bleeds
easily
Existing restorations Large numbers, indicating past high caries
rate; poor quality, indicating increased
habitat for cariogenic organisms
78 CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management
Methods of Caries Treatment by the Medical Model
Method and Indications Rationale Techniques or Material
A. Limit Cariogenic Substrate
Indications :
Frequent sucrose exposure
Poor-quality dietReduce number, duration, and intensity of
acid attacks
Reduce selection pressure for mutans
streptococci (MS)Diet diary
Eliminate sucrose from between-meal snacks
Substantially reduce or eliminate sucrose from meals
B. Modify Microlora
Indications :
High MS counts
High lactobacilli countsModify a dysbiotic bioilm and encourage
a healthy bioilm Reduce overall bioilm
burden to improve gingival healthBactericidal mouthrinse (chlorhexidine)
Topical luoride treatments; probiotics and prebiotics
C. Disorganize Plaque Bioilm
Indications :
High plaque bioilm scores
Puffy red gingiva
High bleeding point scorePrevents plaque bioilm succession
Decreases plaque bioilm mass
Promotes bufferingBrushing
Flossing
Other oral hygiene aids as necessary (e.g., electric
toothbrush)
D. Modify Tooth Surface
Indications :
Noncavitated lesions
Surface rougheningIncrease resistance to demineralization
Decrease plaque bioilm retentionSystemic luorides
Topical luorides
Smooth surface
E. Stimulate Saliva Flow
Indications :
Dry mouth with little saliva
Red mucosa
Medication that reduces salivary lowIncreases clearance of substrate and acids
Promotes bufferingEat noncariogenic foods that require lots of chewing
Sugarless chewing gum
Medications to stimulate salivary low
Use dry mouth topical agents, oral lubricants, etc.
F. Seal Susceptible Surfaces
Indications :
Moderate and high caries risk individuals
Teeth with susceptible anatomy (deep
grooves)
Initial noncavitated enamel lesions in highrisk patients (smooth-surface sealants)Prevents colonization (infection) of
pit-and-issure system with cariogenic
plaque bioilm
Inhibits progression of smooth-surface
lesionUse pit-and-issure and smooth-surface resin
sealants
G. Restore Active Cavitated Surfaces
Indications :
Cavitated lesions
Defective restorationsEliminate nidus of cariogenic bioilm
Deny habitat for cariogenic bioilm
reinfectionApply SDF to caries lesions as indicated Restore all
cavitated lesions
Correct all defects (e.g., marginal crevices, proximal
overhangs)
Treatment Strategies
Examination Findings Nonrestorative, Therapeutic Treatment Restorative Treatment Follow-upa
Normal (no lesions) None None 1-year clinical examination
Hypocalciied enamel
(developmental white spot)None for nonhereditary lesions; hereditary
lesions (dentinogenesis imperfecta)
may require special managementTreatment is elective;
esthetics (restore
defects)1-year clinical examination
Noncavitated enamel lesions only;
bitewing radiographs indicated
(demineralized white spot)Techniques A–E in , as indicated Seal defective pits and
issures as indicated3 months; evaluate: oral lora,
mutans streptococci (MS)
counts, progression of white
spots, presence of cavitations
Possible cavitated lesions (active
caries) and other noncavitated
lesions present; bitewing
radiographs indicatedTechniques A–E in , as indicated Techniques F and G
(restorations, sealants)
in as
indicated3 months; evaluate: oral lora,
MS counts, progression of
white spots, presence of new
cavitations, pulpal response
Inactive caries; no active (new
cavitations) or noncavitated
lesionsNone Treatment is elective;
esthetics (restore
defects)1-year clinical examination
aThese are only generalized follow-up times. Particular circumstances may dictate shorter or longer follow-up intervals, depending on presence of primary and secondary modifying risk factors (see
Fig. 2.1 ).
CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management 79
Oral Hygiene
Bioilm-free tooth surfaces do not decay. Daily removal of bioilm
by dental lossing and tooth brushing with a luoridated toothpaste
is the best patient-based measure for preventing caries and peri -
odontal disease ( Figs. 2.40 and 2.41). Löe established supragingival
plaque as the etiologic agent of gingivitis.47 Longstanding gingivitis
may lead to damage of the epithelial attachment and progression
to more serious periodontal disease. Although plaque scores are
not reliable indicators of caries risk, the presence of bioilm over
a lesion may help assess lesion activity. , Efective bioilm control
by oral hygiene measures using a luoridated toothpaste results in
resolution of the gingival inlammation and remineralization of
any initially demineralized enamel surface.
Mechanical bioilm disorganization by brushing and lossing
has the advantage of not eliminating the normal oral lora. Topical
antibiotics may control oral bioilm, but long-term use predisposes
the host to infection by antibiotic-resistant pathogens such as
Candida albicans . Frequent mechanical bioilm removal does not
engender the risk of infection by opportunistic organisms; rather
it changes the species composition of bioilm in the selection for
pioneering organisms and the denial of habitat to potential
pathogens. he oral lora on the teeth of patients wit h good bioilm
control has a high percentage of S. sanguis or S. mitis and is much
less cariogenic than older, mature bioilm communities, which
have a signiicantly higher percentage of MS.
Krasse showed that a combination of oral hygiene an d diet
counseling is efective in children.48 In this classic study, children
in two schools were monitored for Lactobacillus levels. he children
in one school were given feedback about their Lactobacillus levels
and proper preventive oral hygiene and dietary instruction. After complete absence of oral hygiene practice, systemic illness, or a
combination of these pathologic factors. Rampant caries that is
present primarily on proximal surfaces may point more to diet as
the main driving factor, whereas rampant caries in the cervical
and interproximal areas may point to diet and hygiene as the
driving factors. he presence of rampant caries indicates the need
for comprehensive patient evaluation. Textbooks on dental caries,
nutrition, and medicine should be consulted as needed.
For high-risk patients, a formal diet analysis should routinely
be undertaken to identify cariogenic foods and beverages that are
frequently ingested. his analysis may take place by asking the
patient to recall everything that was ingested in the past 24 hours
(the “24-hour diet interview”). Alternatively, a more detailed diet
analysis may be facilitated by requesting the patient to record a
diet diary, which consists usually of a 5to 7-con secutive-day
period with 2 days surveyed being weekend days as patients’ diets
frequently change considerably on weekends. A form should be
provided to the patient that divides each day into six segments
(breakfast, morning, lunch, afternoon, dinner, and evening), and
the patient should be instructed to write down everything ingested,
including medications, the amount, and the time of consumption.
he diary is then analyzed by the dentist, and a discussion is held
with the patient to suggest appropriate alternatives.46 he dentist
should focus on type of cariogenic foods and time intervals between
their consumption as well as length of exposure of each cariogenic
episode. For example, if a patient were to record “10:00 AM 1
soda,” the dentist should clarify the type of soda consumed, the
quantity of soda, and the duration of time to inish the soda. An
8-oz glass of sugar-containing soda consumed over a 5-minute
period will have a diferent impact than a 20-oz glass sipped over
a 2-hour period.
A
CB
Dw
w
Caries
• Fig. 2.40 Erosion wear and poor home care leading to caries. A young female patient with severe
wear on the facial surfaces of posterior teeth. This patient subsequently was found to have a hiatal hernia
with frequent regurgitation of stomach acids. Too vigorous brushing and acid demineralization of teeth
accelerated the loss of tooth structure ( A and B). Areas of severe wear (w) exhibit dentin hypersensitivity.
Dentin pain was the symptom that caused the patient to seek dental care. Advising the patient to reduce
vigorous tooth brushing resulted in cessation of all brushing. Caries activity rapidly occurred ( C and D).
80 CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management
even only once every 2 weeks, dramatically reduces the development
of ne w caries lesions. here is little evidence that professional
prophylaxis at the usual 6-month intervals reduces dental caries
levels; therefore it is important to customize recall intervals to the
patient risk. Equal or greater reductions may be expected in patients
who practice pr oper oral hygiene methods for bioilm removal.
Another adjunct to regular brushing and lossing is the regular
use of electric toothbrushes and oral irrigation devices. A recent
study has demonstrated these devices are efective in the removal
of bioilm and, more importantly, change the composition of the
bioilm in a favorable direction when used regularly.50 Since most
patients are not very eicacious on judicious removal of bioilm,
brushing may be viewed more as a delivery mechanism for luoride.
Recommendations of brushing for at least 2 minutes and not
rinsing may increase compliance and improve outcomes. Addition -
ally, simple suggestions, like feeling tooth surfaces with the tongue
to assess if the bioilm was removed, may improve awareness and
assist in eicacy.
Fluoride Exposure
he highest level of evidence for caries prevention and reduction
supports the exposure of teeth to luoride. Fluoride in trace amounts
increases the resistance of tooth structure to demineralization and
is particularly important for caries prevention ( Fig. 2.42 ). When
luoride is available during cycles of tooth demineralization, it is
a major factor in reduced caries activity.51 Fluoride seems to be an
essential nutrient for humans and is required only in very small
quantities. Laboratory animals fed a completely luoride-free diet
develop anemia and reduced reproduction after four generations.
When available to humans, luoride produces spectacular decreases
in caries incidence. he availability of luoride for caries risk
reduction has primarily been achieved through the luoridation of 18 months, the children in the school receiving preventive counseling
had an average of 3.3 new restorations, whereas the control
schoolchildren, who received no counseling, averaged 8.2 new
restorations. his study is an excellent demonstration that good
oral hygiene and dietary improvements may be efective when
using microbiologic testing as a motivational tool.
Rigid oral hygiene programs should be prescribed only to
high-risk persons with evidence of active disease. Overzealous,
universal application of oral hygiene training programs is frustrating
to dentists and their patients. High-risk patients should receive
intensive oral hygiene training usually with a prescription-strength
luoridated toothpaste ( parts per million [ppm] F), dietary
instruction, and preventive dental treatment, as necessary, to control
the progress of disease. Adults with a low caries experience probably
require less frequency of daily lossing and brushing.
Bioilm control requires a little dexterity and a lot of motivation.
Some knowledge of tooth contours, embrasure form, proximal
contacts, and tooth alignment is helpful in optimal bioilm control.
Instruction should include the selection and use of mechanical
aids based on patient needs. Professional tooth cleanings can have
an important efect on caries reduction. One study divided grade
school students into three treatment groups: control, monthly
professional cleaning, and twice-a-month professional cleaning.49
In students with low MS levels, the once-a-month cleaning group
showed ~50% fewer new carious surfaces (0.8 surface s/student)
than the control group (1.8 surfaces/student). In the high MS
group, the control group had the most new caries (2.5 surfaces/
student), whereas the once-a-month cleaning group had similar
levels (0.96 surfaces/student) to the low MS group, and the twicea-month cleaning group had almost one tenth the number of new
lesions (0.34 surfaces/student) as the control group. his study
showed that professional bioilm removal on grade school students,
cc
A
CB
D
• Fig. 2.41 A and B, Photograph of the occlusal surfaces of the teeth illustrated in Fig. 2.40 . C and D,
After cessation of oral hygiene procedures, caries (c) rapidly developed in the exposed dentin and issures
on the occlusal surfaces. Caries was treated conservatively by excavation of softened dentin and restora -
tion of the excavations and issures with composite.
CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management 81
B111 sound
enamel74 93Age 8 Age 15Posteruptive changes in dental enamel:
the fate of Class V lesions
Sound enamel
37
15
26 72 White spot
4
9
19 19 Cavitated lesionA41 white
spots
32 cavitated
lesions
• Fig. 2.42 A, Initial (white spot) lesions of enamel (stage 3 in Fig. 2.28 ) may remineralize, remain
unchanged, or progress to cavitated lesions. In this study, done in a community with a luoridated public
water supply, only 9 of 72 noncavitated lesions became cavitated. More than half of noncavitated lesions
(37 of 72) regressed to become indistinguishable from normal enamel. B, White spot lesions of enamel
(stage 3 in Fig. 2.28 ) may remineralize, remain unchanged, or progress to cavitated lesions. A comparison
of a study done in a community with a luoridated public water supply published in (Backer Dirks,
) versus a study completed in a nonluoridated community published in (Ferreira Zandona et al,
). The study followed smooth surfaces (buccal) over a 7-year period. The followed
62, surfaces over a 4-year period, of those were buccal surfaces. In both studies only a very
small portion of sound surfaces cavitate (4% versus 1%–2%). Most initial lesions in enamel on smooth
surfaces will not progress to cavitation (only 13% progressed to cavitation in and only 10% in ).
When other surfaces are included the number of lesions that progress to cavitation more than double
(24%) but it still represents only one fourth of all initial lesions. On smooth surfaces even when enamel
cavities are considered, only 20% progress to cavitation exposing the dentin; and, when all surfaces are
included, 30% of enamel cavities do not progress to cavitations exposing the dentin. (A, Redrawn from
Backer Dirks O: Posteruptive changes in dental enamel. J Dent Res 45: – , .)
community water systems. Fluoride exposure may occur by means
of diet, toothpastes, mouth rinses, and professiona l topical applica -
tions. he optimal luoride level for public water systems is 0.7 mg
per liter of water.52 he percentage of the U.S. population with
public luoridated community water systems has increased from
62% ( million) in to 66% ( million) in 2 , to
69% ( million) in ,23,54 to 74% ( million) in .
Public water luoridation has been one of the most successful
public health measures instituted in the United States. For com -
munities that have luoridated water systems, the annual cost
averages about $0.70 per person.53 For every $1 spent on water
luoridation, $6 of health savings are realized. he U.S. Public
Health Service recommends 0.7 ppm of luoride in public water
programs to reap the beneits of water luoridation and reduce the
risk of luorosis. Excessive luoride exposure ( ≥10 ppm) results in
luorosis, which initially causes enamel to become white but may
eventually cause a brownish discoloration, a condition termed
mottled enamel .
Fluoride exerts its anticaries efect by three diferent mechanisms.
First, the presence of luoride ion greatly enhances the precipitation
into tooth structure of luorapatite from calcium and phosphate
ions present in saliva. his insoluble precipitate replaces the soluble
salts containing manganese and carbonate that were lost because
of bacteria-mediated demineralization. his exchange process results in the enamel becoming more acid resistant (see Fig. 2.29 ). Second,
initial caries lesions are remineralized by the same process. hird,
luoride has antimicrobial activity. In low concentr ations, luoride
ion inhibits the enzymatic production of glucosyltransferase.
Glucosyltransferase promotes glucose to form extracellular polysac -
charides, which increases bacterial adhesion. Intracellular polysac -
charide formation also is inhibited, preventing storage of
carbohydrates by limiting microbial metabolism betw een the host’s
meals. In high concentrations (12, ppm) used in topical luoride
treatments, luoride ion is directly toxic to some oral microorganisms, including MS. Suppression of growth of MS after a single
topical luoride treatment may last several weeks.55 It is possible
to lengthen this suppression greatly by a change in dietary habits
(especially eliminating sucrose) and by the patient’s conscientious
application of a good oral hygiene program.
All luoride exposure methods ( ) are efective to some
degree. he clinician’s goal is to choose the most efective combina -
tion for each patient. his choice must be based on the patient’s
age, caries experience, general health, and oral hygiene. Children
with developing permanent teeth beneit most from systemic luoride
treatments via the public water supply. In regions without adequate
luoride in the water supply, dietary supplementation of luoride
is indicated for children and sometimes for adults. he amount
of luoride supplement must be determined individually. his is
82 CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management
Fluoride Treatment Modalitiesa
Route Method of Delivery Concentration (ppm) Caries Reduction (%)
Systemic Topical Public water supply 0.7 50–60
Self-application
Low-dose/high-frequency rinses (0.05% sodium luoride daily) 30–40
High-potency–low-frequency rinses (0.2% sodium luoride weekly) 30–40 after 2 years
Fluoridated dentifrices (daily) – 20
Prescription-strength luoridated dentifrices (daily) 32
Professional application
Acidulated phosphate luoride gel (1.23%) annually or semiannually 12, 40–50
Sodium luoride solution (2%) 20, 40–50
Sodium luoride varnish (5%) 22, 30
Stannous luoride solution (8%) 80, 40–50
Silver diamine luoride (SDF) (38%) 44, ~96.1 for caries arrest
~70.3 for caries prevention
ppm, Parts per million.
aCaries reduction estimates for topically administered luorides indicate their effectiveness when used individually. When they are combined with systemic luoride treatment, they can provide some
additional caries protection.
of particular importance in rural areas with individual wells because
the luoride content of well water can vary greatly within short
distances.
Topical application of luoride should be done periodically for
children and adults who are at high risk for caries development.
he periodicity varies with the case. Teeth can be cleaned free of
bioilm before the application of topical luorides. Flossing followed
by tooth brushing is recommended for this purpose. Pumicing of
teeth (professional prophylaxis) is able to remove a considerable
amount of the luoride-rich surface layer of enamel and may be
counterproductive. Acidulated phosphate luoride gel is efective,
but a potential risk of swallowing excessive amounts of luoride
exists, particularly in young children. Acidulated phosphate luoride
is available in thixotropic gels and has a long shelf life. Stannous
luoride (8% F), another option, has a bitter, metallic taste; may
burn the mucosa; and has a short shelf life. Although the tin ion
in stannous luoride may be responsible for staining the teeth, it
may also be beneicial in arresting root caries. Topical luoride
agents should be applied according to the manufacturer’s recom -
mendations and always under supervision so as to limit
ingestion.
Various luoride varnishes are available and are successful in
preventing caries. Varnishes provide a high uptake of the luoride
ion into enamel and are widely accepted as the vehicle of choice
for luoride delivery to young adults and older adults alike. Fluoride
varnishes are professionally applied and may provide the most
cost-efective means of delivery of luoride to teeth. hese varnishes
are efective bactericidal and caries-preventive agents. Fluoride
varnishes were developed several decades ago in an attempt to
improve luoride application techniques and beneits. European
countries have used luoride varnishes for many years. Numerous
randomized clinical trials conducted outside the United States
point to the eicacy and safety of luoride varnishes as cariespreventive agents.56-64 Fluoride varnish enables the deposition of
large amounts of luoride on an enamel surface, especially on a
demineralized enamel surface. Calcium luoride precipitates on
the surface, and often luorapatite is formed. he high concentration
of surface luoride also may provide a reservoir for luoride, which
promotes remineralization. Although additional research on luoride
varnishes is needed, the use of a luoride varnish as a caries-preventive agent should be expanded because it has advantages over other
topical luoride vehicles in terms of safety, ease of application, and
luoride concentration at the enamel surface.6 he American Dental
Association (ADA) Council on Scientiic Afairs recently endorsed
the use of luoride-containing varnishes as caries prevention agents.65
Current evidence indicates that luoride varnishes with the
concentration of 5% sodium luoride are the most eicacious of
all topically applied luoride products.58,66 For patients with a high
risk of caries, luoride varnish should be applied every 3 months.
For moderate-risk patients, application every 6 months is indicated.
Fluoride varnish is not indicated for low-risk patients.
When applying luoride varnish, the clinician dries of saliva
from teeth and applies a thin layer of luoride varnish directly
onto teeth. Because the luoride varnish sets when contacting
moisture, thorough isolation of the area is not required. Only
tooth brushing, rather than prophylaxis, is necessary before applica -
tion. he main disadvantage of luoride varnish is that a temporary
change in tooth color may occur. Patients should avoid eating for
several hours and avoid brushing until the next morning after the
varnish has been applied.
Self-administered luoride rinses have an additive efect (about
20% reduction) when used in conjunction with topical or systemic
luoride treatment. Fluoride rinses are indicated in high-risk patients
and patients exhibiting a recent increase in caries activity. T wo
varieties of luoride rinses have similar efectiveness: (1) high
dose–low frequency and (2) low dose–high frequency. High-dose
(0.2% F)–low-frequency rinses are best used in supervised weekly
rinsing programs based in public schools. Low-dose (0.05% F)–highfrequency rinses are best used by individual patients at home. A
high-risk or caries-active patient should be advised to use the rinse
daily. he optimal application time is in the evening. he rinse
should be forced between teeth many times and then expectorated,
not swallowed. Eating and drinking should be avoided after the
rinse.
Routine use of over-the-counter luoride containing dentifrice
three times per day is recommended for all patients. hese tooth -
pastes generally contain 0.32% sodium luoride ( ppm). For
moderate-risk and high-risk patients 6 years or older, prescription
dentifrices containing higher concentrations of luoride are recom -
mended. hese products typically contain 1.1% sodium luoride
CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management 83
AB
C DE
• Fig. 2.43 A, Young high caries risk patient. Tooth No. 17 with extensive caries lesion. Tooth was
asymptomatic and roots were still developing. B, Unsupported enamel was removed, soft caries was left
on the pulpal loor to avoid exposing the pulp. C, SDF was applied and left for 3 minutes. Darkened
dentin can be observed. Tooth was restored with amalgam and remained asymptomatic. D, Tooth with
PFM crown and secondary root caries on distal surface with dificult access for restoration. E, SDF applied
and darkened dentin can be observed. (A–C, Courtesy Dr. Nguyen Ngoc, resident Graduate Operative
Program at UNC; D and E, Courtesy Dr. Epure, resident Graduate Operative Dentistry Program at UNC.)( ppm) and can be safely used up to three times per day in
this age group.67 For most beneit, patients should be instructed
to not rinse after brushing and avoid eating or drinking for 30
minutes after use.
Silver Diamine Fluoride
Silver diamine luoride (SDF) is a topical solution used as a cariesarresting and antihypersensitivity agent. ,
SDF was recently cleared by the US Food and Drug Administra -
tion (FDA) as an antihypersensitivity agent and is used of-label
to arrest caries lesions. Both silver and luoride play active roles
in their mechanisms of arresting caries development and treatment
of tooth hypersensitivity. - Silver has an antibacterial action
that slows demineralization and enhances remineralization. SDF ,
due to its ease of use, has been recommended to arrest large cavitated
lesions, allowing not only conservation of tooth structure, but
delivery of treatment to groups of patients that either do not have
access to traditional restorative care or to whom delivery of the
standard treatment is challenging. he main drawback of SDF is
that with the precipitation of silver, the carious dentin becomes
stained black. Some researchers have studied the use of SDF on
root caries and have found it to be efective at preventing root
caries lesions.160Application of SDF usually only requires removal of the bioilm
and application of the product with a microbrush for 3 minutes,
then either rinsing the area with water or covering the lesion with
luoride varnish. Gingival tissues and lips should be covered with
petroleum jelly to avoid staining. his approach may give patients
who would otherwise be unable to receive treatment a low-cost
alternative to arrest caries lesions and preserve their dentition ( Fig.
2.43). However, the anticaries efect of SDF may be reduced over
time. It has been reported that up to 50% of arrested lesions were
“reactivated” by 24 months after one application of SDF . he
authors reported that this was likely due to the bioilm-retaining
nature of these cavitated lesions. hus there is a rationale for
restoring these arrested lesions from both the caries management
approach and for function and esthetics.
Immunization
For many years, investigators have been trying to develop an efective
anticaries vaccine. Several prototypes have been tested in animals,
but at this time neither the safety nor the eicacy of such a vaccine
has been demonstrated in humans.68,69
Even if an anticaries vaccine was developed, some concerns
remain, which may afect its widespread use. First, the potential
adverse efects of a vaccine must be identiied. he safety of such
84 CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management
Antimicrobial Agents
Mechanism of ActionSpectrum of
Antibacterial
ActivityPersistence
in Mouth Adverse Effects
Antibiotics
Vancomycin Blocks cell wall synthesis Narrow Short Increases gram-negative lora
Kanamycin Blocks protein synthesis Broad Short Can increase caries activity
Actinobolin Blocks protein synthesis Streptococci Long Unknown
Bis Biguanides
Alexidine Antiseptic; prevents bacterial adherence Broad Long Bitter taste; stains teeth and tongue brown;
mucosal irritation
Chlorhexidine Antiseptic; prevents bacterial adherence Broad Long Bitter taste; stains teeth and tongue brown;
mucosal irritation
Halogens
Iodine Bactericidal Broad Short Metallic taste
Fluoride 1–10 parts per million (ppm) reduces
acid production; ppm
bacteriostatic; ppm bactericidalBroad Long Increases enamel resistance to caries attack;
luorosis in developing teeth with chronic
high dosesa vaccine has not yet been shown; concerns about a possible crossreaction with human heart tissue remain. Second, its cost must
be compar ed with that of public water luoridation, which is
inexpensive and already efective at reducing caries. Vaccination
may be no more efective than luoride therapy, which has a proven
safety record. It may however be practical to use a caries vaccine
when public water luoridation is impractical in developed countries,
and it may be useful in developing countries. hird, limitations
imposed by governmental regulatory agencies may afect the
widespread use of an anticaries vaccine.
Saliva
Saliva, as noted earlier in this chapter, provides an efective irst
line of defense against dental caries. Saliva works by diluting acid
produced in bioilm, washing the acid away (swallowing), bufering
the produced acid (bicarbonate + phosphate), and assisting in
remineralization (calcium + phosphate). Saliva also works by forming
a pellicle. When normal salivary low rates are compromised, patients
are usually at high risk for developing caries.
Normal aging does not result in reduced salivary low rates;
however, many older patients have compromised salivary low rates
as a result of medications taken for systemic conditions. Many
commonly prescribed medications have hyposalivation as a potential
side efect. A recent study has indicated that 63% of the most
commonly prescribed drugs in the United States have the adverse
efect of reduced salivary low rates.70
One important strategy for the prevention of caries in such
patients is to increase the salivary low rate and, by this, the
concomitant bufering capacity. For these patients, gathering initial
baseline data on salivary low rates is critical. Commercial kits are
available for the assessment of salivary low. hese kits provide
data on simulated low rates, the pH of saliva, and the level of
bufering capacity. If saliva samples are sent for microbiologic
testing, speciic MS and lactobacilli counts may be determined.
Speciic strategies for improving low rates and reducing bacterial
counts may then be initiated. Subsequent retesting is necessary to
identify the relative eicacy of the strategies.When attempting to improve salivary low rates, a consultation
with the patient’s physician may be in order. It may be possible
that a less xerogenic drug be prescribed or the dose of a current
drug reduced. Changing the time of taking the medication(s) may
be useful. Prescribing salivary stimulants such as pilocarpine or
cevimeline may be very beneicial in patients with f unctioning
salivary glands but who have medication-induced
hyposalivation.
Other strategies to improve salivary low rates include increased
water intake, use of sugar-free candies/mints several times a day,
and/or use of xylitol chewing gum. Xylitol will be discussed in
the next section.
Chemical Agents
Chemical agents to help modulate the bioilm have been proposed.
hese agents have been shown to reduce MS levels but this alone
has not been shown to modify caries outcomes.71 Prior to initiating
procedures to reduce the numbers of cariogenic bact eria in the
oral cavity, bacterial testing should be conducted to determine
baseline microbiologic variables. Saliva samples may be tested for
speciic MS and lactobacilli levels; commercial devices may help
evaluate the level of ATP in the bioilm. Bacterial counts or ATP
levels are not reliable risk indicators but can be useful as motivational
tools for patients.
Various antimicrobial agents are available ( ). As
discussed, luoride has antimicrobial efects. T wo difering strategies
have been suggested for reducing bacterial counts. he traditional
approach is the use of chlorhexidine (CHX) mouthwash, varnish,
or both, along with prescription luoride toothpaste. When using
this approach, it may be prudent to use toothpaste free from
sodium laurel sulfate (SLS), which causes the foaming action in
dentifrices. Although data are equivocal, evidence demonstrates
that SLS reduces the ability of CHX to reduce bioilm formation.72
Although CHX decreases MS, there is no evidence that it decreases
caries incidence in the absence of luoride.
CHX was irst available in the United States as a rinse and was
irst used for periodontal therapy. It was prescribed as a 0.12%
CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management 85
in enamel remineralization87-90; however, most of these studies
have not looked at its efect independent of luoride. he CPP-ACP
products must not be prescribed to patients with allergies to dairy
(milk) proteins.
Probiotics
One novel approach for reducing dental caries that has emerged
in recent years is that of probiotics. he fundamental concept is
to inoculate the oral cavity with bacteria that will compete with
cariogenic bacteria and eventually replace them. Obviously the
probiotic bacteria must not produce signiicant adverse efects.
A number of commercial products have been introduced and
have been demonstrated to be safe in short-term stu dies. However,
their relative level of eicacy remains unknown. It has been specu -
lated that for the probiotic microorganisms to gain dominance,
existing pathogens must irst be eliminated. he concept of probiot -
ics holds signiicant promise but considerably more research is
required.
Sealants
Although luoride treatments are most efective in preventing
smooth-surface caries, they are less efective in preventing pit-andissure caries. he use of sealants is an efective preventive treatment
for caries in pit-and-issure areas.91 Sealants have three important
preventive efects. First, sealants mechanically ill pits and issures
with a resin-based polymer. Second, because the pits and issures
are physically closed of from the oral environment with the sealant
resin, MS and other cariogenic organisms no longer have access
to their preferred habitat. hird, sealants render the surface of the
tooth, where the pits and issures are located, easier to clean by
toothbrushing and mastication ( Figs. 2.44 and 2.45).
Based on the available scientiic literature, pit-and-issure sealants
are appropriate for prevention of caries in susceptible teeth and,
within limits, for arresting initial caries lesions.92-96 here is mounting
evidence that sealing initial lesions is an efective means to arrest
dental caries.
Another strategy recently introduced is the use of extremely
low-viscosity resin sealants for the iniltration of white-spot caries
lesions on smooth surfaces97 (Fig. 2.46 ). In situ studies demonstrate
the ability of resin sealants, also called iniltrants , to prevent further
demineralization under cariogenic conditions.98 Resin iniltrants
have reportedly been used in free (i.e., facial and lingual) as well
as in interproximal enamel surfaces. However, similar to the sealant
technique used in pit-and-issure areas, the technique requires
careful attention to detail. A practice-based randomized clinical
research trial has indicated that iniltration was more efective at
preventing lesion progression than instructions on oral hygiene,
lossing, and luoride use.
Restorations
he status of a patient’s existing restorations may have an important
bearing on the outcome of preventive measures and caries treatment.
Old restorations that are rough and plaque retentive should be
smoothed and polished. If the marginal integrity is inadequate,
then the restoration should be repaired or replaced. Restoration
defects such as overhangs, open proximal contacts, and defective
contours contribute to plaque formation and retention. hese
defects should be corrected, usually by replacement of the defective
restoration. Detection of caries around restorations and sealants
(CARS) (“secondary caries”) may be diicult around old restorations.
Discoloration of the enamel adjacent to a restoration suggests the
potential for CARS, but is not a deinitive diagnosis. his condition rinse to high-risk patients for short-term use. It is also available
as a varnish, and the most efective mode of varnish use is as a
professionally applied material.73 Chlorhexidine gluconate (0.12%)
solution is efective in its ability to chelate cations and, as a result,
disrupts cell adhesion, cell membrane function, and the ability of
MS to uptake glucose and produce glucans and its metabolism
resulting in a decrease in MS counts. Emilson concl uded that
CHX varnishes provide efective reduction in MS, alt hough recent
evidence is not as conclusive in favor of a CHX rinse.74,75 Despite
some favorable evidence, because there is only a weak correlation
with a reduction in caries, CHX currently has very limited applica -
tion as a regularly used caries management antimicrobial agent.
Xylitol is a natural ive-carbon sugar obtained from birch trees.
MS cannot ferment (metabolize) xylitol, so no acid is produced.
Over time xylitol reduces the number of MS in the bioilm. It is
usually recommended that patients chew two pieces of xylitol gum
containing a total of 1 g xylitol 3 to 6 minutes after eating or
snacking. Chewing any sugar-free gum after meals reduces the
acidogenicity of the bioilm because chewing stimulates salivary
low, which improves the bufering of the pH drop that occurs
after eating.80 Reductions in caries rates are greater however when
xylitol is used as the sugar substitute.81Although there is some
suggestion that xylitol may reduce caries rate,82 enhance remineraliza -
tion, and help arrest dentinal caries,78,79, studies in adults have
not been able to conirm its role on caries control163 except for
root caries. he evidence supporting the use of xylitol products
for the purpose of caries reduction in both adults and children is
very weak.
A myriad of other chemical agents have been suggested to
selectively kill gram-positive cariogenic coaggregates of bacteria.
Among these are propolis, nutraceutical phenols from licorice root,
arginine, and bactericidal products such as sodium hypochlorite
0.2% in the form of an oral rinse. - However, despite the efect
of these strategies on decreasing cariogenic bacteria counts, they
have not been shown to actually decrease caries incidence in the
absence of luoride. Caries is a bioilm disease modulated by diet;
therefore changes to bacterial counts will have a short-term impact
on the caries process. In the absence of other changes, for example
a signiicant reduction in fermentable carbohydrate intake, the
bioilm microbiome will continue to adapt to the acidogenic and
aciduric environment caused by a highly cariogenic diet; and these
antimicrobial strategies will have little impact on caries
outcomes.
Calcium and Phosphate Compounds
Amorphous calcium-phosphate (ACP) products have become
commercially available and reportedly have the potential to
remineralize tooth structure.83 ACP is a reactive and soluble calcium
phosphate compound that releases calcium and phosphate ions to
convert to apatite and remineralize the enamel when it comes in
contact with saliva. Forming on the tooth enamel and within the
dentinal tubules, ACP provides a reservoir of calcium and phosphate
ions in the saliva.84 Casein phosphopeptide (CPP) is a milk-derived
protein that binds to the tooth’s bioilm and is used to stabilize
ACP . Remineralization products that use CPP as a vehicle to deliver
and maintain a supersaturation state of ACP at or near the tooth
surface have recently been introduced. Some of these products
contain other caries-preventive agents such as luoride and xylitol
(e.g., MI Paste Plus, GC America, Alsip, IL). Gum, lozenges, and
topically applied solutions containing CPP-ACP have also been
reported to remineralize white spots.85,86 Mounting evidence
indicates that CPP-ACP complexes, when used regularly, are efective
86 CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management
A
BSealant
• Fig. 2.44 A and B, Sealant applied to the central fossa of a maxillary
second molar. This tooth was treated because of the appearance of chalky
enamel and softening in the central fossa. A highly illed sealant was used
(see Fig. 2.43 ).
Penetrating
pit
Radiopaqu e
sealant
A
CB
D
• Fig. 2.45 A and B, Radiograph of a maxillary irst molar with a deep
central fossa pit that appears to penetrate to the dentin. C and D, The
central pit was sealed with a highly illed, radiopaque sealant. The sealant
is readily visible on the radiograph.
CDAB
• Fig. 2.46 A, Radiographic image of irst mandibular molar with a proximal lesion on distal surface.
B, Tooth was iniltrated according to manufacturer’s instructions (Icon, DMG America). C and D, Clinical
images of smooth-surface lesions on anterior teeth before and after iniltration, with Icon. (A, Courtesy
Dr. Andrea Cortes, Operative Dentistry Specialization Program, El Bosque University. B, Courtesy Dr. Olga
Lucia Zarta (chair) and Dr. Ainimsay Benitez (resident), Operative Dentistry Specialization Program, Dental
School, El Bosque University, Bogotá, Colombia. C and D, Reprinted with permission from Meyer-Lueckel
H, Paris, Zahnmedizin up2date – , .)
CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management 87
Growing evidence suggests that temporization followed by reentry
does not contribute to improved clinical outcomes27, 28; therefore
current research suppor ts the placement of a deinitive restora -
tion.30, - Selective caries removal allows a restoration to b e
placed while avoiding pulpal exposure.26 Avoiding a pulpal exposure
has a great impact on the lifetime prognosis of the tooth and
long-term treatment costs. Although the residual dentin thickness
cannot be accurately assessed clinically, its preservation is a signiicant
factor in avoiding pulpal distress. ,
In slowly advancing lesions, it is expedient to remove the soft
(infected) dentin until the readily identiiable hard (sclerotic) dentin
is reached. In rapidly advancing lesions (see Figs. 2.36, 2.37, and
2.43A ), little clinical evidence (as determined by texture or color
change) exists to indicate the extent of the soft (infected) dentin.
For deep lesions, this lack of clinical evidence may result in an
excavation that risks pulp exposure. In a tooth with a deep advanced
caries lesion, no history of spontaneous pain, normal responses to
thermal stimuli, and a vital pulp, a deliberate, selective caries lesion
removal (as noted) may be indicated. his procedure is supported
by a large body of evidence.26-34,99- , -
Removal of the bacterial infection has been seen as an essential
part of all operative procedures; however, even removal of dentin
up to hard dentin in deep, advanced caries lesions does not ensure
a “sterile” dentin as bacteria have been found to be present in all
dentinal layers in deep caries lesions. Nevertheless, even when
bacteria are present, compounding evidence indicates that when
a good seal is present the lesion will arrest193- (see Fig. 2.18E–L ).
herefore it is not necessary to remove all of the dentin that has
been compromised by the caries process. Although caries detection
solutions such as 1% acid red 52 (acid rhodamine B or food red
) in propylene glycol35 have been developed to help stain the
infected layer, these dyes bind and stain the demineralized dentin
matrix and do not stain bacteria exclusively. Complete removal of
all stained tooth structure in the preparation therefore ultimately
leads to signiicantly larger preparations than the traditional visualtactile method of evaluating for caries removal, so their use is no
longer recommended. -
he following are additional clinical considerations for caries
lesion removal:
a. Regardless of which protocol is used for caries removal (caries
removal to irm dentin or selective caries removal to soft dentin),
the tooth may be restored with a inal restoration ( Figs. 2.47
and 2.48). However, the patient should be clearly informed
that in the treatment of advanced (deep) dentin caries so me
leathery and soft dentin may remain under the restora tion. his
remaining caries-afected dentin has many implications, in cluding
higher risk for endodontic complications205 (not because “caries
was left under the restoration” but because deep caries was
present to begin with) and a radiographic presentation that
may suggest secondary or residual caries.
b. Although there is overwhelming scientiic evidence in support
of the SCR protocol, this is still a controversial clinical procedure
in certain countries32 with potential liability implications as
well as implications for clinical board examinations, most of
which still require complete caries removal (excavation) to hard
dentin as a criteria for a successful clinical board
examination.
c. he patient should be clearly informed of the risks and beneits
of the selective caries removal to soft dentin protocol, and
provide informed consent. If the patient is not willing to accept
the risks, then the alternative, either complete caries removal
with a higher risk of complications (endodontic therapy, appears as a localized opalescent area next to the restoration margins.
(Exception: A bluish color of facial or lingual enamel that directly
overlies an old, otherwise acceptable amalgam restoration does not
indicate replacement unless there is a need for improvement of
esthetics. Such a discoloration may be caused by the amalgam
itself.) Because metallic restorations are radiopaque, the radiolucency
of CARS may be masked. he restoration of cavitated active caries
lesions is preventive only because it removes large numbers of
cariogenic organisms and some of the sites in which they may be
protected, and it restores adequate tooth contours and surface
smoothness that may facilitate oral hygiene. As emphasized earlier,
the placement of a restoration into a cavitated carious tooth does
not cure the caries process.
Although caries diagnostic and preventive measures have been
improved and are more widely used, the repair of destruction
caused by the caries process still is necessary for many patients.
he treatment regimen is dictated by the patient’s caries status. If
the patient is at high risk for caries development, treatment s hould
consist of restorative procedures concomitant with many of the
preventive measures described previously. he damage done by
caries may be repaired while at the same time seeking to lower the
patient’s risk status for further caries developmen t. Sometimes,
patients present with active caries lesions in numerous teeth. Because
these teeth may be in jeopardy and because of the large numbers
and sites of cariogenic bacteria, arresting medication for caries
control (e.g., SDF) or restorative treatment for caries control may
be indicated, as described later in this section. his procedure
rapidly eliminates the caries lesions, providing better assessment
of the pulpal responses of some teeth and greater success of the
preventive measures instituted. Later, teeth may be restored with
more deinitive restorations.
Once caries has produced cavitation of the tooth su rface, unless
the cariogenic bioilm can be removed from a cavitated caries
lesion or the lesion has been treated with SDF , preventive measures
will be inadequate to prevent further progression of the lesion.
Excision of the lesion (tooth preparation) and proper tooth restora -
tion will not only stop the progression of active, cavitated lesions
but also restore tooth function and esthetics.
Clinical Considerations for Caries Removal
Under normal operative clinical circumstances, in a vital permanent
tooth with no symptoms or signs of pulpal pathology, the extent
of the dentin caries removal (excavation) is dictated primarily by
lesion severity and depth:
• Moderate lesions (lesions not reaching the inner one third of
dentin and with no anticipated risk of pulp exposure) should
be excavated to a caries-free DEJ and irm dentin.
• Advanced (deep) lesions (lesions reaching the inner one third
of dentin and with anticipated risk of pulp exposure) should
be excavated to a caries-free DEJ and soft dentin, following a
selective caries removal (SCR) protocol. ,
For a complete description of current caries classiication criteria
based on lesion severity and activity, please see Chapter 3 . he
SCR protocol is a professionally recognized and accepted tooth-level
caries control treatment, - and it can be used on any tooth
with an advanced (deep) caries lesion that is deemed restorable,
and for which the pulpal and periapical areas are deemed healthy.
Selective caries removal consists of complete caries removal peripher -
ally to a sound, caries-free DEJ; axially and pulpally, caries is
removed to within approximately 1 mm of the pulp within soft
dentin; a glass ionomer (e.g., Fuji IX, GC America, Alsip, IL)
temporary restoration or a deinitive restoration is then placed.
88 CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management
Enamel
Extensive
caries lesion
Dentin
Pulp
Excavated areaTemporary or
definitive
restoration
Base/linerEnamel
Extensive
caries lesion
Dentin
Pulp
AB
C D
• Fig. 2.47 Schematic representation of caries-control procedure. A and
B, Faciolingual (A) and mesiodistal (B) cross sections of mandibular irst
molar show extensive preoperative occlusal and proximal caries lesions.
C, Tooth after excavation of extensive caries. Note remaining unsupported
enamel. D, Temporary amalgam restoration inserted after appropriate liner
or base.
BA
C
D
E• Fig. 2.48 A, Preoperative clinical radiograph illustrating extensive
caries lesion in the proximal and occlusal regions of the mandibular right
irst molar. Initial caries excavation of tooth. B, Remaining caries requires
further excavation. Also, note the wedge in place, protecting rubber dam
and soft tissue; it has been lightly shaved by a bur. C, Remaining unsup -
ported enamel under mesiolingual cusp. D, Tooth ready for placement of
temporary restoration. Carious involvement required further extension than
that seen in B and C. Liner or base material has been applied to deepest
excavated areas, and matrix, appropriately wedged, has been placed.
E, Temporary restoration completed for caries-control procedure. Caries
has been eliminated, the pulp adequately protected, and interarch and
intraarch positions of tooth maintained by caries-control procedure. postoperative sensitivity) or tooth extraction, should be
presented.
d. A sealed tooth-restoration interface is critical for the success of
the restorative procedure (see Fig. 2.18E–L ). When a proper
seal is NOT obtained, or when/if the seal is compromi sed,
marginal leakage and ingr ess of bacteria/luids/nutrients will
allow lesion progression. his is particularly critical when soft
dentin remains under the restoration.
e. When excavating advanced (deep) dentin caries, if a caries-free
DEJ cannot be obtained, a protective restoration (s edative illing,
temporary restoration) should be used and tooth restorability
should be reassessed. A permanent restoration should not be
used unless a sound DEJ (or peripheral dentin margin) is reached
(see Figs. 2.47 and 2.48).
f. In slowly advancing lesions, it is practical to remove the soft
(infected) dentin until irm (demineralized, afected) dentin is
reached. Despite being demineralized, with adequate marginal
seal, the lesion may arrest and the affected dentin may remineralize. his allows for the most conservative tooth prepara -
tion without jeopardizing the restoration.
g. he pulpal diagnoses outlined here rely on signs and symptoms
of pulp pathology using the best diagnostic tools available.
However, actual pulpal status is difficult to determine
CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management 89
One of the primary etiologic factors for these patients is their
use of prescription drugs for a wide variety of systemic medical
problems. It has been estimated that 63% of the most com -
monly prescribed medications have dry mouth as an adv erse efect.
It is the subsequent reduction in salivary low rates and concomitant
diminished bufering capacity resulting from use of these medications
that is primarily responsible for the increase in r oot caries in older
patients.
The critical pH of dentin (pH at which dentin begins to
demineralize) is between 6.2 and 6.7, whereas that of enamel is
about 5.5. As a result, root dentin will demineralize in very
weak acids, and root caries progresses at about twice the rate of
coronal caries. hus it is critical that all older patients receive
thorough clinical and radiographic examinations on a regular basis.
As described previously in this chapter, a caries risk assessment
should be carried out for all older patients. Factors that increase
the risk for root caries include the following:
1. Gingival recession
2. Poor oral hygiene
3. Cariogenic diet
4. Presence of multiple restorations or multiple missing teeth
5. Existing caries
6. Xerogenic medications
7. Compromised salivary low rates
Once it has been determined that a patient is at high risk for
root caries, an aggressive preventive protocol should be considered.
his protocol is based upon four primary strategies for the prevention
of root caries. he irst strategy is to improve salivary low rates
and increase the bufering capacity. he second strategy is to modulate
a cariogenic bioilm in the oral cavity. he third strategy is to
reduce the quantity and numbers of exposures of ingested reined clinically—bacteria and toxins progressing ahead of caries may
cause areas of undetectable and asymptomatic pulpal necrosis
or irreversible pulpitis.
h. Use of calcium hydroxide (or other liner/base materials) after
caries removal and before use of a protective or inal restoration
does not appear to improve outcomes.
i. Teeth that are restorable only by use of full cuspal coverage
restoration generally are not appropriate for the SCR technique
because of the diiculty of evaluating the tooth for possible
failures such as continuing caries activity under the full coverage
restoration. Another concern is the cost of rectifying failures.
j. his protocol recognizes that exposures will occur despite
admonitions to leave soft and leathery (infected) dentin rather
than expose the pulp. Whenever there is a pulp exposure, the
treatment should be consistent with existing endodontic
guidelines for vital pulp exposures.
k. Advances in vital pulp therapy may allow successful endodontic
therapy of pulp exposures without the need for root canal
treatment. With the advent of tricalcium silicates, the prognosis
of pulp capping (partial and full pulpotomy of permanent mature
teeth) has tremendously improved. Recent observational and
randomized trials, as well as systematic reviews and meta-analyses,
have shown that these procedures have success for pulp vitality
that exceeds 90%. - Complete caries removal with the option
of vital pulp therapy should be one of the options ofered to
the patient during the informed consent process.
l. he SCR protocol can be applied either on a single tooth being
treated or to several teeth in a caries control phase treatment.
High caries risk patients with multiple cavitated caries lesions
can beneit from a treatment plan designed speciically to gain
control over the rapid progression of their disease. he term
caries control refers to a procedure in which multiple teeth with
acute threatening caries are treated quickly by (1) applying a
medication (e.g., SDF) to arrest the caries lesions or (2) removing
the infected tooth structure, medicating the pulp if necessary,
and restoring the defect(s) with a temporary or deinite material.
he intent of caries-control procedures is immediate, corrective
intervention of advanced caries lesions so as to prevent pulpal
disease and avoid possible sequelae such as toothache, root
canal therapy, or more complex ultimate restorations.
his allows the caries process in these cavitated lesions to
be essentially arrested and the overall bacterial load to be reduced.
Caries-control procedures must be accompanied by ot her preven -
tive measures ( ). Teeth rapidly treated by caries-control
procedures subsequently may be treated by using routine
restorative techniques if appropriate pulpal responses are
obtained.
Root Carie Management
It is clear that the baby boom generation of North America is
aging. In the year , 3% of the US population was over 60
years of age, whereas in the year , 13% of the population
was over 60 years. In the year , it is estimated that at least
20% of the population will be 60 years or older. Root caries is a
pervasive problem in a high percentage of older patients. ,
Many of these patients have had extensive restorative dentistry
done in their lifetimes. Approximately 38% of patients between
the ages of 55 and 64 years have root caries, and 47% of those
between 65 and 74 years have experienced root caries. he
incidence of root caries in old-older adults (over 75 years) is even
higher.128Caries-Control Restoration
Initial treatment Caries risk assessment
Education and motivation
Thorough evaluation and documentation of
lesions
Temporization of all large cavitated lesions by
caries-control restorations
Speciic nonrestorative, therapeutic treatment
(see )
Plaque control (see , technique C)
Dietary control (see , technique A)
Preliminary
assessmentGingival response as a marker of plaque
bioilm control effectiveness
Arrest of cavitated lesions with SDF as
indicated
Pulpal response of teeth with selective
caries-excavation and restoration
Assessment of patient compliance with
medications, oral hygiene, and dietary
control measures
Follow-up care Careful clinical evaluation of teeth
Replacement of caries-control restorations with
permanent restorations
Monitoring of plaque bioilm and mutans
streptococci (MS) levels
Further antimicrobial treatment and dietary
reassessment as indicated by new
cavitations, noncavitated lesions, or high MS
levels
90 CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management
for deinitive restorations of active root caries lesions primarily
because they bond efectively to both enamel and dentin and
they act as reservoirs for luoride, which may be re-released
into the oral cavity. , hese materials may be efective as
anticaries materials only if patients reload the material a
minimum of three times a day by brushing with luoridecontaining toothpaste or by using other luoride-containing
products. Alternatively these same root caries lesions can be
arrested by application of SDF (see Fig. 2.43D and E ).
3. Educating patients of the necessity for three exposures to luoride
per day and for reloading the luoride-releasing materials can
assist in motivating them to improved levels of compliance.
In summary, many older patients are experiencing an epidemic
of root caries, primarily as a result of the hyposalivatory efects of
medications prescribed for systemic illnesses. Many root caries
lesions occur in locations that make them diicult if not impossible
to restore. he dental profession has a strong track record of preven -
tion, and it is clear that with root caries, prevention is much better
than restoration.carbohydrates, and the fourth is to attempt to remineralize initial
lesions and prevent new lesions from developing. In addition to
following the aforementioned protocol, three additional consid -
erations are important:
1. Use of powered toothbrushes and irrigation devices. It is critical
that patients susceptible to root caries practice meticulous oral
hygiene. However, many of these patients have physical and
visual deiciencies, which makes it diicult for them to adequately
cleanse the mouth. For these patients, a powered toothbrush
may be advantageous. Additionally, daily use of a water
irrigation device (Waterpik, Water Pik Inc., Fort Collins, CO)
may be beneicial. Although the device will not remove bioilm,
studies have shown that daily use will change the composition
of the bioilm in a beneicial way. However, since the toothbrush
essentially provides the means of luoride delivery, use of a
water irrigation device alone is not indicated unless used with
a luoridated rinse (e.g., ACT).
2. Restoration of all root caries lesions with a luoride-releasing
material. Resin-modiied glass ionomer materials are preferred
Summary
Caries management eforts must be directed not at the tooth level
(traditional or surgical treatment) but at the total-patient level
(medical model of treatment). Restorative treatment does not cure
the caries process. Instead, identifying and eliminating the causative
factors for caries must be the primary focus, in addition to the
restorative repair of damage caused by caries.
Much of the remainder of this textbook presents information
on when and how to restore tooth defects. Many tooth defects are the result of caries activity. Only implementation of appro -
priate caries-preventive measures will lower the probability that
caries lesions will recur. Tooth restorations are preventive in the
sense that they remove numerous cariogenic organisms in the
afected site and eliminate a protected habitat for other cariogenic
bacteria; however, they primarily repair the tooth damage caused
by caries and have only a limited impact on the patient’s overall
caries risk.
Acknowledgment
he authors would like to thank Professor JM (“Bob”) ten Cate
PhD, University of Amsterdam, for his review of the Ecologic
Basis of Dental Caries: he Role of the Bioilm section of this
chapter.
Reference
1. Keyes PH: Research in dental caries. J Am Dent Assoc 76(6): – ,
.
2. Featherstone JD: he caries balance: he basis for caries management
by risk assessment. Oral Health Prev Dent 2(Suppl 1): – ,
.
3. Chaussain-Miller C, Fioretti F , Goldberg M, et al: he role of matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) in human caries. J Dent Res 85(1):22–32,
.
4. Young DA, Kutsch VK, Whitehouse J: A clinician’s guide to
CAMBRA: A simple approach. Compend Contin Educ Dent
30(2):92–94, 96, 98, passim, .
5. Marsh PD: Dental plaque as a bioilm and a microbial community—
implications for health and disease. BMC Oral Health 6(Suppl
1):S14, .
6. Hannig C, Hannig M: he oral cavity—a key system to understand
substratum-dependent bioadhesion on solid surfaces in man. Clin
Oral Invest 13(2): – , .
7. Juhl M: hree-dimensional replicas of pit and issure morphology
in human teeth. Scand J Dent Res 91(2):90–95, .
8. Brown LR: Efects of selected caries preventive regimes on microbial
changes following radiation-induced xerostomia in cancer patients.
Microbiol Abstr Spec Suppl 1: , .9. Dreizen SBL: Xerostomia and dental caries. Microbiol Abstr Spec
Suppl , .
10. Mandel ID: Salivary factors in caries prediction, Sp. Suppl. Microbiol -
ogy Abstracts . In Bibby BG, Shern RJ, editors: Proceedings “Methods
of Caries Prediction” , ed 4, Arlington, Va, , Information Retrieval,
Inc, pp – .
11. Arnold RR, Russell JE, Devine SM, et al: Antimicrobial activity of
the secretory innate defense factors lactoferrin, lactoperoxidase, and
lysozyme. In Guggenheim B, editor: Cariology today , Basel, ,
Karger, pp 75–88.
12. Mandel I, Ellison SA: Naturally occurring defense mechanism in
saliva. In Tanzer JM, editor: Animal models in cariology (supplement
to Microbiology Abstracts) , Washington, DC, , Information
Retrieval.
13. van Houte J: Microbiological predictors of caries risk. Adv Dent
Res 7(2):87–96, .
14. Hay DI: Speciic functional salivary proteins. In Guggenheim B,
editor: Cariology today , Basel, , Karger.
15. Ritter AV, Shugars DA, Bader JD: Root caries risk indicators: A
systematic review of risk models. Community Dent Oral Epidemiol
38(5): – , .
16. Du M, Jiang H, Tai B, et al: Root caries patterns and risk factors
of middle-aged and elderly people in China. Community Dent Oral
Epidemiol 37(3): – , .
17. Saunders RH, Jr, Meyerowitz C: Dental caries in older adults. Dent
Clin North Am 49(2): – , .
18. Berry TG, Summitt JB, Swift EJ, Jr: Root caries. Oper Dent
29(6): – , .
19. Paritt GJ: he speed of development of the carious cavity. Br Dent
J : – , .
20. Backer DO: Posteruptive changes in dental enamel. J Dent Res
45: , .
CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management 91
46. Kidd EA: he use of diet analysis and advice in the management
of dental caries in adult patients. Oper Dent 20(3):86–93, .
47. Löe H: Human research model for the production and prevention
of gingivitis. J Dent Res 50: , .
48. Krase B: Caries risk , Chicago, , Quintessence.
49. Klock B, Krasse B: Efect of caries-preventive measures in children
with high numbers of S. mutans and lactobacilli. Scand J Dent Res
86(4): – , .
50. Gorur A, Lyle DM, Schaudinn C, et al: Bioilm removal with a
dental water jet. Compend Contin Educ Dent 30(Spec1):1–6, .
51. Brown LJ, Lazar V: he economic state of dentistry. Demand-side
trends. J Am Dent Assoc (12): – , .
52. HHS US Department of Health & Human Services: New Assessments
and Actions on Fluoride: Accessed 06/07/ : http://www.hhs.gov/
news/press/2011pres/01/20110107a.html .
53. American Dental Association Sc: Key dental facts , Chicago, ,
American Dental Association.
54. Populations receiving optimally luoridated public drinking water—
United States, - . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep
57(27): – , .
55. Svanberg M, Westergren G: Efect of SnF2, administered as
mouthrinses or topically applied, on Streptococcus mutans, Streptococcus
sanguis and lactobacilli in dental plaque and saliva. Scand J Dent
Res 91(2): – , .
56. Beltran-Aguilar ED, Goldstein JW, Lockwood SA: Fluoride varnishes.
A review of their clinical use, cariostatic mechanism, eicacy and
safety. J Am Dent Assoc (5): – , .
57. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Rec ommendations for
using luoride to prevent and control dental caries in the United
States. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 50(RR–14):1–30, .
58. Newbrun E: Topical luorides in caries prevention and management:
A North American perspective. J Dent Educ 65(10): – ,
.
59. Weintraub JA: Fluoride varnish for caries prevention: Comparisons
with other preventive agents and recommendations for a communitybased protocol. Spec Care Dentist 23(5): – , .
60. Borutta A, Kunzel W, Rubsam F: he caries-protective eicacy of
2 luoride varnishes in a 2-year controlled clinical trial [transla -
tion]. Dtsch Zahn Mund Kieferheilkd Zentralbl 79(7): – ,
.
61. Borutta A, Reuscher G, Hufnagl S, et al: Caries prevention with
luoride varnishes among preschool children [translation]. Gesundheitswesen 68(11): – , .
62. Castellano JB, Donly KJ: Potential remineralization of demineralized
enamel after application of luoride varnish. Am J Dent 17(6): – ,
.
63. Haugejorden O, Nord A: Caries incidence after topical application
of varnishes containing diferent concentrations of sodium luoride:
3-year results. Scand J Dent Res 99(4): – , .
64. Seppa L: Efects of a sodium luoride solution and a varnish with
diferent luoride concentrations on enamel remineralization in
vitro. Scand J Dent Res 96(4): – , .
65. Hutter JW, Chan JT, Featherstone JD, et al: Professionally
applied topical luoride. Executive summary of evidence-based
clinical recommendations. J Am Dent Assoc (8): – ,
.
66. Alaluusua S, Kleemola-Kujala E, Gronroos L, et al: Salivary cariesrelated tests as predictors of future caries increment in teenagers. A
three-year longitudinal study. Oral Microbiol Immunol 5(2):77–81,
.
67. Professionally applied topical luoride: Evidence-based clinical recom -
mendations. J Am Dent Assoc (8): – , .
68. Lehner T, Challacombe SJ, Caldwell J: An immunological investiga -
tion into the prevention of caries in deciduous teeth of rhesus
monkeys. Arch Oral Biol 20(5–6): – , .
69. Taubman MA, Smith DJ: Efects of local immunization with
glucosyltransferase fractions from Streptococcus mutans on dental
caries in rats and hamsters. J Immunol (2): – , .21. Silverstone LM: In vitro studies with special reference to the enamel
surface and the enamel-resin interface. In Silverstone LM, Dogon
IC, editors: Proceedings of an international symposium on the acid
etch tecnique , St Paul, MN, , North Central.
22. Baum LJ: Dentinal pulp conditions in relation to ca ries lesions. Int
Dent J 20: – , .
23. Brannstrom M, Lind PO: Pulpal response to early dental caries. J
Dent Res 44(5): – , .
24. Pashley DH: Clinical correlations of dentin structure and function.
J Prosthet Dent 66(6): – , .
25. Ogawa K, Yamashita Y, Ichijo T, et al: he ultrastructure and
hardness of the transparent layer of human carious dentin. J Dent
Res 62(1):7–10, .
26. Hayashi M, Fujitani M, Yamaki C, et al: Ways of enhancing pulp
preservation by stepwise excavation—a systematic review. J Dent
39(2):95– , .
27. Bjorndal L, Reit C, Bruun G, et al: T reatment of deep caries lesions
in adults: Randomized clinical trials comparing stepwise vs. direct
complete excavation, and direct pulp capping vs. part ial pulpotomy.
Eur J Oral Sci (3): – , .
28. Ricketts DN, Pitts NB: Novel operative treatment options. Monogr
Oral Sci 21: – , .
29. Hilton TJ: Keys to clinical success with pulp capping: a review of
the literature. Oper Dent 34(5): – , .
30. hompson V, Craig RG, Curro FA, et al: T reatment of deep carious
lesions by complete excavation or partial removal: A critical review.
J Am Dent Assoc (6): – , .
31. Bjorndal L: Indirect pulp therapy and stepwise excavation. J Endod
34(7 Suppl):S29–S33, .
32. Oen KT, hompson VP , Vena D, et al: Attitudes and expectations
of treating deep caries: A PEARL Network survey. Gen Dent
55(3): – , .
33. Miyashita H, Worthington HV, Qualtrough A, et al: Pulp manage -
ment for caries in adults: Maintaining pulp vitality. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev (2):CD004484, .
34. Maltz M, Oliveira EF , Fontanella V, et al: Deep caries lesions after
incomplete dentine caries removal: 40-month follow-up study.
Caries Res 41(6): – , .
35. Fusayama T: T wo layers of carious dentin: Diagnosis and treatment.
Oper Dent 4(2):63–70, .
36. Kuboki Y, Liu CF , Fusayama T: Mechanism of diferential staining
in carious dentin. J Dent Res 62(6): – , v, .
37. Beck JD, Kohout F , Hunt RJ: Identiication of high caries risk
adults: Attitudes, social factors and diseases. Int Dent J 38(4): – ,
.
38. Beck JD: Risk revisited. Community Dent Oral Epidemiol
26(4): – , .
39. Fontana M, Zero DT: Assessing patients’ caries risk. J Am Dent
Assoc (9): – , .
40. Steinberg S: Understanding and managing dental caries: A medical
approach. Alpha Omegan (3): – , .
41. Steinberg S: Adding caries diagnosis to caries risk assessment: he
next step in caries management by risk assessment (CAMBRA).
Compend Contin Educ Dent 30(8): , 24–26, 28 passim,
.
42. Domejean-Orliaguet S, Gansky SA, Featherstone JD: Caries risk
assessment in an educational environment. J Dent Educ
70(12): – , .
43. Hausen H: Caries prediction—state of the art. Community Dent
Oral Epidemiol 25(1):87–96, .
44. Riley JL, 3rd, Gordan VV, Rindal DB, et al: General practitioners’
use of caries-preventive agents in adult patients versus pediatric
patients: Findings from the dental practice-based research network.
J Am Dent Assoc (6): – , .
45. Riley JL, 3rd, Gordan VV, Rindal DB, et al: Preferences for caries
prevention agents in adult patients: Findings from the dental
practice-based research network. Community Dent Oral Epidemiol
38(4): – , .
92 CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management
of the American D ental Association Council on Scientiic Afairs.
J Am Dent Assoc (3): – , .
95. Bader JD, Shugars DA, Bonito AJ: Systematic reviews of selected
dental caries diagnostic and management methods. J Dent Educ
65(10): – , .
96. Simonsen RJ: Pit and issure sealant: Review of the literature. Pediatr
Dent 24(5): – , .
97. Paris S, Meyer-Lueckel H: Masking of labial enamel white spot
lesions by resin iniltration—a clinical report. Quintessence Int
40(9): – , .
98. Paris S, Meyer-Lueckel H: Inhibition of caries progression by resin
iniltration in situ. Caries Res 44(1):47–54, .
99. Swift EJ: T reatment options for the exposed vital pulp. Pract
Periodontics Aesthet Dent 11: – , .
. Banerjee A, Watson TF , Kidd EA: Dentine caries: Take it or leave
it? Dent Update 27(6): – , .
. Bjorndal L: Buonocore Memorial Lecture. Dentin caries: Prog ression
and clinical management. Oper Dent 27(3): – , .
. Bjorndal L: Indirect pulp therapy and stepwise excavation. Pediatr
Dent 30(3): – , .
. Bjorndal L, Kidd EA: he treatment of deep dentine caries lesions.
Dent Update 32(7): – , – , , .
. Bjorndal L, Larsen T: Changes in the cultivable lora in deep carious
lesions following a stepwise excavation procedure. Caries Res
34(6): – , .
. Bjorndal L, Larsen T, hylstrup A: A clinical and microbiological
study of deep carious lesions during stepwise excavation using long
treatment intervals. Caries Res 31(6): – , .
. Bjorndal L, hylstrup A: A practice-based study on stepwise
excavation of deep carious lesions in permanent teeth: A 1-year
follow-up study. Community Dent Oral Epidemiol 26(2): – ,
.
. Foley J, Evans D, Blackwell A: Partial caries removal and cariostatic
materials in carious primary molar teeth: A randomised controlled
clinical trial. Br Dent J (11): – , discussion ,
.
. Innes NP , Evans DJ, Stirrups DR: he Hall Technique; a randomized
controlled clinical trial of a novel method of managing carious
primary molars in general dental practice: Acceptability of the
technique and outcomes at 23 months. BMC Oral Health 7:18,
.
. Kidd EA: How “clean” must a cavity be before restoration? Caries
Res 38(3): – , .
. Kidd EA, Fejerskov O: What constitutes dental caries? Histopathology
of carious enamel and dentin related to the action of cariogenic
bioilms. J Dent Res 83(SpecC):C35–C38, .
. Leksell E, Ridell K, Cvek M, et al: Pulp exposure after stepwise
versus direct complete excavation of deep carious lesions in young
posterior permanent teeth. Endod Dent Traumatol 12(4): – ,
.
. Maltz M, de Oliveira EF , Fontanella V, et al: A clinical, microbiologic,
and radiographic study of deep caries lesions after incomplete caries
removal. Quintessence Int 33(2): – , .
. Mertz-Fairhurst EJ, Adair SM, Sams DR, et al: Cariostatic and
ultraconservative sealed restorations: Nine-year results among children
and adults. ASDC J Dent Child 62(2):97– , .
. Mertz-Fairhurst EJ, Curtis JW, Jr, Ergle JW, et al: Ultraconservative
and cariostatic sealed restorations: Results at year 10. J Am Dent
Assoc (1):55–66, .
. Mertz-Fairhurst EJ, Schuster GS, Fairhurst CW: Arresting caries
by sealants: Results of a clinical study. J Am Dent Assoc (2): – ,
.
. Mertz-Fairhurst EJ, Schuster GS, Williams JE, et al: Clinical progress
of sealed and unsealed caries. Part II: Standardized radiographs and
clinical observations. J Prosthet Dent 42(6): – , .
. Mertz-Fairhurst EJ, Schuster GS, Williams JE, et al: Clinical progress
of sealed and unsealed caries. Part I: Depth changes and bacterial
counts. J Prosthet Dent 42(5): – , .70. Sreebny LM, Schwartz SS: A reference guide to drugs and dry
mouth—2nd edition. Gerodontology 14(1):33–47, .
71. Swarn A, Ritter AV, Donovan T, et al: Caries risk evaluation:
Correlation between chair-side, laboratory and clinical tests. J Dent
Res 89(SpecialB, USB of abstracts # ): .
72. Barkvoll P , Rolla G, Svendsen K: Interaction between chlorhexidine
digluconate and sodium lauryl sulfate in vivo. J Clin Periodontol
16(9): – , .
73. Emilson CG: Potential eicacy of chlorhexidine against mutans
streptococci and human dental caries. J Dent Res 73(3): – ,
.
74. Slot DE, Vaandrager NC, Van Loveren C, et al: he efect of
chlorhexidine varnish on root caries: A systematic review. Caries
Res 45(2): – , .
75. Ashley P: Efectiveness of chlorhexidine varnish for preventing caries
uncertain. Evid Based Dent 11(4): , .
76. Reference deleted in pages.
77. Reference deleted in pages.
78. Tanzer JM: Xylitol chewing gum and dental caries. Int Dent J 45(1
Suppl 1):65–76, .
79. T rahan L: Xylitol: A review of its action on mutans streptococci
and dental plaque–its clinical signiicance. Int Dent J 45(1 Suppl
1):77–92, .
80. Edgar WM: Saliva and dental health. Clinical implications of saliva:
Report of a consensus meeting. Br Dent J (3–4):96–98, .
81. Hayes C: he efect of non-cariogenic sweeteners on the prevention
of dental caries: A review of the evidence. J Dent Educ
65(10): – , .
82. Deshpande A, Jadad AR: he impact of polyol-containing chewing
gums on dental caries: A systematic review of original randomized
controlled trials and observational studies. J Am Dent Assoc
(12): – , .
83. T ung MS, Eichmiller FC: Amorphous calcium phosphates for tooth
mineralization. Compend Contin Educ Dent 25(9 Suppl 1):9–13,
.
84. Chow LC, Takagi S, Vogel GL: Amorphous calcium phosphate:
he contention of bone. J Dent Res 77(1):6, author reply 7, .
85. Cai F , Shen P , Morgan MV, et al: Remineralization of enamel
subsurface lesions in situ by sugar-free lozenges containing casein
phosphopeptide-amorphous calcium phosphate. Aust Dent J
48(4): – , .
86. Morgan MV, Adams GG, Bailey DL, et al: he anticariogenic efect
of sugar-free gum containing CPP-ACP nanocomplexes on approxi -
mal caries determined using digital bitewing radiography. Caries
Res 42(3): – , .
87. Reynolds EC: Remineralization of enamel subsurface lesions by
casein phosphopeptide-stabilized calcium phosphate solutions. J
Dent Res 76(9): – , .
88. Reynolds EC, Cai F , Shen P , et al: Retention in plaque and remin -
eralization of enamel lesions by various forms of calcium in a
mouthrinse or sugar-free chewing gum. J Dent Res 82(3): – ,
.
89. Yengopal V, Mickenautsch S: Caries preventive efect of casein
phosphopeptide-amorphous calcium phosphate (CPP-ACP): A
meta-analysis. Acta Odontol Scand 67(6):1–12, .
90. Llena C, Forner L, Baca P: Anticariogenicity of casein phosphopeptideamorphous calcium phosphate: A review of the literature. J Contemp
Dent Pract 10(3):1–9, .
91. Simonsen RJ: Cost efectiveness of pit and issure sealant at 10
years. Quintessence Int 20(2):75–82, .
92. Tinanof N, Douglass JM: Clinical decision making for caries
management in children. Pediatr Dent 24(5): – , .
93. Ahovuo-Saloranta A, Hiiri A, Nordblad A, et al: Pit and issure
sealants for preventing dental decay in the permanent teeth of
children and adolescents. Cochrane Database Syst Rev (3):CD001830,
.
94. Beauchamp J, Cauield PW, Crall JJ, et al: Evidence-based clinical
recommendations for the use of pit-and-issure sealants: A report
CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management 93
. Ismail AI, Pitts NB, Tellez M, et al: he International Caries
Classi ication and Management System (ICCMSTM) An Example o f
a Caries Management Pathway. BMC Oral Health 15(Suppl 1):S9,
.
. Pitts NB, Ekstrand KR, Foundation ICDAS: International Caries
Detection and Assessment System (ICDAS) and its International
Caries Classiication and Management System (ICCMS) - methods
for staging of the caries process and enabling dentists to manage
caries. Community Dent Oral Epidemiol 41(1):e41–e52, .
. Ismail AI, Tellez M, Pitts NB, et al: Caries management pathways
preserve dental tissues and promote oral health. Community Dent
Oral Epidemiol 41(1):e12–e40, .
. Campus G, Cagetti MG, Sale S, et al: Cariogram validity in
schoolchildren: a two-year follow-up study. Caries Res 46:16–22,
.
. Petersson GH, Isberg PE, T wetman S: Caries risk proiles in
schoolchildren over 2 years assessed by Cariogram. Int J Paediatr
Dent 20: – , .
. Takahashi N, Nyvad B: Ecological hypothesis of dentin and root
caries. Caries Res 50: – , .
. Ekstrand KR, Martignon S, Ricketts DJN, et al: Detection and
activity assessment of primary coronal caries lesions: a methodologic
study. Oper Dent 32(3): – , .
. Nyvad B, Machiulskiene V, Baelum V: Reliability of a new caries
diagnostic system diferentiating between active and inactive caries
lesions. Caries Res 33(4): – , .
. Yamaga R, Nishino M, Yoshida S, et al: Diammine silver luoride
and its clinical application. J Osaka Univ Dent Sch 12:1–20, .
. Horst JA, Ellenikiotis H, Milgrom PL: UCSF Protocol for Caries
Arrest Using Silver Diamine Fluoride: Rationale, Indications and
Consent. J Calif Dent Assoc 44(1):16–28, .
. Mei ML, Ito L, Cao Y, et al: Inhibitory efect of silver diamine
luoride on dentine demineralisation and collagen degradation. J
Dent 41(9): – , .
. Mei ML, Li QL, Chu CH, et al: Antibacterial efects of silver
diamine luoride on multi-species cariogenic bioilm on caries. Ann
Clin Microbiol Antimicrob 12:4, .
. Markowitz K, Pashley DH: Discovering new treatments for sensitive
teeth: the long path from biology to therapy. J Oral Rehabil
35(4): – , .
. Rosenblatt A, Stamford TC, Niederman R: Silver diamine luoride:
a caries “silver-luoride bullet. J Dent Res 88(2): – , .
. Tan HP , Lo ECM, Dyson JE, et al: Randomized clinical trial on
arresting dental root caries through silver diamine luoride applications
in community-dwelling elders. Br Dent J (7): , .
. Yee R, Holmgren C, Mulder J, et al: Eicacy of silver diamine luoride
for Arresting Caries T reatment. J Dent Res 88(7): – , .
. Campus G, Cagetti MG, Sale S: Six months of high-dose xylitol
in high-risk caries subjects–a 2-year randomised, clinical trial. Clin
Oral Invest 17: – , .
. Bader JD, Vollmer WM, Shugars DA, et al: Results from the Xylitol
for Adult Caries T rial (X-ACT). J Am Dent Assoc (1):21–30,
.
. Ritter AV, Bader JD, Leo MC, et al: Tooth-surface-speciic efects
of xylitol: randomized trial results. J Dent Res 92(6): – , .
. Riley P , Moore D, Ahmed F , et al: Xylitol-containing products for
preventing dental caries in children and adults. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 26(3): .
. Bueno-Silva B, Koo H, Falsetta ML, et al: Efect of neovestitol–vestitol
containing Brazilian red propolis on accumulation of bioilm in
vitro and development of dental caries in vivo. J Bioadhesion Bioilm
Res 29: – , .
. Ástvaldsdóttir Á, Naimi-Akbar A, Davidson T, et al: Arginine and
Caries Prevention: A Systematic Review. Caries Res 50(4): – ,
.
. Bader JD, Shugars DA, Bonito AJ: A systematic review of selected
caries prevention and management methods. Community Dent Oral
Epidemiol 29: – , . . Mjor IA: Pulp-dentin biology in restorative dentistry. Part 7: he
exposed pulp. Quintessence Int 33(2): – , .
. Pinheiro SL, Simionato MR, Imparato JC, et al: Antibacterial
activity of glass-ionomer cement containing antibiotics on caries
lesion microorganisms. Am J Dent 18(4): – , .
. Ricketts D: Management of the deep carious lesion and the vital
pulp dentine complex. Br Dent J (11): – , .
. Ricketts DN, Kidd EA, Innes N, et al: Complete or ultraconservative
removal of decayed tissue in unilled teeth. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev (3):CD003808, .
. Uribe S: Partial caries removal in symptomless teeth reduces the
risk of pulp exposure. Evid Based Dent 7(4):94, .
. van Amerongen WE: Dental caries under glass ionomer restorations.
J Public Health Dent 56(3 Spec No): – , discussion – ,
.
. Shay K: he evolving impact of aging America on dental practice.
J Contemp Dent Pract 5(4): – , .
. Leake JL: Clinical decision-making for caries management in root
surfaces. J Dent Educ 65(10): – , .
. homson WM: Dental caries experience in older people over time:
What can the large cohort studies tell us? Br Dent J (2):89–92,
discussion 87, .
. Winston AE, Bhaskar SN: Caries prevention in the 21st century.
J Am Dent Assoc (11): – , .
. Berkey DB, Berg RG, Ettinger RL, et al: he old-old dental patient:
he challenge of clinical decision-making. J Am Dent Assoc
(3): – , .
. Surmont PA, Martens LC: Root surface caries: An update. Clin
Prev Dent 11(3):14–20, .
. Burgess JO, Gallo JR: T reating root-surface caries. Dent Clin North
Am 46(2): – , vii–viii, .
. Haveman CW, Redding SW: Dental management and treatment
of xerostomic patients. T ex Dent J (6):43–56, .
. Takahashi N, Nyvad B: he role of bacteria in the caries process:
ecological perspectives. J Dent Res 90(3): – , .
. Ferjeskov O, Nyvad B, Kidd E, editors: Dental C aries: he disease
and its clinical management , 3rd ed, Oxford, , Wiley-Blackwell.
. Simón-Soro A, Tomás I, Cabrera-Rubio R, et al: Mira AMicrobial
geography of the oral cavity. J Dent Res 92(7): – , .
. Ling Z, Kong J, Jia P , et al: Analysis of oral microbiota in children
with dental caries by PCR-DGGE and barcoded pyrosequencing.
Microb Ecol 60(3): – , .
. Hannig C, Hannig M, Attin T: Enzymes in the acquired enamel
pellicle. Eur J Oral Sci (1):2–13, .
. Silverstone LM, Hicks MJ: he structure and ultrastructure of the
carious lesion in human dentin. Gerodontics 1(4): – , .
. Boushell LW, Nagaola H, Yamauchi M: Increased Matrix
Metalloproteinase-2 and Bone Sialoprotein Response to Human
Coronal Caries. Caries Res 45: – , .
. Bjørndal L, Kidd EA: he treatment of deep dentine caries lesions.
Dent Update 32(7): – , .
. Bjørndal L, hylstrup A: A structural analysis of approximal enamel
caries lesions and subjacent dentin reactions. Eur J Oral Sci
(1):25–31, .
. Ekstrand KR, Ricketts DN, Kidd EA: Do occlusal carious lesions
spread laterally at the enamel-dentin junction? A histolopathological
study. Clin Oral Investig 2(1):15–20, .
. Bjørndal L, Kidd EA: he treatment of deep dentine caries lesions.
Dent Update 32(7): – , .
. Ekstrand KR, Ricketts DN, Kidd EA: Do occlusal carious lesions
spread laterally at the enamel-dentin junction? A histolopathological
study. Clin Oral Investig 2(1):15–20, .
. Doméjean S, Featherstone JDB, White J: Validation of the CDA
CAMBRA caries risk assessment: a six-year retrospective study. J
Calif Dent Assoc 39: – , .
. Cheng J, Chafee BW, Cheng NF , et al: Understanding treatment
efect mechanisms of the CAMBRA randomized trial in reducing
caries increment. J Dent Res 94(1):44–51, .
94 CHAPTER 2 Dental Carie :Etiology, Clinical Characteritic ,Rik Aement, and Management
. Uribe S: Partial caries removal in symptomless teeth reduces the
risk of pulp exposure. Evid Based Dent 7(4):94, .
. van Amerongen WE: Dental caries under glass ionomer restorations.
J Public Health Dent 56(3 Spec No): – , discussion 61-63,
.
. Bjorndal L, Larsen T: Changes in the cultiv able lora in deep carious
lesions following a stepwise excavation procedure. Caries Res
34(6): – , .
. Maltz M, Garcia R, Jardim JJ, et al: Randomized trial of partial vs.
stepwise caries removal: 3-year follow-up. J Dent Res
91(11): – , .
. Alves LS, Fontanella V, Damo AC, et al: Qualitative and quantitative
radiographic assessment of sealed carious dentin: a 10-year prospective
study. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod
(1): – , .
. Lima KC, Coelho LT, Pinheiro IVA, et al: Microbiota of dentinal
caries as assessed by reverse-capture checkerboard analysis. Caries
Res 45:21–30, .
. Banerjee A, Kidd EA, Watson TF: In vitro validation of carious
dentin removed using diferent excavation criteria. Am J Dent
16(4): – , .
. Hamama HH, Yiu CK, Burrow MF , et al: Chemical, morphological
and microhardness changes of dentine after chemomechanical caries
removal. Aust Dent J 58(3): – , .
. Hamama HH, Yiu CK, Burrow MF , et al: Systematic Review and
Meta-Analysis of Randomized Clinical T rials on Chemomechanical
Caries Removal. Oper Dent 40(4):E167–E178, .
. Corralo DJ, Maltz M: Clinical and ultrastructural efects of diferent
liners/restorative materials on deep carious dentin: a randomized
clinical trial. Caries Res 47(3): – , .
. Alqaderi H, Lee CT, Borzangy S, et al: Coronal pulpotomy for
cariously exposed permanent posterior teeth with closed apices: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Dent 44:1–7, .
. Hoeler V, Nagaoka H, Miller CS: Long-term survival and vitality
outcomes of permanent teeth following deep caries treatment with
step-wise and partial-caries-removal: A Systematic Review. J Dent
54(11):25–32, .
. Reference deleted in pages.
. Reference deleted in pages.
. Schwendicke F , Meyer-Lückel H, Dorfer C, et al: Failure of
incompletely excavated teeth: a systematic review. J Dent
41(7): – , .
. Zanini M, Hennequin M, Cousson PY: A Review of Criteria for
the Evaluation of Pulpotomy Outcomes in Mature Permanent Teeth.
J Endod 42(8): – , .
. Yaacob M, Worthington HV, Deacon SA, et al: Powered versus
manual toothbrushing for oral health. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
(6): .
. Haveman CW, Summitt JB, Burgess JO, et al: hree restorative
materials and topical luoride gel used in xerostomic patients: A
clinical comparison. J Amer Dent Assoc : – , .
. Welch JL, Rossetti BJ, Riekem CW, et al: Bioge ography of a human
oral microbiome at the micron scale. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
(6):E791–E800, .
. Xiao J, Klein MI, Falsetta ML, et al: he exopolysaccharide matrix
modulates the interaction between 3D architecture and virulence
of a mixed-species oral bioilm. PLoS Pathog 8(4):e1002623, .
. Koo H, Falsetta ML, Klein MI: he exopolysaccharide matri: A
virulence determinant of cariogenic biofilm. J Dent Res
92(12): – , . . Wright JT, Tampi MP , Graham L, et al: Sealants for preventing and
arresting pit-and-issure occlusal caries in primary and permanent
molars. A systematic review of randomized controlled trials—a
report of the American Dental Association and the American
Academy of Pediatric Dentistry. J Am Dent Assoc (8): – ,
e18, .
. Meyer-Lueckel H, Balbach A, Schikowsky C, et al: Pragmatic
RCT on the Eicacy of Proximal Caries Iniltration. J Dent Res
95(5): .
. Innes NP , Frencken JE, Bjorndal L, et al: Managing Carious Lesions:
Consensus Recommendations on Terminology. Adv Dent Res
28(2):49–57, .
. Schwendicke F , Frencken JE, Bjorndal L, et al: Managing Carious
Lesions: Consensus Recommendations on Carious Tissue Removal.
Adv Dent Res 28(2):58–67, .
. Schwendicke F , Frencken JE, Bjorndal L, et al: Managing Carious
Lesions: Consensus Recommendations on Carious Tissue Removal.
Adv Dent Res 28(2):58–67, .
. Banerjee A, Watson TF , Kidd EA: Dentine caries: take it or leave
it? Dent Update 27(6): – , .
. Bjorndal L: Buonocore Memorial Lecture. Dentin caries: progression
and clinical management. Oper Dent 27(3): – , .
. Bjorndal L: Indirect pulp therapy and stepwise excavation. Pediatr
Dent 30(3): – , .
. Oen KT, hompson VP , Vena D, et al: Attitudes and expectations
of treating deep caries: a PEARL Network survey. Gen Dent
55(3): – , .
. Pinheiro SL, Simionato MR, Imparato JC, et al: Antibacterial
activity of glass-ionomer cement containing antibiotics on caries
lesion microorganisms. Am J Dent 18(4): – , .
. Ricketts D: Management of the deep carious lesion and the vital
pulp dentine complex. Br Dent J (11): – , .
. Ricketts DN, Kidd EA, Innes N, et al: Complete or ultraconservative
removal of decayed tissue in unilled teeth. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev (3): .
. van Amerongen WE: Dental caries under glass ionomer restorations.
J Public Health Dent 56(3 Spec No): – , discussion 61-63,
.
. Banerjee A, Watson TF , Kidd EA: Dentine caries: take it or leave
it? Dent Update 27(6): – , .
. Bjorndal L: Indirect pulp therapy and stepwise excavation. J Endod
34(7 Suppl):S29–S33, .
. Bjorndal L, Kidd EA: he treatment of deep dentine caries lesions.
Dent Update 32(7): – , .
. Oen KT, hompson VP , Vena D, et al: Attitudes and expectations
of treating deep caries: a PEARL Network survey. Gen Dent
55(3): – , .
. Pinheiro SL, Simionato MR, Imparato JC, et al: Antibacterial
activity of glass-ionomer cement containing antibiotics on caries
lesion microorganisms. Am J Dent 18(4): – , .
. Ricketts D: Management of the deep carious lesion and the vital
pulp dentine complex. Br Dent J (11): – , .
. Ricketts DN, Kidd EA, Innes N, et al: Complete or ultraconservative
removal of decayed tissue in unilled teeth. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev (3): .
. Ricketts DN, Pitts NB: Novel operative treatment options. Monogr
Oral Sci 21: – , .
. hompson V, Craig RG, Curro FA, et al: T reatment of deep carious
lesions by complete excavation or partial removal: a critical review.
J Am Dent Assoc (6): – , .
CHAPTER 3 Patient Aement, Examination, Diagnoi ,and Treatment Planning
3
Patient Assessment, Examination,
Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
LEE W. BOUSHELL, DANIEL A. SHUGARS, R. SCOTT EIDSONa
This chapter provides an overview of the process through
which a clinician completes patient assessment, clinical
examination, diagnosis, and treatment planning for operative
dentistry procedures. he chapter assumes that the reader has a
background in oral medicine and an understanding of how to
perform complete (comprehensive) extraoral and intraoral hard
and soft tissue examinations, as well as an understanding of the
etiology, characteristics, risk assessment, and management of dental
caries as presented in Chapter 2 . It is not in the scope of this
chapter to incorporate the details of other aspects of a complete
dental examination, such as periodontal, occlusal, and esthetic
examinations. Appropriate textbooks that cover the speciics of
these areas, in health and disease, should be consulted.
Any discussion of diagnosis and treatment must begin with an
appreciation of the role of the dentist in helping patients m aintain
their or al health. his role is summarized by the Latin phrase “primum
non nocere,” which means “do no harm.” his phrase represents a
fundamental principle continually embraced by those in the healing
arts over many centuries.
he implication of this concept for operative dentistry is that, before
we recommend treatment, we must be r easonably conident that the
patient will be better of as a result of our intervention. However,
how can we be reasonably conident when we realize that few, if any,
of the tests we perform or the assessments of risk that we make are
completely accurate? To make matters even more challenging, none of
the treatments we provide is without adverse outcomes and none will
likely last for the life of the patient. he answer is that we must
acknowledge that the information or evidence we have is not perfect
and that we must be clear about the possible conseq uences of our
decisions. If we are informed and clear about options and their
consequences, then we reduce the chances of doing any harm.
he success of operative treatment depends heavily on an
appropriate plan of care, which, in turn, is based on a comprehensive
analysis of the patient’s reasons for seeking care and on a systematic
assessment of the patient’s current conditions and risk for future
problems. his information is then combined with the best available
evidence on approaches to management of the patient’s needs so
that an appropriate plan of care may be ofered.
he collection of this information and the determinations based
on examination indings should be comprehensive and accomplished
in a stepwise manner. Simply put, skipping steps may lead to overlooking potentially important parts of the patient’s individual
needs. hese steps include reasons for seeking care, medical and
dental histories, clinical examination for the detection of abnormali -
ties, establishing diagnoses (which includes assessing risk), and
determining prognosis. All of these steps must occu r before a
sound and appropriate plan of care may be developed and
recommended.
Growing attention to using only the most efective and appropri -
ate treatment has spawned interest in numerous research eforts.
Research that provides information on treatments that work best
in certain situations is expanding the knowledge base of dentistry
and has led to an interest in translating the results of that research
into practice activities that enhance care for patients. his movement
has been termed evidence-based dentistry and is deined as the
“conscientious, explicit, and judicious use of current best evidence
in making decisions about the care of individual patients.”1 Systematic reviews emerging from the focus on evidence-based dentistry
will provide practitioners with a distillation of the avail able
knowledge about various conditions and treatments. It is incumbent
on the authors of the systematic review to openly discuss the
strengths and weaknesses of the reviewed studies as well as the
relative value of their conclusions for application in dental care.
Currently, the American Dental Association (ADA) has developed
a website ( http://ebd.ada.org/ ) that may be used by dental profes -
sionals for evidence-based dentistry decision making. his website
helps clinicians identify systematic reviews, describes the preferred
method for assembling the best available scientiic evidence, and
provides an appraisal of the evidence through critical summaries.
As evidence-based dentistry continues to expand, professional
associations will become more active in the development of
guidelines to assist dentists and their patients in making informed
and appropriate decisions.
General Conideration
It is di icult to overstate the importance of gaining compre hensive
insight into each patient. Dentistry has, by its very origins, been
heavily focused on reconstruction of damaged areas. However,
nothing that we design and create has the ability to withstand the
wet, warm, salty, thermally cycled, and cyclically loaded environment
of the oral cavity for the whole life of the patient. herefore the
emphasis in dentistry has shifted toward understanding and
maintaining conditions consistent with a healthy stomatognathic aDr. Eidson was an inactive author in this edition.
96 CHAPTER 3 Patient Aement, Examination, Diagnoi ,and Treatment Planning
broken restorations or tooth structure. Finally, the date, type, and
diagnostic quality of available radiographs should be recorded so
as to ascertain the need for additional radiographs and to minimize
the patient’s exposure to ionizing radiation.
Chief Concern
Before initiating any treatment, the patient’s chief concerns, or
the problems that initiated the patient’s visit, should be identiied
and clearly understood. Concerns are recorded essentially verbatim
in the dental record. he patient should be encouraged to discuss
all aspects (symptoms) of the current problem(s), including onset,
duration, and related factors they are experiencing. his information
is vital to establishing which speciic diagnostic tests are required,
determining the cause, selecting appropriate treatment options for
the concerns, and building a sound relationship with the patient.
Examination
It is somewhat artiicial to discuss examination as a separate entity
from patient assessment for aspects of the patient “examination”
begin during initial conversations with the patient. Careful observa -
tion of extraoral symmetry of the patient’s physical appearance of
the head and neck areas, mandibular movement during speech,
ability to articulate sounds, and tendencies to smile provides vital
information relative to overall presence or absence of abnormalities
or disease. hese observations occur while reviewing/clarifying
information reported in the medical and dental history and while
listening to the patient’s chief concern(s). By deinition, these early
observations are all extraoral in nature.
Many examination data recording systems utilize organizational
logic that begins with “extraoral examination” followed by “intraoral
examination” so as to facilitate the recording of observational
information (what the dentist observes while interacting with the
patient). Utilization of clinical photography to capture full face
and proile images is particularly useful in this process. Any observa -
tions will ultimately be followed by the physical e xamination neces -
sary to assess extraoral aspects of the muscles of mastication,
temporomandibular joints (TMJs), lymphnodes, and other vital
structures, which will then be followed by intraoral examination.
Examination of Ethetic Appearance
Examination of esthetic appearance may be described as the evalu -
ation of tooth color, form, display, and position in relation to the
face. Evaluation must include discussion of realistic esthetic
expectations when considering treatment options with the patient.
Attaining the desired esthetic outcomes may be complicated by
maximum tooth display and excessive or uneven tissue display.
Risk of patient dissatisfaction with treatment outcomes may be
lowered by careful attention to the establishment of intrafacial,
intraarch, and interarch tooth positions that have been identiied
as consistent with maximum esthetics. his is accomplished in
light of the reality that when individual teeth are correct in their
anatomic shape, and positioned in the face and arches fo r optimum
function, then the overall esthetic result will be optimal (“form
follows function”). Tooth color evaluation becomes a factor if teeth
are more visible when smiling or at the resting position of lips.
Darker colored teeth, teeth with enamel intrinsic s taining, and
conditions such as tetracycline staining all increase the risk for not
satisfying the esthetic expectations of patients with tooth color
concerns. Symmetry of gingival margins becomes very important system so that steps may be taken to prevent dental disease. he
speciic circumstances of each individual must be considered in
light of the known requirements of optimal oral health. Gaining
insight into individual circumstances begins with proper patient
assessment. Medical and dental health survey questions are excellent
basic tools designed to facilitate this process. Responses to the
broad overview questions (generally referred to as the “medical
history” and “dental history”) then enable speciic exploration of
previous or current conditions unique to the individual patient,
that may represent risk factors or indicators for dental disease, as
well as the primary reason (i.e., the chief concern) that prompted
the patient to seek the assistance of the dentist. hi s interview
process is then followed by the clinical gathering of additional
information by means of strategic examination. he examination
is the “hands-on” process of observing the patient’s extraoral and
intraoral structures and detecting of symptoms and si gns of abnormal
conditions or disease. During the clinical examination, the dentist
must be keenly sensitive to subtle symptoms (that the patient
reports), signs (that the dentist detects), and variations from normal
to detect pathologic conditions and determine etiologic factors.
he discovery of additional risk factors/indicators may occur during
the examination. he combined patient assessment and exami nation
information is then used to formulate diagnoses (and risk proiles),
which are a determination or judgment of health versus disease,
variations from normal, and likelihood for the development of
additional disease. he dentist must be committed to comprehensive
and meticulous attention to detail.
Patient Aement
Medical Hitory
he patient or legal guardian completes a standard, comprehensive
medical history form. his form is an integral part of the preex -
amination patient interview, which helps identify conditions that
could alter, complicate, or contraindicate proposed dental proce -
dures. he practitioner should identify (1) communicable diseases
that require special precautions, procedures, or referral; (2) allergies
or medications, which may contraindicate the use of certain drugs;
(3) systemic diseases, cardiac abnormalities, or joint replacements,
which may require prophylactic antibiotic coverage or other treat -
ment modiications; and (4) physiologic changes associated with
aging, which may alter clinical pr esentation and inluence treatment.
he practitioner also might identify a need for medical consultation
or referral before initiating dental care. All of this information is
carefully detailed in the patient’s permanent record and is used,
as needed, to shape subsequent treatment recommendations.
Dental Hitory
he dental history is a review of previous dental experiences and
current dental problems. Review of the dental history often reveals
information about past dental problems, previous dental treatment,
and the patient’s responses to treatments. Frequency of dental care
and perceptions of previous care may be indications of the patient’s
future behavior. If a patient has diiculty tolerating certain types
of procedures or has encountered problems with previous dental
care, an alteration of the treatment or environment might help
avoid future complications. It is crucial to understand past experi -
ences in order to provide optimal care in the future. Also, this
discussion might lead to identiication of speciic problems such
as areas of food impaction, inability to loss, areas of pain, and
CHAPTER 3 Patient Aement, Examination, Diagnoi ,and Treatment Planning 97
grinding or clenching. Nonworking-side excursive contacts are
recorded and related to any indings of masticatory muscle myositis
and/or ipsilateral TMJ disc issues. Working-side excursive contacts
are recorded and related to areas of cusp fracture developm ent.
Protrusive contacts on all posterior teeth molars are noted. Heavy
wear facets on posterior cuspal inclines, mobility of teeth, or frem itus
during function is identiied and classiied as primary or secondary
occlusal traumatism. Full analysis of the occlusion may require
articulated diagnostic models. Movement of the mandible from
maximum intercuspation to maximum opening is observed and
maximum unassisted opening is measured; any “clicking or popping”
of the joint disc(s) during mandibular movements is noted and
related to any history of trauma, nonworking occlusal interferences,
or other possible pathologic changes. Bimanual loading of the
joints and palpation of the condyle lateral poles and retrocondylar
areas (during wide mandibular opening) are completed to further
test for tenderness/pain as signs of inlammation. he occlusal
relationships of the teeth are assessed for the presence of an unusually
tall and narrow cusp (a “plunger cusp”) that “plunges” deep into
the occlusal plane of the opposing arch . A plunger cusp might
contact the lower of two adjacent marginal ridges of diferent
levels, contacting directly between two adjacent marginal ridges in
maximum intercuspation, or be positioned in a deep fossa. It may
increase the likelihood of food impaction and tooth or restoration
fracture.
he results of the occlusal examination should be included in
the dental record and considered in the restorative treatment plan.
Acceptable aspects of the occlusion must be preserved and not
altered during treatment. When possible, improvement of the
occlusion (elimination of interferences), based on knowledge of
the physiologic masticatory muscle response to various relationships,
is desirable; occlusal interferences must not be perpetuated in the
restorative treatment.
Examination of Teeth and Retoration
Preparation for Clinical Examination
A trained assistant familiar with the terminology, notation system,
and charting procedure may survey the patient’s tee th and existing
restorations and record the information to save chair time for the
dentist. he dentist subsequently performs the examination and
conirms the charting. Proper instruments, including a mirror, an
explorer, and a periodontal probe, and the ability to air-dry the
surfaces of the teeth are required. Every accessible surface of each
tooth must be inspected for localized changes in color, texture,
and translucency. A routine for charting should be established,
such as starting in the upper right quadrant with the most posterior
tooth and progressing around the maxillary and mandibular arches.
Dental loss is useful in identifying overhanging restorations,
improper proximal contours, and open contacts. he clinical
examination is performed systematically in a clean, dry, wellilluminated mouth. A cotton roll in the vestibular space and another
under the tongue maintain dryness and improve visualization of
the teeth and adjacent gingiva ( Fig. 3.1 ). Heavy bioilm accumula -
tion may require lossing and a toothbrush prophylaxis to aid in
the examination process. Occasionally a gross debridement must
be schedule before inal clinical examination of the teeth may be
accomplished.
Clinical Examination for Caries
Contemporary caries management, which encompasses expanded
nonoperative approaches and conservative operative interventions, in patients who display a large amount of gingival tissue when
smiling. Lack of symmetry increases the risk of not meeting the
patient’s esthetic expectations. Presence of multiple risk factors
requires in-depth, careful consideration of the various components/
relationships of the stomatognathic system, the ability to develop
an interdisciplinary treatment plan, and excellent listening skills
so as to identify realistic options consistent with the patient’s overall
esthetic expectations. All of this must be accomplished without
compromising the shortand long-term dental health of the patient
(“do no harm” ). In many of these situations, conservative direct or
indirect enamel-supported restorations are more appropriate for
long-term risk management than are more aggressive preparations
that remove relatively more tooth structure.
Examination of Occluion
A careful examination of the patient’s current occlusal scheme,
along with potential impact on the muscles of mastication and
TMJs, must occur before planning and implementing restorative
care (see Chapter 1 ). his examination includes identiication of
signs of occlusal trauma, such as heavy wear facets, enamel cracks,
or tooth mobility, and notation of occlusal abnormalities that may
be contributing to pathologic conditions such as bo ne loss.
Identiication of the current relative health of the stomatognathic
system then allows consideration of the potential ability of the
proposed restorative treatment to achieve harmonious function of
each component of the system. Careful analysis may identify need
for modiication of the current occlusal scheme prior to the initiation
of any deinitive restorative care.
he static and dynamic occlusion must be examined carefully
(see Chapter 1 ) in light of the observation that there is no “ideal”
occlusion and that most patients may have the ability to adapt
to their occlusion without clinical symptoms. However, the cli -
nician must understand the normal physiologic response of the
muscles of mastication to various occlusal interrelationships and
be able to identify where, for a speciic patient, pathology (of
the dentition, muscles of mastication, and/or TMJs) is present
and what modiications may be indicated. A description of the
patient’s static anatomic occlusion in maximum intercuspation,
including the relationship between molars and canin es (Angle Class
I, II, or III), and the amount of vertical overlap (overbite) and
horizontal overlap (overjet) of anterior teeth should be recorded.
his should include assessment of the presence and speciics of
any functional shift from centric relation occlusion to maximum
intercuspation. he presence of missing teeth and the relationship
of the maxillary and mandibular midlines should be determined.
he appropriateness of the occlusal plane and the positions of
malposed teeth should be identiied. Supererupted teeth, spacing,
fractured teeth, and marginal ridge discrepancies should be noted.
he dynamic functional occlusion in all movements of the mandible
(right, left, forward, and all excursions in between) should be
evaluated. he evaluation also includes assessing the relationship
of teeth in centric relation, which is the orthopedic position of the
joint where the condyle head is in its most anterior and superior
position against the articular eminence within the glenoid fossa.
Functional movements of the mandible are evaluated to determine
if canine guidance or group function exists. he presence and
amount of anterior guidance is evaluated to note the degree of
potential posterior disclusion. Teeth are examined for abnormal
wear patterns that are excessive and not age appropriate. If signs
of abnormal or premature wear are present, the patient is queried
as to awareness of any contributing parafunction habits such as
98 CHAPTER 3 Patient Aement, Examination, Diagnoi ,and Treatment Planning
relies on enhanced risk assessment and improved lesion detection
and classiication. Clinical caries lesion detection has been found
lacking; thus improvement is needed.2 One means of addressing
these concerns has been the development of a visual system for
caries lesion detection and classiication. he International Caries
Detection and Assessment System (ICDAS) was developed to
serve as a guide for standardized visual caries assessment that
could be used for clinical practice, clinical research, education,
and epidemiology ( Fig. 3.2 ). In the United States, the Caries
Management by Risk Assessment (CAMBRA) movement, as
discussed in Chapter 2 , embraces the principles of the ICDAS
for visual examination and assessment of caries lesions. he ICDAS
has been further condensed by the American Dental Association
into the Caries Classiication System (ADA CCS)3 (see Fig. 3.2 ).
Assessment of dental caries also requires identiication of caries
lesion activity so as to make decisions relative to treatment recom -
mendations ( ). he objective of improved detection and
classiication systems is to accurately identify those early enamel
lesions that are most likely to be reversed by remineralization.
herefore appropriate nonoperative care may be attempted, and
lesions that require operative treatment may be identiied as early
as possible in the disease process. With this approach, restoration
• Fig. 3.1 Accurate clinical examination requires a clean, dry, well-illu -
minated mouth. Cotton rolls are placed in the vestibular space and under
the tongue to maintain dryness and enhance visibility.
Occlusal Protocol ***
ICDAS code
Definitions
Histologic depth
Sealant/restoration
Recommendation
for low risk
Sealant/restoration
Recommendation
for moderate risk
Sealant/restoration
Recommendation
for high risk * and
extreme risk **01 23 45 6
Sound tooth surface;
no caries change
after air drying (5
sec); or hypoplasia,
wear, erosion, and
other noncaries
phenomenaADA CCS Initial Moderate Extensive
Sealant optional
DIAGNOdent may
be helpfulSealant optional
DIAGNOdent may
be helpful
Sealant optional
DIAGNOdent may
be helpful
Sealant recommended
DIAGNOdent may be
helpfulSealant recommended
DIAGNOdent may be
helpfulSealant recommended
DIAGNOdent may be
helpfulSealant optional or
caries biopsy if
DIAGNOdent is 20-30
Sealant optional or
caries biopsy if
DIAGNOdent is 20-30
Sealant optional or
caries biopsy if
DIAGNOdent is 20-30First visual change
in enamel; seen on ly
after air drying or
colored, change “thin”
limited to the confines
of the pit and fissure
area
Lesion depth in P/F
was 90% in the outer
enamel with only 10%
into dentinDistinct visual change
in enamel; seen when
wet, white or colored,
“wider” than the
fissure/fossa
Lesion depth in P/F
was 50% inner enamel
and 50% into the
outer 1/3 dentinLocalized enamel
breakdown with no
visible dentin or
underlying shad ow;
discontinuity of
surface enamel,
widening of fissure
Lesion depth in P/F
with 77% in dentin
Sealant or minimally
invasive restoration
needed
Sealant or minimally
invasive restoration
needed
Sealant or minimally
invasive restoration
neededMinimally in vasive
restoration
Minimally in vasive
restoration
Minimally in vasive
restorationMinimally in vasive
restoration
Minimally in vasive
restoration
Minimally in vasive
restorationMinimally in vasive
restoration
Minimally in vasive
restoration
Minimally in vasive
restorationUnde rlying da rk
shad ow from dentin,
with or without
localized enamel
breakd own
Lesion depth in P/F
with 88% in to dentinDistinct cavity with
visible dentin ; frank
cavitation in volving
less than half of a
tooth surface
Lesion depth in P/F
with % in dentinExtensi ve distinct
cavity with dentin;
cavity is deep and
wide in volving mo re
than half of the tooth
Lesion depth in P/F
% reaching inner
1/3 dentin
* Patients with one (or more) cavitated lesion(s) are high-risk patients . ** Patients with one (or more) cavitated lesion(s) and xerostomia are extremerisk patient s.
*** All sealants and restorations to be done with a minimally in vasive philosophy in mind . Sealants are defined as confined to enamel. Restoration is de fined as in dentin . A two-surface restoration is defined as a
preparation that has one pa rt of the preparation in dentin and the preparation extends to a second surface (note: the second surface does not ha ve to be in dentin). A sealant can be either resin-based or glass
ionome r. Resin-based sealants should ha ve the most conservatively prepared fissures for proper bonding . Glass ionomer should be conside red where the enamel is immatu re, or where fissure preparation is not
desired, or whe re rubber dam isolation is not possible . Patients should be given a choice in material selection.
• Fig. 3.2 American Dental Association Caries Classiication System (ADA CCS) and International Caries
Detection and Assessment System (ICDAS) chart showing visual caries detection. (Modiied from Young
DA, Nový BB, Zeller GG, et al.: The American Dental Association Caries Classiication System for Clinical
Practice, A report of the American Dental Association Council on Scientiic Affairs, J Am Dent Assoc
(2):79–86, ; and Jenson L, Budenz AW, Featherstone JD, et al.: Clinical protocols for caries
management by risk assessment , J Calif Dent Assoc 35: , .)
CHAPTER 3 Patient Aement, Examination, Diagnoi ,and Treatment Planning 99
frequently are cleansed by the rubbing action of food during
mastication. Conversely, occlusal issures and pits are deep, tight
crevices or holes in enamel, where the lobes failed to coalesce
partially or completely. Fissures and pits are detected visually and
may frequently be stained but not diseased.
As noted earlier, sharp explorers previously have been used
to evaluate issures and pits in an attempt to diagnose issure/
pit caries. However, numerous studies have found that the use
of a sharp explorer for this purpose did not increa se diagnostic
validity compared with visual inspection alone.4-7 he use of the
dental explorer for this purpose was found to fracture ename l
and serve as a source for transferring pathogenic bacteria among
various teeth.8,9 herefore the use of a sharp explorer in diagnosing
pit-and-issure caries is contraindicated as part of the detection
process.
An occlusal surface is examined visually and radiographically.10,11
he visual examination is conducted in a dry, well-illuminated
ield. Direct vision is used to observe how light passes into the
surface of the tooth structure. he occlusal surface is diagnosed
as diseased if external chalkiness (enamel caries) or subsurface
opacity (dentin caries) or cavitation of tooth structure, forming
the issure or pit, is seen. At times a brown-gray discoloration,
radiating peripherally from the issure or pit, is present (see Fig.
3.3A , enamel area adjacent to the central pit/lingual issure)
indicating caries progression in dentin below the translucent enamel.
In contrast, it is common to observe nondiseased occlusal surfaces
with narrow grooves or fossae that exhibit supericial staining, but
no visual changes in light r election through the enamel immediately
adjacent (see Fig. 3.3A , distal aspect of central groove and distal
fossa area) and with no radiographic evidence of caries. The
supericial staining is extrinsic and occurs over several years of oral
exposure in a person with low caries risk. Caries lesions occasionally
develop on cusp tips (see Fig. 3.3B ). Typically, these are the result
of developmental enamel defects or following loss of enamel
(exposure of dentin) due to erosion, abrasion, or parafunction.
he presence of caries in these self-cleansing areas usually indicates
that the patient is at high risk of developing additional caries (see
Risk Assessments and Proiles in the Diagnosis section to come).
Carious pits and issures also occur on the occlusal two thirds of
the facial or lingual surface of posterior teeth and on the lingual
surface of maxillary incisors.
he clinical interpretation of subtle changes in the appear -
ance of tooth structure is aided by simultaneous consideration of
the patient’s overall caries risk, along with the patient’s previous
patterns of susceptibility. he patient’s medical history, dental
history, oral hygiene, diet, and age, among other caries risk factors
and indicators, may suggest a prediction of current and future
caries activity. In addition, occlusal caries lesions tend to occur
bilaterally.
he ICDAS uses a two-stage process to record the status of
the caries lesion. he irst is a code for the severity of the caries
lesion and the second is for the restorative status of the tooth.
he status of the caries severity is determined visually on a scale
of 0 to 6:
0 = sound tooth structure
1 = irst visual change in enamel
2 = distinct visual change in enamel
3 = enamel breakdown, no dentin visible
4 = dentinal shadow (not cavitated into dentin)
5 = distinct cavity with visible dentin
6 = extensive distinct cavity with visible dentinwill result in the removal of the minimum amount of tooth
structure.
Caries lesions may be detected by visual changes in tooth surface
texture or color or in tactile sensation when an explorer is used
judiciously to detect surface roughness by gently stroking across
the tooth surface. Current thinking inds that the use of an explorer
in this manner might have some relevance for assessing caries
activity. However, it cannot be overemphasized that the explorer
must not be used to determine a “stick” (i.e., a resistance to withdrawal
from a issure or pit). his improper use of a sharp explorer has
been shown to irreversibly damage the tooth by turning a sound,
remineralizable subsurface lesion into a possible cavitation that is
prone to progression. Forcing an explorer into pits and issures
also theoretically risks cross-contamination from one probing site
to another. In contrast, for assessment of root caries, an explorer
is valuable for detecting root surface softness. Additional methods
used in caries lesion identiication include radiographs, which show
changes in tooth density from normal, and adjunctive tests that
use various technologies to aid in caries lesion detection and caries
activity (discussed in later sections).
Occlual Surface
Caries lesions are most prevalent in the faulty pits and issures of
the occlusal surfaces where the developmental enamel lobes of
posterior teeth partially or completely failed to coalesce ( Fig. 3.3A ).
It is important to remember the distinction between primary occlusal
grooves and fossae and occlusal issures and pits. Primary occlusal
grooves and fossae are smooth “valley or saucer” landmarks that
result from complete coalescence of developmental enamel lobes
(see Chapter 1 ). Normally, such grooves and fossae are not sus -
ceptible to caries because they are not niches for bioilm and Characteristics of Active and Inactive
Caries Lesions
Activity Assessment
FactorCARIES LESION ACTIVITY
ASSESSMENT DESCRIPTORS
Likely to Be
Inactive/Arrested Likely to Be Active
Location of the
LesionLesion is not in a
plaque stagnation
areaLesion is in a plaque
stagnation area
(pit/issure,
approximal,
gingival)
Plaque Over the
LesionNot thick or sticky Thick and/or sticky
Surface Appearance Shiny; color:
brown-blackMatte/opaque/loss of
luster; color:
white-yellow
Tactile Feeling Smooth, hard enamel/
hard dentinRough enamel/soft
dentin
Gingival Status (If the
Lesion is Located
Near the Gingiva)No inlammation, no
bleeding on
probingInlammation,
bleeding on
probing
From Young DA, Nový BB, Zeller GG, et al.: The American Dental Association Caries Classiication
System for Clinical Practice, A report of the American D ental Association Council on Scientiic
Affairs, J Am Dent Assoc (2):79–86, .
CHAPTER 3 Patient Aement, Examination, Diagnoi ,and Treatment Planning
4 = amalgam restoration
5 = stainless steel restoration
6 = ceramic, gold, PFM (porcelain-fused-to-metal) crown or
veneer
7 = lost or broken restoration
8 = temporary restorationhis severity code is paired with a restorative/sealant code 0
to 8:
0 = not sealed or restored
2 = sealant, partial
3 = sealant, full; tooth-colored restoration
A B
CD
E F
• Fig. 3.3 Caries may be diagnosed clinically by careful inspection. A, Loss of translucency and change
in color of occlusal enamel resulting from a carious issure. B, Caries lesions on cusp tips. C, White chalky
appearance or shadow under marginal ridge (distal #4 and mesial #5). D, Incipient smooth-surface caries
lesion, or a white spot, has intact surface. E, Smooth-surface caries may appear white or dark, depending
on the degree of extrinsic staining. F, Root-surface caries.
CHAPTER 3 Patient Aement, Examination, Diagnoi ,and Treatment Planning
area along the marginal ridge when the light is directed through
the tooth. In addition to transillumination, tactile exploration of
anterior teeth is appropriate to detect cavitation because the proximal
surfaces generally are more visible and accessible than in the posterior
regions.
Another form of smooth-surface caries may occur on the facial
and lingual surfaces of the teeth of patients with high caries activity,
particularly in the cervical areas that are less accessible for cleaning.
he earliest clinical evidence of early enamel lesions on these surfaces
is a white spot that is visually diferent from the adjacent translucent
enamel that appears when the surface is dried. Rewetting results
in partial or total disappearance. his appearing–disappearing
phenomenon distinguishes the smooth-surface early enamel lesion
from the enamel white spot that results from nonhereditary enamel
hypocalciication (see section on clinical examination for additional
defects ). Both types of white spots are undetectable tactilely because
the surface is intact, smooth, and hard. For white spot lesions,
nonsurgical remineralization therapies (discussed in Chapter 2 )
should be instituted to promote remineralization.
he presence of several facial (or lingual) smooth-surface caries
lesions within a patient’s dentition suggests a high caries rate,
which means that if the existing risk factors are not addressed, the
patient is at high risk for developing more lesions in the future.
In a caries-susceptible patient, the gingival third of the facial surfaces
of maxillary posterior teeth and the gingival third of the facial and
lingual surfaces of mandibular posterior teeth should be evaluated
carefully because these surfaces are often at a greater risk for caries.
Advanced smooth-surface caries exhibits discoloration and demin -
eralization and feels soft as the explorer is translated across the
suspicious area. he discoloration may range from white to dark
brown, with rapidly progressing caries usually being light in color.
Slowly progressing caries, in a patient with low caries activity,
darkens over time because of extrinsic staining and phy sical changes
in the structure of the dentin collagen matrix. Remineralization See Fig. 3.2 for examples of ADA CCS and ICDAS coding for
caries lesion severity. he details of the ICDAS system for detection,
and training to use the system with an online tutorial, are available
at www.icdas.org .
Proximal Surface
Early proximal surface caries, one form of smooth-surface caries,
is usually diagnosed radiographically ( Fig. 3.4A and B ). It also
may be detected by careful visual examination after tooth separation
or through iberoptic transillumination.12 When the caries lesion
has progressed through the proximal surface enamel and has
demineralized dentin, a white opaque appearance or a shadow
under the marginal ridge may become evident (see Fig. 3.3C ).
Careful probing with an explorer on the proximal surface may
detect cavitation, which is deined as a break in the surface contour
of enamel. he combined use of all examination methods may be
helpful in arriving at an accurate inal diagnosis.
Brown spots on intact, hard proximal surface enamel adjacent
to and usually gingival to the contact area are often seen in older
patients, in whom caries activity is low. hese discolored areas are
a result of extrinsic staining during earlier caries demineralizing
episodes, each followed by a remineralization episo de. hese areas
are no longer carious and are usually more resistant to caries as a
result of luorohydroxyapatite formation. Restorative treatment of
these areas is not indicated. Inactive proximal caries lesions
sometimes are diicult to correctly diagnose because of faint
radiographic evidence revealing previous mineral loss.
Proximal surface caries in anterior teeth may be identiied by
radiographic examination, visual inspection (with optional transil -
lumination), or probing with an explorer. T ransillumination is
accomplished by placing the mirror or light source on the lingual
aspect of teeth and directing the light through teeth. Small early
enamel proximal lesions may be detectable only on the radiograph
(see Fig. 3.4B ). More advanced proximal lesions appear as a dark
Aa
cb a
d
dcb
B
C D
• Fig. 3.4 Caries may be diagnosed radiographically as translucencies in the enamel or dentin. A and
B, Proximal caries tends to occur bilaterally ( a) and on adjacent surfaces ( b). C, Occlusal caries ( c). D,
Recurrent caries gingival to an existing restoration ( d). This same recurrent caries ( d) also is shown in B.
Note that there are additional radiolucencies (consistent with caries lesion development) that are not
identiied with arrows.
CHAPTER 3 Patient Aement, Examination, Diagnoi ,and Treatment Planning
Proximal overhangs are diagnosed visually, tactilely, and radio -
graphically ( Fig. 3.5 ). he amalgam–tooth junction is evaluated
by moving the explorer back and forth across it. If the explorer
stops at the junction and then moves outwardly onto the amalgam,
an overhang is present. Overhangs also may be conirmed by the
catching or tearing of unwax ed dental loss. Such an overhang
likely represents an area of bioilm accumulation, provides an
obstacle to good oral hygiene, and may contribute to chronic
inlammation of adjacent soft tissue. his type of overhang should
be corrected, and often indicates the need for restoration
replacement.
Marginal gap formation (or “ditching”) is the deterioration of
the amalgam–tooth interface as a result of enamel wear and/or
restoration edge fracture ( Fig. 3.6A ). Improper tooth preparation
may predispose an amalgam restoration to ditching. It can be
diagnosed visually or by the explorer dropping into an opening
as it crosses the margin. Shallow ditching less than 0.5 mm deep
usually is not a reason for restoration replacement because the area
is self-cleaning and not prone to caries development.16 Such a
restoration usually looks worse than it really is. he ongoing selfsealing property of amalgam allows the restoration to continue
serving adequately if it can be satisfactorily cleaned and maintained.
If the ditch is too deep to be cleaned or jeopardizes the integrity
of the remaining restoration or tooth structure, the restoration
should be replaced.16 However, marginal gaps near the gingival
wall frequently become areas of secondary caries development and
correction of these areas is indicated.17
Localized voids, which result from poor condensation of the
amalgam, may also occur at the margins of amalgam restorations.
If the void is at least 0.3 mm deep and is located in the gingival
third of the tooth crown, the restoration is judged as defective and
should be repaired or replaced. Accessible small voids in other
marginal areas where the enamel is thicker may be corrected by
enamel recontouring or repairing with a small restoration.
A careful clinical examination is able to detect the presence of
a fracture line across the occlusal portion of an amalgam restoration.
A line that occurs in the isthmus region generally indicates a
fractured amalgam, and the defective restoration must be replaced
(Fig. 3.7A ). Procedures involved with replacement must ensure
adequate thickness of the amalgam restoration and r ounding of
the internal line angles (e.g., the axiopulpal line angle) so as to
limit the likelihood of recurrence of a fracture on the occlusal
surface (see Fig. 3.7B ). Care must be taken to correctly evaluate
any such line, however, especially if it is in the midocclusal area
because this may be an interface line, a manifestation of two abutted
restorations accomplished at separate appointments (see Fig. 3.7A ).
If other aspects of the abutted restorations are satisfactory, replace -
ment is unnecessary.of the decalciied tooth structure will return the tactile hardness
of the lesion and is an evidence that the caries has been arrested.
he dentin in an arrested remineralized lesion has become sclerotic
(see Chapter 1 ). Such an arrested lesion at times may be rough,
although cleanable, and restoration is not indicated except to address
the esthetic concerns of the patient or to assist w ith patient control
of bioilm accumulation. hese lesions are inactive but remain
susceptible to new caries activity in the future.
Cervical Area
In patients with attachment loss, extra care must b e taken to inspect
for root-surface caries. A combination of root exposure, dietary
changes, systemic diseases, and medications that afect the amount
and character of saliva may predispose a patient, especially an older
individual, to root-surface caries. Lesions are often found at the
cementoenamel junction (CEJ) or more apically on cementum or
exposed dentin in older patients or in patients who have undergone
periodontal surgery (see Fig. 3.3F ). Early in its development, root
caries appears as a well-deined, discolored area adjacent to the
gingival margin, typically near the CEJ. Root caries is softer than
the adjacent tooth structure, and lesions typically spread laterally
around the CEJ. Although no clinical criteria are universally accepted
for the diagnosis of root caries, it is generally agreed that softened
cemental or dentinal tooth structure compared with the surrounding
surface is characteristic.13 Active root caries is detected by the
presence of softening and cavitation.14,15 Although root-surface caries
may be detected on radiographic examination, a careful, thorough
clinical examination is crucial. A diicult diagnostic challenge is the
patient who has attachment loss with no gingival re cession, limiting
accessibility for clinical inspection of the proximal root surfaces.
Proximal root-surface lesions often progress rapidly and are best
diagnosed using quality bitewing radiographs. Diferentiation of
a caries lesion from a radiolucent artifact created by radiographic
cervical burnout is, however, essential.12,13
Clinical Examination of Amalgam Restorations
Evaluation of existing restorations should be accomplished systemati -
cally in a clean, dry, well-lit ield. Clinical evaluation of amalgam
restorations requires visual observation, application of tactile sense
with the explorer, use of dental loss, interpretation of radiographs,
and knowledge of the probabilities that a given condition is sound
or at risk for further breakdown. At least 11 distinct conditions
might be encountered when amalgam restorations are evaluated:
(1) amalgam “blues,” (2) proximal overhangs, (3) marginal ditching,
(4) voids, (5) fracture lines, (6) lines indicating the interface between
abutted amalgam restorations placed at separate times, (7) improper
anatomic contours, (8) marginal ridge incompatibility, (9) improper
proximal contacts, (10) improper occlusal contacts, and (1 1)
recurrent caries lesions.
Discolored areas or “amalgam blues” are often seen through
the enamel in teeth that have amalgam restorations. his bluish
hue results either from the leaching of amalgam corrosion products
into the dentinal tubules or from the color of underlying amalgam
seen through translucent enamel. he latter occurs when t he enamel
has little or no dentin support, such as in undermined cusps,
marginal ridges, and regions adjacent to proximal margins. When
other aspects of the restoration are sound, amalgam blues do not
indicate caries, do not warrant classifying the restoration as defective,
and require no further treatment. Replacement of the restoration
may be considered, however, for elective improvement of esthetics
or for areas under heavy functional stress that may require a cusp
coverage restoration designed to prevent possible tooth fracture.
• Fig. 3.5 Proximal restoration overhang ( a) may be diagnosed
radiographically.
CHAPTER 3 Patient Aement, Examination, Diagnoi ,and Treatment Planning
A B
C D
• Fig. 3.6 Restorations may be diagnosed clinically as being defective by observing the following. A,
Deep marginal ditching. B, Improper contour. C, Recurrent caries. D, Esthetically unappealing dark
staining.
B
A
• Fig. 3.7 Lines across the occlusal surface of an amalgam restoration. A, Fracture line indicates
replacement. An interface line (arrow) indicates two restorations placed at separate appointments, which,
by itself, is insuficient indication for replacement. B, Radiograph revealing thin amalgam area, which
allowed material lexure and subsequent fracture.
CHAPTER 3 Patient Aement, Examination, Diagnoi ,and Treatment Planning
staining that is judged to be noncarious may be corrected by a
small repair restoration along the margin. Occasionally, the staining
is supericial and may be removed by resurfacing or removal of
restoration excess extending beyond the preparation margins.
Clinical Examination of Dental Implants and
Implant-Supported Restorations
Baseline radiographs that reveal the initial levels of implant bone
support should be obtained when the implant is restored. Percussion
of the restoration should reveal a clinical sound consistent with
integration. Probing depths associated with the implant ixture
should be consistent with the thickness of the local gingival tissue.
he gingival tissue should be assessed for signs of inlammation
(redness, edema, tenderness, bleeding on probing). he marginal
adaptation between implant restorations and their abutments should
allow for optimal bioilm removal. Any deviation from normal
should be noted. Many edentulous areas receive implants that are
generally smaller than the roots of the teeth they are replacing.
herefore the restorations of the implants require modiied cervical
contours. Implant restorations should be evaluated for proper
cervical (especially proximal) contours that limit food impaction
or bioilm accumulation.
Chronic inflammation (periimplantitis), secondary to the
presence of residual dental cement or bioilm accumulation, of
the tissue immediately adjacent to the implant ixture/restoration
may lead to localized bone loss around an implant and impact its
long-term survival. Periimplantitis has a multifactorial etiology.
See Chapter 11 , and a textbook dedicated to dental implantology,
for additional information.
Clinical Examination for Additional Defects
A thorough clinical examination occasionally identiies localized
noncavitated, hard white areas on the facial ( Fig. 3.8 ) or lingual
surfaces or on the cusp tips of teeth. Generally, these are hypocalci -
ied areas of enamel resulting from childhood fever, trauma, or
luorosis that occurred during the developmental stages of tooth
formation. hese areas are diagnosed as nonhereditary developmental
enamel hypoplasia . Another cause of hypocalciication is arrested
and remineralized incipient caries, which leaves an opaque, dis -
colored, and hard surface. When smooth and cleanable, such areas
do not warrant restorative intervention unless they are esthetically
ofensive to the patient. hese areas remain visible whether the
tooth is wet or dry, and should not be confused with the opaque
white smooth-surface incipient caries lesions that appear when Amalgam restorations should duplicate the normal anatomic
contours of teeth. Restorations that impinge on soft tissue, have
inadequate embrasure form or proximal contact, or prevent the
use of dental loss should be classiied as defective, indicating
recontouring or replacement (see Fig. 3.6B ).
he marginal ridge portion of the amalgam restoration should
be compatible with the adjacent marginal ridge. Both ridges should
be at approximately the same level and display correct occlusal
embrasure form for passage of food to the facial and lingual surfaces
and for proper proximal contact area (see Chapter 1 ). If the marginal
ridges are incompatible and are associated with poor tissue health,
food impaction, or the inability of the patient to loss, the restoration
is defective and should be recontoured or replaced.
he proximal surface of an amalgam restoration should recreate
the normal height of contour such that it comes into contact with
the adjacent tooth at the proper occlusogingival and faciolingual
area with correct adjacent embrasure form (a “closed” contact).
he use of loss is helpful in assessing the intensity of a closed
contact. If the proximal contact of any restoration is suspected to
be inadequate, it should be evaluated visually by trial angulations
of a mouth mirror (held lingually when viewing from the facial
aspect, etc.) to relect light and see if a space where the contact
should occur (“open” contact) is present. For this viewing, the
contact must be free of saliva. If the contact is open and is associated
with poor interproximal tissue health, food impaction, or both,
the restoration should be classiied as defective and should be
replaced or repaired. An open contact typically is annoying to the
patient, so correcting the problem usually is an appreciated service.
Recurrent caries adjacent to the marginal area of the restoration
is detected visually, tactilely, or radiographically and is an indication
for repair or replacement (see Figs. 3.4D and 3.6C ). he same
criteria for initial proximal and occlusal caries lesions apply for
the diagnosis of and intervention for recurrent caries lesions around
restorations.
Improper occlusal contacts on an amalgam restoration may
cause deleterious occlusal loading (and predisposition to fracture
or pain on biting from hyperocclusion), undesirable tooth move -
ment, or both. Premature occlusal contacts may be seen as a “shiny”
spot on the surface of the restoration or detected by occlusal marking
paper. Such a condition warrants correction by selective occlusal
adjustment.
Clinical Examination of Indirect Metal Restorations
Indirect metal restorations should be evaluated clinically in the
same manner as amalgam restorations. Any aspect of the restoration
that is not satisfactory, that is causing harm to tissue or occlusal
function, should be noted and considered for recontouring, repair,
or replacement.
Clinical Examination of Composite and Other
Tooth-Colored Restorations
Tooth-colored restorations (direct and indirect) should be evaluated
clinically in the same manner as amalgam and cast-metal restora -
tions. he presence of improper contour or inadequate proximal
contact, overhanging margin, recurrent caries, or occlusal interfer -
ence should be noted and considered for correction. Corrective
procedures include recontouring, polishing, repairing, or replacement
of the restoration.
One of the main concerns with anterior teeth is esthetics. If a
tooth-colored restoration has dark marginal staining or is discolored
to the extent that it is esthetically unappealing to the patient, the
restoration should be judged as defective (see Fig. 3.6D ). Marginal
• Fig. 3.8 Nonhereditary hypocalciied areas on facial surfaces. These
areas may result from numerous factors but do not warrant restorative
intervention unless they are esthetically offensive or cavitation is present.
CHAPTER 3 Patient Aement, Examination, Diagnoi ,and Treatment Planning
is generally referred to as erosive tooth wear . It is necessary to docu -
ment the severity of the tooth structure loss and the speciic areas
that have been afected. If the defects are only on the lingual of
upper teeth, the diagnosis would be diferent from i nding defects
on the occlusal surfaces of lower molars. Exogenous acidic agents
such as lemon juice (through sucking on lemons) may cause
crescent-shaped or dished defects (rounded as opposed to angular)
on the surfaces of teeth exposed to the agent (see Fig. 3.9A ),
wher eas endogenous acidic agents, such as gastric luids, cause
generalized erosion on the lingual, incisal, and oc clusal surfaces
(see Fig. 3.9B ). Erosion processes may also be involved in the loss
of the tooth structure with a clinical presentation of “cupped-out”
areas on occlusal surfaces. hese defective areas are associated with
the binge–purge syndrome in bulimia, or with gastroesophageal
relux disease (GERD). Many patients with GERD are often not
aware of their gastric symptoms or do not associate them with the
problems with their teeth. Consultation with a physician to obtain
a proper diagnosis of GERD may assist in the diagnosis and teeth are air-dried. Care must be exercised in distinguishi ng
nonhereditary developmental enamel hypoplasia from an early
enamel caries lesion.
Rare genetic disorders afecting enamel and dentin may be
discovered during clinical examination. Defective enamel organiza -
tion and calciication, which results in teeth that are compromised
in appearance and strength, is referred to as amelogenesis imperfecta .
Defective dentin formation and a compromised dentin oenamel
junction (DEJ) resulting in early loss of clinically normal enamel
is referred to as dentinogenesis imperfecta . Additional information
on these genetic disorders may be found in textbooks on oral
pathology.
he loss of surface tooth structure by chemical action in the
continued presence of demineralizing agents with low pH ( Fig.
3.9) is deined as erosion . he resulting defective surface is usually
smooth. Although erosive agents are the predominant causative
factors, it is thought that toothbrushing and/or other abrasive
agents in the diet may accelerate the loss of tooth structure, which
EFAB
C D
• Fig. 3.9 Erosion. A, Crescent-shaped defects on enamel facial surfaces caused by exogenous demin -
eralizing agent (from sucking on lemons several years previous to the time of the photograph). B, General -
ized erosion caused by endogenous luids. C, Rounded cervical lesions associated with toothbrush
abrasion. D, Idiopathic erosion lesions in cervical areas are hypothesized to be associated with abnormal
occlusal forces. E, Generalized attrition caused by excessive functional or parafunctional mandibular
movements. F, Enamel craze lines.
CHAPTER 3 Patient Aement, Examination, Diagnoi ,and Treatment Planning
surrounding enamel, though there may also be an erosive component
to the process. Sometimes, these areas are an annoyance because
of food retention or the presence of peripheral, ragged, sharp
enamel edges. he sharp edges may result in tongue or cheek
biting; rounding these edges does not completely resolve the problem
but may improve comfort. Slowing such wear by appropriate
restorative treatment may be indicated.
he examination process may reveal areas of horizontal or verti -
cal fracture development. Awareness of extreme variations in dental
anatomy aids in the identiication of fracture-prone areas. For
example, deep developmental issures that cross between marginal
or cusp ridges may predispose posterior teeth to fracture. Early
fractures may be invisible upon initial assessment. Appropriate
dye materials or transillumination may aid in detecting the line of
fracture within the tooth structure. Cusp isolation/loading devices
and techniques must be utilized so as to identify fractures that
involve the dentin and are symptomatic (i.e., fractures that are
actively propagating). Teeth with active, symptomat ic fractures
should be considered for full coverage of the occlusal surface.
Fractures that have been present for a period of time become
stained and thereby visible during examination; they should be
considered at risk for further propagation into dentin. Any tooth
that has extensive caries, or restoration, and remaining cusps with
little dentin support should be identiied as being susceptible to
future fracture and considered for a cusp-protecting restoration ( Fig.
3.10). Complete cusp fracture is a common occurrence in posterior
teeth. In general, the most frequently fractured cusps are the non -
functional cusps (see Chapter 1 ). Speciically, the most frequently
fractured teeth are mandibular molars and second premolars, with
the lingual (nonfunctional) cusps fracturing more often than the
facial (functional) cusps. Maxillary premolars also frequently
fracture, and similar to mandibular teeth, the facial (nonfunctional)
cusps fracture more often than the lingual (functional) cusps. he
mesiofacial (nonfunctional) and distolingual (small functional)
cusps are the most commonly fractured cusps in maxillary molars.21
A study of fracture severity found that 95% of the fractures management of erosion. Other sources of erosion may be use of
sports drinks, herbal teas, and vomiting associated with chemo -
therapy, and, in the case of alcoholism, the presence of stomach
contents in the mouth during periods of excessive a lcohol consump -
tion. It is necessary to document the erosion process as it progresses
over time through the use accurate study models, photography,
and/or digital scanning technology. Risk assessments for erosion
should be included in the assessment of the patient, as indicated.
he low and bufering capacity of the individual patient’s saliva
impact the rate of progression of erosive tooth wear. Understanding,
identifying, and diagnosing tooth damage secondary to erosion
(erosive tooth wear) is essential if management of the disease process
is to be successful.18
Abnormal tooth surface loss resulting from direct frictional
forces between teeth and external objects or from frictional forces
between contacting teeth in the presence of an abrasive medium
is termed abrasion. Habitual chewing on hard objects (e.g., paper
clips, pens, pencils) or chronic use of agents with high abrasivity
(e.g., smokeless tobacco, inadequately washed vegetables) may
result in loss of occlusal-surface tooth structure.
he loss of tooth structure in the cervical areas ( abrasion ) is
commonly seen as a rounded notch in the gingival portion of the
facial aspects of teeth (see Fig. 3.9C ). In contrast to cervical lesions
that develop from abrasion processes, idiopathic erosion lesions
(“abfractions” ) are cervical, wedge-shaped defects (angular as opposed
to rounded) similar to the defects customarily associated with
abrasion but in which one of the possible causative factors may
include excessive lexure of the tooth as a result of heavy, eccentric
occlusal forces (see Fig. 3.9D ). he heavy occlusal loading may
also lead to the development of a pronounced occlusal wear facet.
It is hypothesized that the lexural force produces tension stress
in the afected wedge-shaped region on the tooth side away from
the tooth-bending direction, resulting in loss of the surface tooth
structure by microfractures, which is termed abfracture .19 Proponents
of this hypothesis add that microfractures may increase the rate
of tooth structure loss during abrasion from tooth brushing and/
or from acids in the diet or bioilm. Opponents of this h ypothesis
note that these cervical lesions have been detected in individuals
who do not have any apparent evidence of heavy occlusal forces
(such as wear facets and/or fremitus). he general consensus among
experts is that the etiology of these lesions is multifactorial and
that well-designed clinical research studies are required to gain
better understanding relative to the etiology of cervical abrasion
and abfraction defects, which are generally referred to as noncarious
cervical lesions (NCCLs).20 he presence of such defects does not
automatically warrant intervention.
he mechanical wear of the incisal or occlusal tooth structure
that results from functional or parafunctional movements of the
mandible is termed attrition . Although a certain degree of attrition
is expected with age, it is important to note abnormally advanced
attrition (see Fig. 3.9E ). If abnormal attrition is present, the patient’s
functional movements should be evaluated and inquiry made with
regard to potential parafunctional habits such as tooth grinding
or clenching/grinding (bruxism) . Heavy occlusal loading from
clenching may result in the presence of “craze lines” that are limited
to enamel (i.e., do not progress through the DEJ into dentin; see
Fig. 3.9F ). Craze lines are not sensitive and do not require treatment
but may be evidence of excessive masticatory muscle activity (see
Chapter 1 ). he etiology of the parafunction may include stress,
airway issues, and/or sleep apnea. In some older patients, the enamel
of the cusp tips (or incisal edges) is worn of, resulting in cupped-out
areas because the exposed, softer dentin wears faster than the
• Fig. 3.10 Extensively restored teeth with weakened and fractured
cusps. Note the distal developmental issure in the second molar, which
further predisposes the distal cusps to fracture.
CHAPTER 3 Patient Aement, Examination, Diagnoi ,and Treatment Planning
For diagnosis of proximal surface caries, restoration overhangs,
or poorly contoured restorations, posterior bitewing and anterior
periapical radiographs are most helpful. When interpreting the
radiographic presentation of proximal tooth surfaces, it is necessary
to know the normal anatomic picture presented in a radiograph
before any abnormalities may be diagnosed. In a radiograph, a
proximal caries lesion usually appears as a dark area or a radiolucency
in the enamel slightly apical to the contact (see Fig. 3.4A ). his
radiolucency is typically triangular and has its apex toward the
DEJ.
Moderate-to-deep occlusal caries lesions may be seen as a
radiolucency extending into dentin (see Fig. 3.4C ). Because the
speciicity of radiographs for detecting dentinal lesions on occlusal
surfaces is relatively good at 80% (very few false positives), when
a radiolucency is apparent beneath the occlusal enamel surface
emanating from the DEJ a diagnosis of caries is appropriate.
However, because the sensitivity of radiographs for dentinal lesions
on the occlusal surface is rather low (50%), the absence of a
radiolucency does not mean that a lesion is not present. In these
situations, the clinician should rely more on the results of the
visual examination and the indings of any adjunctive tests (discussed
later).
Some defective aspects of restorations, including improper
contour, overhangs (see Fig. 3.5 ), and recurrent caries lesions gingival
to restorations (see Fig. 3.4D ), may also be identiied radiographi -
cally. he height and integrity of the marginal periodontium may
be evaluated using bitewing radiographs. Pulpal abnormalities such
as pulp stones and internal resorption may be identiied in various
radiographs. Periapical radiographs are helpful in identifying changes
in the periapical periodontium that are consistent with periapical
abscesses, dental granulomas, or cysts. Impacted third molars,
supernumerary teeth, and other congenital or acquired abnormalities
also may be discovered on periapical radiographic examination.
he sensitivity and speciicity of dental radiographs vary, however,
according to the diagnostic task (e.g., surface of the tooth being
examined, proximal versus occlusal; and depth, enamel versus
dentin).
Radiographs aid in determining the relationship between the
margins of existing or proposed restorations and bone. A biologic
width of at least 2 mm is required for the junctional epithelium
and the connective tissue attachments located between the base
of the sulcus and the alveolar bone crest ( Fig. 3.11A ). In addition
to this physiologic dimension, the restoration margin should be
placed occlusally as far away as possible from the base of the sulcus.
Restoration margins that encroach on the biologic width, by being
placed deep in the sulcus, are inaccessible for bioilm removal and
result in chr onic inlammation. he inlammatory state may be
clinically detected as clinical redness, swelling, and bleeding on
probing or lossing in the area. Localized loss of osseous support
will occur and the biologic width will reorganize further apically.
he osseous loss and reorganization will result in deeper periodontal
probing depths, which in turn will further limit efective bioilm
removal. For these reasons, the inal position of a proposed gingival
margin, which is dictated by the existing restoration, caries, or
retention features, must be estimated before restoration to determine
if crown-lengthening procedures are indicated (see Fig. 3.11B ).
Surgical crown lengthening procedures involve the surgical removal
of the gingiva, bone, or both to create a longer clinical crown and
provide more tooth structure for placing the restoration margin
and for increasing retention form. Another possible treatment
option may be to orthodontically extrude the tooth so that the
restoration margins do not violate the biologic width. Restorative exposed dentin, 25% were below the CEJ, and 3% resulted in
pulp exposure. he consequences of posterior tooth fracture were
found to vary, with maxillary premolar and mandibular molar
fractures being generally more severe. Most fractures were treated
with direct or indirect restorations or recontouring and polish -
ing; 3% of the fractured teeth were extracted, and 4% received
endodontic treatment.22 Risk factors for nontraumatic fracture
of posterior teeth were found to be the presence of a stained
fracture in enamel and an increase in the proportion of the volume
of the natural tooth crown occupied by a restoration.23,24 he
examination process should notate the presence and activity of all
fracture areas.
he dental examination also may reveal dental anomalies that
include variations in size, shape, structure, or number of teeth—such
as dens in dente, macrodontia, microdontia, gemination, concres -
cence, dilaceration, amelogenesis imperfecta, and dentinogenesis
imperfecta. An in-depth discussion of these anomalies is beyond
the scope of this text. he reader should consult an oral pathology
textbook for additional information.
Radiographic Examination of Teeth and Restorations
Radiographs are an indispensable part of the contemporary dentist’s
diagnostic armamentarium. he use of diagnostic ionizing radiation
is, however, not without risks. Cumulative exposure to ionizing
radiation potentially may result in adverse efects. he diagnostic
yield or potential beneit that might be gained from a radiograph
must be weighed against the inancial costs and the potential adverse
efects of exposure to radiation. Several technologies, particularly
digital radiography, are now available and are designed to enhance
diagnostic yield and reduce radiation exposure.
he ADA, in collaboration with the Food and Drug Administra -
tion (FDA), developed guidelines for the prescription of dental
radiographic examinations to serve as an adjunct to the dentist’s
professional judgment with regard to the best use o f diagnostic
imaging. Radiographs help the dental practitioner evaluate and
deinitively diagnose many oral diseases and conditions. However,
the dentist must weigh the beneits of taking dental radiographs
against the risk of exposing a patient to ionizing radiation, the
efects of which accumulate from multiple sources over time. he
dentist, being aware of the patient’s health history and vulnerability
to oral disease, is in the best position to make this judgment. For
this reason, guidelines are intended to serve as a resource for the
practitioner and are not intended to be standards of care, require -
ments, or regulations. he ADA/FDA guidelines help direct the
type and frequency of radiographs needed according to patient
condition and risk factors ( ).
Generally, patients at higher risk for caries or periodontal disease
should receive more frequent and more extensive radiographic
surveys. A systematic review of methods of diagnosing dental caries
lesions found that although radiographs were useful in detecting
lesions, they do have limitations.25 For the examination of occlusal
surfaces, radiographs had moderate sensitivity and good speciicity
for diagnosing dentinal lesions; however, for enamel lesions, the
sensitivity was poor and the speciicity was reduced (see the section
on Diagnosis for description of these terms). Studies of the
radiographic examination of proximal surfaces found that there
was moderate sensitivity and good speciicity for the detection of
cavitated lesions and low to moderate sensitivity and moderate to
high speciicity for enamel or dentinal lesions. Before rendering a
diagnosis and deciding on treatment, information obtained from
radiographs should be conirmed or augmented through clinical
examination indings if at all possible.
CHAPTER 3 Patient Aement, Examination, Diagnoi ,and Treatment Planning
than it appears radiographically, it is estimated that over half of
radiographically detected proximal lesions (in the outer half of
dentin) are likely to be noncavitated and treatable with remineraliza -
tion measures.26 Radiographic indings must always be clinically
veriied (if possible) prior to the inalization of a diagnosis and
treatment plan.
Adjunctive Aid for Examining Teeth
and Retoration
Magniication in Operative Dentistry
Clinical dentistry often requires the viewing and evaluation of
small details in teeth, intraoral and perioral tissues, restorations,
and study casts. Unaided vision is often inadequate to view details procedures must be accomplished such that the periodontal health
may be maintained.
Dental radiographs should always be interpreted cautiously.
he dental radiograph is a two-dimensional image of a threedimensional mass; thus a facial or lingual lesion (or radiolucent
tooth-colored restoration) may be radiographically superimposed
over the proximal area, mimicking a proximal caries lesion (false
positive). he general inding that approximately 25% mineral
loss has to occur before a radiolucency begins to appear on a
radiograph means that a caries lesion may be present and not
detected (false negative). Misdiagnosis may occur when cervical
burnout (the radiographic picture of the normal structure and
contour of the cervical third of the crown) mimics a caries lesion.
Finally, although a caries lesion may be more extensive clinically
Guidelines for Prescribing Dental Radiographs
The recommendations in this chart are subject to clinical judgment and may not apply to every patient . They are to be used by dentists only after
reviewing the patient’s health history and completing a clinical examination. Because every precaution should be taken to minimize radiation exposure,
protective thyroid collars and aprons should be used, whenever possible. This practice is strongly recommended for children, women of childbearing age,
and pregnant women.
Type of Encounter Patient Age and Dental Developmental Stage
Child With Primary Dentition
(Prior to Eruption of First
Permanent Tooth)Child With Transitional
Dentition (After
Eruption of First
Permanent Tooth)Adolescent With
Permanent Dentition
(Prior to Eruption of
Third Molars)Adult, Dentate
or Partially
EdentulousAdult,
Edentulous
New patient * being
evaluated for dental
diseases and dental
developmentIndividualized radiographic
exam consisting of selected
periapical/occlusal views
and/or posterior bitewings if
proximal surfaces cannot be
visualized or probed.
Patients without evidence of
disease and with open
proximal contacts may not
require a radiographic exam
at this time.Individualized
radiographic exam
consisting of
posterior bitewings
with panoramic
exam or posterior
bitewings and
selected periapical
images.Individualized radiographic exam consisting
of posterior bitewings with panoramic
exam or posterior bitewings and selected
periapical images.
A full mouth intraoral radiographic exam is
preferred when the patient has clinical
evidence of generalized dental disease
or a history of extensive dental
treatment.Individualized
radiographic
exam, based
on clinical
signs and
symptoms.
Recall patient * with clinical
caries or at increased risk
for caries **Posterior bitewing exam at 6to 12-month intervals if proximal surfaces cannot be
examined visually or with a probe.Posterior bitewing
exam at 6to
18-month
intervals.Not applicable
Recall patient * with no
clinical caries and not at
increased risk for caries **Posterior bitewing exam at 12to 24-month intervals if
proximal surfaces cannot be examined visually or with
a probe.Posterior bitewing
exam at 18to
36-month intervals.Posterior bitewing
exam at 24to
36-month
intervals.Not applicable
Recall patient * with
periodontal diseaseClinical judgment as to the need for and type of radiographic images for the evaluation of periodontal
disease. Imaging may consist of, but is not limited to, selected bitewing and/or periapical images of
areas where periodontal disease (other than nonspeciic gingivitis) can be identiied clinically.Not applicable
Patient for monitoring of
growth and developmentClinical judgment as to need for and type of radiographic
images for evaluation and/or monitoring of dentofacial
growth and development.Clinical judgment as to
need for and type of
radiographic images
for evaluation and/
or monitoring of
dentofacial growth
and development.
Panoramic or
periapical exam to
assess developing
third molars.Usually not indicated
CHAPTER 3 Patient Aement, Examination, Diagnoi ,and Treatment Planning
Many choices of magniication loupes are currently available
for dentistry. he simplest magniiers are the diopter single-lens
loupes, which are single-piece plastic pairs of lenses that clip onto
eyeglass frames. hese loupes are inexpensive and lightweight and
may provide magniication of up to 2.5 ×. However, images may
be distorted, and working lengths less than ideal. he more com -
monly used dental loupe is binocular with lenses mounted on an
eyeglass frame. Binocular loupes typically have Galilean and
prismatic optics that provide 2 ×, 3.5×, 4×, and greater magniication.
Prescription lenses may be placed in the eyeglass frames for all
loupe types. Most models also have side shields or a wraparound
design for eye protection and infection control. T wo mounting
systems are currently av ailable for binocular loupes: (1) lip-up
and (2) ixed or through-the-lens types.
Dental microscopes, though limited primarily to endodontic
practices in the past, are now being used in some restorative dentistry
practices. Compared with high powered loupes, dental microscopes
allow the clinician to view intraoral structures at a higher level of
magniication while maintaining a broader ield of view. Because
very small areas may be seen, microscopes are used in detail-oriented
procedures such as the inishing of porcelain restoration margins,
identifying minute caries lesions, and minimizing the removal of
sound tooth structure. Generally, microscopes include ive or six
levels of magniication that typically range from 2.5 × to 20×.
Manufacturers of dental microscopes include Carl Zeiss, Inc.
(Dublin, CA); Global Surgical Corporation (St. Louis, MO); and
Seiler Precision Microscope Instrument Company (St. Louis, MO). needed to make treatment decisions. Magniication aids such as
loupes provide a larger image size for improved visual acuity, while
allowing proper upright posture to be maintained with less eye
fatigue.
When choosing loupes, several parameters should be
considered.27-29 Magniication (power) describes the increase in
image size. Most dentists use magniications of 2 × to 4×. he lower
power systems of 2 × to 2.5× allow multiple quadrants to be viewed,
whereas the higher power systems of 3 × to 4× enable viewing of
several teeth or a single tooth. In general, higher magniication
systems are heavier, have a narrower ield of view, are more expensive,
and require more light than lower power systems. he use o f small,
lightweight light-emitting diode (LED) headlamps attached to the
eyeglass frame or headband ofer the considerable visual advantage
of added illumination when used with loupes.
Working distance (focal length) is the distance from the eye to
the object when the object is in focus. his parameter should be
considered carefully before selecting loupes because the desired
working distance depends on the dentist’s height, arm length, and
seating preferences. Dentists of average height typically choose a
working distance of 13 to 14 inches (33–35 cm), whereas tall
dentists and those who prefer to work farther away from the patient
use working distances of 14 to 16 inches (35–40 cm).
Depth of focus, or the diference between the far and near focus
limits of the working distance, depends on the magniication.
Typically, the lower the magniication, the greater is the depth of
focus.Patient with other
circumstances including,
but not limited to,
proposed or existing
implants, pathology,
restorative/endodontic
needs, treated periodontal
disease, and caries
remineralizationClinical judgment as to need for and type of radiographic images for evaluation and/or monitoring in these circumstances.
*Clinical situations for which radiographs may be indicated include but are not limited to:
A. Positive Historical Findings
1. Previous periodontal or endodontic treatment
2. History of pain or trauma
3. Familial history of dental anomalies
4. Postoperative evaluation of healing
5. Remineralization monitoring
6. Presence of implants or evaluation for implant placement
B. Positive Clinical Symptoms/Signs
1. Clinical evidence of periodontal disease
2. Large or deep restorations
3. Deep caries lesions
4. Malposed or clinically impacted teeth
5. Swelling
6. Evidence of dental/facial trauma
7. Mobility of teeth
8. Sinus tract (“istula”)
9. Clinically suspected sinus pathology
10. Growth abnormalities
11. Oral involvement in known or suspected systemic disease
12. Positive neurologic indings in the head and neck
13. Evidence of foreign objects
14. Pain and/or dysfunction of the temporomandibular joint and/or muscles of mastication
15. Facial asymmetry
16. Abutment teeth for ixed or removable partial prosthesis
17. Unexplained bleedingGuidelines for Prescribing Dental Radiographs—cont’d
18. Unexplained sensitivity of teeth
19. Unusual eruption, spacing, or migration of teeth
20. Unusual tooth morphology, calciication, or color
21. Unexplained absence of teeth
22. Clinical erosion
**Factors increasing risk for caries may include but are not limited to:
1. High level of caries experience or demineralization
2. History of recurrent caries
3. High titers of cariogenic bacteria
4. Existing restoration(s) of poor quality
5. Poor oral hygiene
6. Inadequate luoride exposure
7. Prolonged nursing (bottle or breast)
8. Frequent high sucrose content in diet
9. Poor family dental health
10. Developmental or acquired enamel defects
11. Developmental or acquired disability
12. Xerostomia
13. Genetic abnormality of teeth
14. Many multisurface restorations
15. Chemotherapy/radiation therapy
16. Eating disorders
17. Drug/alcohol abuse
18. Irregular dental care
From American Dental Association, US Food and Drug Administration: The selection of patients
for dental radiograph examinations. Available on www.ada.org . Document created November .
CHAPTER 3 Patient Aement, Examination, Diagnoi ,and Treatment Planning
evaluation of the plane of occlusion; tilted, rotated, or extruded
teeth; crossbites; plunger cusps; wear facets and defective restorations;
coronal contours; proximal contacts; and embrasure spaces between
teeth. he ability to obtain virtual study models via digital impres -
sion technology has increased the ease and level of diagnostic
evaluation, especially in situations where the use of conventional
impression techniques/materials may not be an option (such as in
patients with a hyperactive gag r elex). Combined with clinical
and radiographic indings, study casts allow the practitioner to
carefully relect on indings and develop a treatment plan without
the patient present, thus saving valuable chair time. When a
proposed treatment plan is discussed with the patient, study models
are a valuable educational medium in helping the patient understand
and visualize existing conditions and the need for the proposed
treatment.
Caries Detection Technologies
In addition to the traditional methods of caries detection, several
new technologies have emerged and show promising results for
the clinical detection and diagnosis of caries lesions. hese devices
may have the potential to replace the tactile portion of caries
detection, where explorers are used to try to estimate the depth
of the caries lesions into the pits and issures. However, these
devices have two limitations. he irst is that they are only indicated
for use on unrestored pits and issures. he second is that their
diagnostic accuracy has not been irmly established. he technologies
currently approved by the FDA include laser-induced luorescence,
light-induced luorescence, and alternating current (AC) impedance
spectroscopy (ACIST).10,30
he DIAGNOdent device (KaVo Dental Corporation, Charlotte,
NC) uses laser luorescence technology, with the intention of
detecting and measuring bacterial products and changes in tooth
structure in a caries lesion. his compact and portable device,
which requires a clean, dry occlusal surface, yields a numerical
score from 0 to 99. he manufacturer has recommended threshold
scores that represent the presence and extent of a lesion. A systematic
review found that the “device is clearly more sensitive than tradi -
tional diagnostic methods, but the increased likelihood of falsepositive diagnoses limits its usefulness as a principal diagnostic
method.”31
Another system currently available for caries lesion detection
is the CamX Spectra Caries Detection Aid (Air Techniques, Melville,
NY). his system claims to detect caries lesions by measuring
increased light-induced luorescence. Special LEDs project highenergy violet or blue light onto the tooth surface. Light of this
wavelength supposedly stimulates porphyrins—metabolites unique
to cariogenic bacteria—to appear distinctly red, while healthy
enamel luoresces to appear green. Using this luorescent technology,
the data captured by the Spectra system are analyzed by imaging
software, which highlights the lesions in diferent color ranges and
deines the potential caries activity on a scale of 0 to 5.
he CarieScan PRO (CarieScan, LLC, Charlotte, NC) is a
device for the detection and monitoring of caries by the application
and analysis of ACIST (AC Impedance Spectroscopy Technology).
he CarieScan PRO claims to enable clinicians to evaluate demin -
eralized tooth structure using ACIST by providing information
about tissue being healthy, in the early stages of demineralization,
or already signiicantly decayed. he device provides a color scale
and a numerical scale to determine the severity of the caries lesion
and is accompanied by management recommendations that range
from therapeutic prevention to operative interventi on appropriate
for the extent of the demineralization.Cost, size of the equipment, and perceived lack of value to the
clinician are factors that have limited the use of microscopes in
operative dentistry practice.
Photography in Operative Dentistry
Photography in dentistry has many uses and, with newer digital
technologies, is becoming mainstream in dental practice. Photography is an excellent tool for documentation and evaluation.
Intraoral cameras and single-lens relex (SLR) digital cameras provide
opportunities to document existing esthetic conditions such as
color, shape, and position of teeth. Close-up images of existing
pits and issures provide the opportunity to image current conditions
for the purpose of future reevaluation and detection of changes
that may be developing. Photographs of preparations of deep caries
lesions provide documentation to aid in future diagnosis of tooth
conditions. Digital documentation with photographs, and ability
to process and store images in an electronic patient record, is easy
and cost efective.
Diagnostic Study Models
Study models are helpful in evaluating a patient’s clinical status
in many situations. Study models are able to provide an understand -
ing of occlusal relationships, help in developing the treatment
plan, and serve as a tool for educating the patient. Accurately
mounted study models provide an opportunity for a thorough
evaluation of the tooth interdigitation, the functional occlusion,
and any occlusal abnormalities. Study models allow further
ab
c
d
e
f
A
B
• Fig. 3.11 A, Biologic width ( a) is the physiologic dimension needed for
the junctional epithelium ( d) and the connective tissue attachment ( e),
which is measured from the base of the sulcus ( c) to the level of the bone
crest ( f). The margin of the restoration ( b) must not violate this dimension.
B, Tooth with an existing restoration ( g) that encroaches on the biologic
width requires crown-lengthening procedures before placement of a new
restoration.
CHAPTER 3 Patient Aement, Examination, Diagnoi ,and Treatment Planning
the “gold standard.” Findings in this cell are termed false negatives .
he inal cell, cell D, includes true negatives , where the diagnostic
test accurately identiies nondiseased cases that are truly negative
as conirmed by the “gold standard.” A perfect diagnostic test
would result in all cases being assigned to cells A or D with no
false positives (cell B) or false negatives (cell C).
When the basics of this table are understood, the information
it yields may be put to good use by the diagnostician. he irst
concept is test sensitivity , which is calculated as the number of
true positives (A) divided by the number of total positive cases (A
+ C, i.e., the number of times where disease was actually present
regardless of the diagnostic test results). Sensitivity indicates the
proportion of individuals with disease in any group or population
that is identiied positively by the test. In contrast, speciicity refers
to the proportion of individuals without disease properly classiied
by the diagnostic test and is the ratio of true negatives (D) to all
negatives (B + D). Sensitivity and speciicity will not vary on the
basis of the prevalence of disease, that is, the proportion of cases
in a population. Rather, these statistics indicate what proportions
of existing disease and absence of disease will be correctly identiied
in any group of individuals.
A test with low sensitivity indicates that a high probability
exists that many of the individuals with negative results have the
disease and go undiagnosed. Conversely, a test with high sensitivity
means that most of those who actually have disease will be identiied
as such. Tests with high speciicity suggest that patients without
the disease are highly likely to test negative. Tests with low speciicity
will misclassify a sizable proportion as diseased when many are
actually free of disease.
Very few tests have both high sensitivity and high speciicity, so
trade-ofs are inevitable. he clinician must weigh the seriousness
of the disease that is left untreated (in cases of low sensitivity)
against the invasiveness of the treatment (in cases of low speciic -
ity). In the former, low sensitivity may be acceptable for tests
diagnosing slowly progressing, nonfatal conditions but unacceptable
for conditions that progress rapidly or are life threatening. In the
latter, low speciicity may not be acceptable if the treatment is
invasive and irreversible, but more acceptable if the treatment is
noninvasive and temporary. In the case of dental caries, all things
being equal, this means that the clinician may accept a less sensitive
test (i.e., miss some initial lesions [cell C]) because caries usually
progresses slowly over years. But given that operative treatment
is invasive and irreversible, a highly speciic test (i.e., few false
positives [cell B]) means that fewer healthy teeth will be incorrectly
treated.
he dentist should be mindful of the fact that except in cases
of relatively large caries lesions, the accuracy of the methods used to
detect lesions (visual inspection, radiographs, caries detection devices,
etc.) are all prone to inaccuracies (Box 3.1 ). hese inaccuracies result
in false-positive and false-negative indings. his situation raises
the question, “What are the implications of these inaccuracies for
clinical decision making?” False-positive indings m ay result in the
surgical treatment of a sound tooth, and false-negative indings
will result in a diseased surface receiving remineralization treatment
instead of operative treatment. he former situation is irreversible
and should be avoided, whenever possible. In the latter situation,
false negatives will receive remineralization therapy, regular monitor -
ing, and, if a lesion develops, may be treated operatively at a later
time, if needed. his reasonable approach takes into consideration
that caries lesions generally do not progress rapidly.33-35 hus the
clinician should strive to reduce the number of false positives by
making sure that strong diagnostic evidence supports the presence Although these technologies appear promising, the standard of
care remains visual inspection of well-illuminated, clean and dry
teeth, with use of radiographs as indicated.32 An ideal diagnostic
test accurately detects when a tooth surface is healthy (speciicity);
when a lesion or demineralization is present (sensitivity); and if
demineralization is present, whether or not it is active and whether
or not it has cavitated the surface (see section on Diagnosis ). Except
for the presence of frank cavitation in more advanc ed lesions, none
of the available approaches to detecting caries or determining lesion
activity is completely accurate. hus the clinician must take all of
the available diagnostic information together—visual, tactile,
radiographic, and so on—along with the respective reported levels
of accuracy and combine that with an assessment of the patient’s
overall caries status to make a inal diagnosis of the presence and
extent of a caries lesion.
Diagnoi
Dental Dieae; Interpretation and Ue of
Diagnotic Finding
As discussed in Chapter 2 , dental caries is a multifactorial, transmis -
sible, infectious oral disease caused primarily by the complex
interaction of cariogenic oral lora (bioilm) with fermentable dietary
carbohydrates on the tooth surface over time. Caries lesions are the
result of the caries disease process, not the cause.
he diagnostic efort of health care professionals has been
enhanced by the use of principles adopted from clinical epidemiol -
ogy. his analytic approach relies on “2 × 2” contingency tables
(Fig. 3.12 ) derived from clinical trials data. Such studies compare
the results of a diagnostic test with the results obtained from a
“gold standard” (knowledge of the actual condition) to determine
how well a test identiies the “true,” or actual, co ndition. he
results of the diagnostic test, positive or negative, are shown across
the rows of the table, and the results of a “gold standard” or the
“truth” are displayed in the columns. Cell A of the table contains
the cases that the test identiies as being positive (or diseased) that
actually are positive (i.e., conirmed by the “gold standard”). hese
cases are termed true positives . Cell B contains all cases for which
a positive inding from the diagnostic test is present, but where
the actual condition is negative. herefore this cell denotes false
positives . Cell C includes the cases identiied by the diagnostic test
as not being diseased, but actually are diseased, as determined by
Gold Standard
/H11001/H11001/H11002
/H11002Diagnostic
Test
Results
Cell A /H11005 true positives
Cell B /H11005 false positives
Cell C /H11005 false negatives
Cell D /H11005 true negativesA
CB
D
• Fig. 3.12 Contingency table for interpretation of diagnostic tests.
CHAPTER 3 Patient Aement, Examination, Diagnoi ,and Treatment Planning
and high risk to associate a level of risk with a category. his is
sometimes expressed by using color-coded categories: red for high
risk, yellow for medium risk, and green for low risk. Categories
simplify the concept for the patient, as they are easily understood
while discussing assessments and their implications for treatment
recommendations.
Patients who possess risk factors and risk indicators should be
considered to be at risk for dental caries even if the examination
does not reveal any caries lesions.33 A patient at high risk for dental
caries should receive aggressive intervention to remove or alter as
many risk factors as possible. Alternatively, regular monitoring
and reassessment might be appropriate for a patient at low risk
for dental caries. Risk assessment is a relatively young science in
the dental profession, but as more research is completed, evidence
is quickly validating this approach to patient care. Approaches to
patient care using risk assessments and disease management such
as CAMBRA are becoming the recognized standard of care. he
CAMBRA guidelines were developed over several years as an
evidence-based approach to preventing, reversing, and, when
necessary, repairing early damage to teeth caused by caries. Refer
to Chapter 2 for more information on how CAMBRA is used to
determine caries risk and how this determination helps the clinician
in the decision-making process for surgical or nonsurgical therapeutic
interventions.
In relation to operative dentistry, risk assessments are made for
caries, erosive tooth wear, and structural problems of teeth such
as fractures. However, risk assessments should be established for
other areas of the stomatognathic system such as periodontal disease,
functional occlusal and TMJ issues, and for the “risk” involved in
satisfying the patient’s esthetic expectations. All treatment for
patients should be designed to lower their risk for problems in
each of these areas. Dental treatment in any one of the abovemen -
tioned areas may improve risk status in that area but at a cost of
increased risk in another area. For example, preparation of teeth
for full-coverage crowns might reduce occlusal or esthetic risk but
at a cost of increasing risk for future caries or pulpal pathology.
Taken together, risk assessments provide a risk pr oile that helps
guide preventive and operative recommendations that are made
to the patient with the goal of mitigating as many risk factors as
possible.
Prognoi
Prognosis is the term used to describe the prediction of the probable
course and outcome of a disease or condition as well as the outcome
expected from an intervention, be it preventive or operative.
Prognosis may also be used to estimate the likelihood of recovery
from a disease or condition. In operative dentistry, prognosis may
be used to describe the likelihood of success of a particular treatment
procedure in terms of time of service, functional value, comfort,
and esthetic value for the patient. A prognosis may be described
as excellent , good, fair, poor, or even hopeless . Prognosis for a disease
or condition is largely dependent on the risk factors and indicators
that are present in the patient. However, other variables, such as
the skill of the dentist and the current status of the disease before
beginning treatment, also have an efect on the prog nosis. For
example, a patient with severe caries may be willing to eliminate
all of the modiiable risk factors, but if the disease is too advanced,
the long-term prognosis for the afected teeth may still be poor.
It is important for the clinician to take into account the entire
risk proile of the patient in all areas of the person’s medical and
dental health when trying to establish a prognosis. Once the dentist of cavitation or dentin penetration before recommending irreversible
operative treatment.
hese concepts are widely used in medical practice. Although
many of the necessary research studies have not been conducted
to develop probabilities for dental conditions, interest in the use
of clinical epidemiology in the dental profession has been growing.
In the future, more research studies will be conducted so as to
provide this information to clinicians, and one should be prepared
to take advantage of their use.
Rik Aement and Pr oiles
he patient assessment and examination process allows opportunity
to identify factors and indicators that increase likelihood (risk) of
future problems, given the patient’s current behaviors, clinical
conditions, and so on (see Chapter 2 ).36,37 Risk assessments help
organize the data relative to multiple causative factors. Few diseases
or dental conditions are caused by a single factor. Rather, most
diseases and dental conditions have been shown to be associated
with numerous behavioral or sociodemographic, physical or
environmental, microbiologic, or host factors. In addition, every
patient has a diferent set of risk factors. his presents a challenge
to determining the likelihood that a disease or condition would
occur in the future or that some form of dental treatment or
therapeutics would decrease the chances of disease occurrence.
Many risk assessments use terms such as low risk , medium risk , Contingency Table for Diagnostic Test Evaluation
Histologic Gold Standard
Caries
No caries
Diagnostic Test
Caries
True positive (TP)
False positive (FP)
No caries
False negative (FN)
True negative (TN)
Desirable and Undesirable Outcomes Resulting from Diagnostic Tests
with Low Sensitivity or Speciicity
Example 1
Diagnosing teeth (90 healthy and 10 carious) with a diagnostic test
having a high sensitivity (0.80) and low speciicity (0.50) would result
in the following:
Desirable outcomes:
Correctly detect 8 of 10 carious teeth (TP)
Correctly diagnose 45 of 90 healthy teeth (TN)
Undesirable outcomes:
Fail to detect 2 of 10 carious teeth (FN)
Fail to diagnose 45 healthy teeth as carious (FP)
Example 2
Diagnosing teeth (90 healthy and 10 carious) with a diagnostic test
having low sensitivity (0.50) and high speciicity (0.80) would result in
the following:
Desirable outcomes:
Correctly detect 5 of 10 carious teeth (TP)
Correctly diagnose 72 of 90 healthy teeth (TN)
Undesirable outcomes:
Fail to detect 5 of 10 carious teeth (FN)
Fail to diagnose 18 healthy teeth as carious (FP)Assessing the Accuracy of a Diagnostic
Test for Caries• BOX 3.1
CHAPTER 3 Patient Aement, Examination, Diagnoi ,and Treatment Planning
multiphase and dynamic series of activities. Success of the treatment
plan is determined by its ability to meet the patient’s initial and
long-term needs. A treatment plan should allow for reevaluation
and be adaptable to meet the changing needs, preferences, and
health conditions of the patient.
In the context of planning dental treatment, the clinician should
recommend invasive operative treatment only when the beneits
outweigh the risks of adverse outcomes. Restorations that require
permanent removal of tooth structure have a limited lifespan.
Studies have shown that the average lifespan of a restoration ranges
from 5 to more than 15 years.38 When the restoration is subsequently
replaced additional tooth structure is removed, regardless of how
carefully the operator removes the existing restoration. his situation
results in what has been termed the cycle of re-restoration , which
leads to larger and more invasive restorations over the course of a
patient’s life.39
As a general rule, remineralization therapies, as well as sealants
in the case of pits and issures, are the preferred methods of managing
coronal lesions that are neither cavitated nor involve dentin.
Remineralization is also recommended for root-surface lesions in
which a break in the surface contour of the exposed root surface
has not occurred. However, it is very important to note that
remineralization requires a high level of patient compliance with the
therapeutic regimen and frequent recall visits to assess the success of
the treatment . If lesion progression is detected at recall, then operative
intervention is warranted.
here are exceptions to the general rule of managing non -
cavitated enamel lesions with remineralization. Remineraliza -
tion requires a shift in the delicate balance of the oral bioilm
and therefore depends heavily on changes in patient behavior
(e.g., improved home care, diet) and the timely application of
antimicr obial agents, luoride, and other remineralizing agents.
hus, when it is clear that the patient is unwilling or unable to
follow the prescribed remineralization regimen of home care and
professional care, it is often appropriate to remove the lesion(s)
surgically and restore the defect or to seek to arrest the lesion (see
Chapter 2 ).
If conirmed cavitation of the enamel or demineralization
penetrating into the dentin on coronal surfaces is present or a
break exists in the contour of exposed root and softening of the
surface, then operative treatment is usually recommended. One
exception to this general guideline is the lesion that is deemed
arrested.
Treatment Plan Sequencing/Phaing
Proper sequencing is a crucial component of a successful treatment
plan. Certain treatments must follow others in a logical order,
whereas other treatments may or must occur concurrently and
require coordination. Complex treatment plans often are sequenced
in phases, including an urgent phase, a control phase, a reevaluation
phase, a deinitive phase, and a maintenance phase (that includes
reassessment and recare). For most patients, the irst three phases
are accomplished simultaneously. Generally, the principle of “greatest
need” guides the order in which treatment is sequenced. his
principle suggests that what the patient needs most is performed
irst—with pain, bleeding, and swelling at the beginning of the
treatment plan and elective esthetic procedures at the end. he
process of treatment planning requires that the dentist develop an
ever-increasing, comprehensive knowledge of dental disease manage -
ment in the context of individualized patient care. Study of textbooks
devoted to this discipline is indicated.40and the patient have a good understanding of the current
condition(s), the patient’s risk proile, and all associated prognoses,
they will be able to work together as a team to identify treatment
options and establish a treatment plan.
Treatment Planning
General Conideration
Patient assessment, examination, and diagnosis result in a listing
of dental problems, an inventory of existing risk factors (or indica -
tors), and an accurate prognosis for each tooth and for the patient’s
overall oral health. he dentist then begins to consider various
options in light of the paramount principle in dentistry: to do no
harm . Clinicians must have a sound knowledge of the current
evidence relative to the risks and beneits of their treatment recom -
mendations. One option that must always be included is recommend
that there not be any intervention. Another consideration, based
on the patient–dentist interaction, particular needs/desires of the
patient, and/or the skill/comfort level of the dentist, is to recommend
referral to another practitioner. With regard to ope rative dentistry
procedures, the decision to recommend surgical or nonsurgical
intervention depends on the determination that a tooth is diseased,
a restoration is defective, or the tooth or restoration is at some
increased risk of further deterioration if the intervention does not
occur. If any of these conditions exists, intervention is recommended
to the patient. here may be multiple possible means by which
to resolve the diagnosed disease or defect. Identiication of treatment
alternatives involves establishing a list of one or more reasonable
interventions from the set of possible alternatives. T reatment
alternatives for a speciic condition may include, for example,
periodic reevaluation to monitor the condition, chemotherapeutics
(e.g., applications of luoride to promote remineralization or
antimicrobials to reduce bacteria), recontouring defective restorations
or irregular tooth surfaces, repair of an existing restoration, and
restoration of caries lesions or other defects. he list of reasonable
treatment alternatives is based on current evidence of the efective -
ness of treatments, prevailing standards of care, and clinical and
nonclinical patient factors. If the decision is made to recommend
intervention then identiication and selection among treatment
alternatives, with the patient’s involvement, enables creation of
the treatment plan .
he treatment plan is a carefully sequenced series of services
designed to eliminate or control etiologic factors, repair existing
damage, and create a functional, maintainable environment. An
appropriate treatment plan depends on thorough evaluation of
the patient, the expertise of the dentist, and a prediction of the
patient’s response to treatment. he treatment plan will also include
strategies designed to reduce the patient’s risk for future caries
or other oral disease. Selection of speciic components of the
treatment plan is accomplished in consultation with the patient.
he patient is advised of the reasonable treatment alternatives
and related risks and beneits. After the patient is fully informed,
the dentist and patient select a course of action that is most
appropriate.
T reatment plans are inluenced by many factors, including
patient preferences, motivation, systemic health, emotional status,
and inancial resources. he treatment plan is also inluenced by
the dentist’s knowledge, experience, and training; laboratory support;
dentist–patient compatibility; availability of spec ialists; and the
patient’s functional, esthetic, and technical demands. Finally, a
treatment plan is not a static list of services. Rather, it is often a
CHAPTER 3 Patient Aement, Examination, Diagnoi ,and Treatment Planning
appointments for bioilm removal (dental prophylaxis). he fre -
quency of reevaluation examinations depends, in large part, on
the patient’s risk for dental disease. A patient with a low risk proile
may have longer intervals (e.g., 9–12 months) between recall visits.
In contrast, patients at high risk proile should be recalled and
examined much more frequently (e.g., 3–4 months).
Interdiciplinary Conideration in Operative
Treatment Planning
When an operative procedure is performed during the control or
deinitive phases, general guidelines help determine when the
operative treatment should occur relative to other forms of care.
Following is a discussion on sequencing operative care with
endodontic, periodontal, orthodontic, surgical, and prosthodontic
treatments.
Endodontics
All teeth to be restored with large restorations should have a pulpal
and periapical evaluation. If indicated, teeth should have endodontic
treatment before restoration is completed. Also, a tooth previously
endodontically treated, that shows no evidence of healing or has
an inadequate illing or a illing exposed to oral luids, should be
evaluated for retreatment before restorative therapy is initiated.41
Periodontics
Generally, periodontal treatment should precede operative care,
especially when improved oral hygiene and initial scaling/root
planing procedures create (through reduction of gingival inlam -
mation) a more desirable environment for performing operative
treatment. A tooth with a questionable periodontal prognosis should
not receive an extensive restoration until periodontal treatment
provides a more favorable prognosis. If a tooth has a good peri -
odontal prognosis, then operative treatment may occur before or
after periodontal therapy, as long as the operative treatment is not
compromised by the existing tissue condition. T reatment of deep
caries lesions often requires caries control (see Chapter 2 ). Caries
control may utilize temporization, creation of a foundation, or
root canal therapy/foundation before periodontal th erapy. he
correction of gross restorative defects in restoration contours (e.g.,
open contact resulting from restoration undercontour, gingival
overhang, poor embrasure form, occlusal interference resulting in
increased mobility) is considered a part of initial periodontal therapy,
and such corrections enable a more favorable tissue response. If
periodontal surgical procedures are required, indirect restorations
such as inlays or onlays, crowns, and prostheses should be delayed
until the surgical phase is completed. Teeth planned for cast restora -
tions may, however, be prepared and temporized before periodontal
surgery. his approach permits conirmation of the restored tooth
prognosis before surgery and allows improved access for the surgical
procedure.
Patients with gingivitis and early periodontitis generally respond
favorably to improved oral hygiene and scaling/root planing
procedures. Patients with more advanced periodontitis might require
removal (or at least minimization) of associated risk factors/indicators
through surgical steps that eliminate/reduce sulcular depths or
various regenerative procedures to resolve their pe riodontal disease.
Steps to increase the zones of attached gingiva and eliminate
abnormal frenal tension should be achieved by corrective periodontal
surgical procedures around teeth receiving restorations with sub -
gingival margins. In addition, any teeth requiring restorations that
may encroach on the biologic width of the periodontium should Urgent Phase
he urgent phase of care begins with a thorough review of the
patient’s medical history and current condition. A patient presenting
with swelling, pain, bleeding, or infection should have these
problems managed as soon as possible, before initiation of subse -
quent phases.
Control Phase
A control phase is appropriate when the patient presents with
multiple pressing problems and extensive active disease or when
the prognosis is unclear. he goals of this phase are to remove
etiologic factors, eliminate the ecologic niches of pathogens, and
stabilize the patient’s dental health. hese goals are accomplished
by (1) removal of active disease such that inlammation may resolve,
(2) correction of conditions that prevent or limit hygiene eforts,
(3) elimination of potential causes of disease, and (4) initiation of
preventive activities. Examples of control phase treatment include
extractions, endodontics, periodontal debridement and scaling,
occlusal adjustment, caries arrest and/or removal, replacement or
repair of defective restorations such as those with gingival overhangs,
and use of caries control measures, as discussed in Chapter 2 .
he dentist should develop a plan for the management and
prevention of dental caries as part of the control phase. After the
patient’s caries status and caries risk have been determined, chemical,
surgical, behavioral, mechanical, and dietary techniques may be
used to improve host resistance and alter the oral lora.40 Chapter
2 presents a detailed discussion of caries diagnosis, prevention,
treatment, and control.
Reevaluation Phase
he reevaluation phase allows time between the control and deini -
tive phases for resolution of inlammation and healing. Initial
treatment and pulpal responses are reevaluated during this phase
as the relative efectiveness of control phase treatment may inluence
and modify the deinitive phase treatment plan. his phase is used
to reinforce home care habits and assess motivation for further
treatment.
Patients with an overall low risk proile, who only require minor
alterations in diet, behaviors, and exposure to remineralization
agents, may not require a formal control phase/reevaluation phase
process. he treatment plan for these patients may start with a
plan to deinitively address immediate concerns while sim ultaneously
implementing minor changes and reinforcing habits consistent
with dental health.
Deinitive Phase
he patient enters the deinitive phase of treatment only after the
dentist reassesses initial eforts to control disease and, with the
patient, determines the need for further care. his phase may include
endodontic, periodontal, orthodontic, and surgical procedures. he
patient’s active disease must be under control, and preventive eforts
habitually established, before ixed or removable prosthodontic
treatment. his phase is discussed in more detail in the section on
interdisciplinary considerations in operative treatment planning .
Maintenance (Reassessment and Recare) Phase
he maintenance phase includes regular reassessment (synonyms
include reevaluation, periodic) examinations that may reveal the
need for adjustments to prevent future breakdown, provide an
opportunity to reinforce home care, and plan recare treatment
steps where disease has returned. Examinations for reassessment
most frequently occur as part of strategically planned (recall)
CHAPTER 3 Patient Aement, Examination, Diagnoi ,and Treatment Planning
creation of an occlusal guard, for nocturnal use, may be indicated
with a diagnosis of sleep-related bruxism. A treatment plan for
deinitive indirect restorations must include an occlusal analysis
(which requires articulated diagnostic models) as part of the
comprehensive examination. Careful consideration of related
information from the patient assessment and examination process
is essential if all aspects of the etiology are to be identiied and
risk factors reduced. Also, occlusal guard therapy should be con -
sidered for nocturnal protection of indirect restorations completed
as part of the deinitive phase.
Treatment of Root-Surface Carie
Root caries is common in older adults and in patients who have
had periodontal therapy. Increases in the number of older patients
in the patient population and tooth retention have contributed
to this growing problem. Areas with root-surface caries usually
should be restored when clinical and/or radiographic evidence of
cavitation exists. Care must be exercised, however, to distinguish
the active from the arrested (inactive) root-surface lesion. he
arrested root-surface lesion may have sclerotic dentin that has
darkened from extrinsic staining, is irm to the touch of an explorer,
may be rough but is cleanable. Successful caries arrest usually
occurs in patients whose oral hygiene or diet has improved such
that the balance between demineralization and remineralization
has become favorable. Generally, these lesions should not be restored
except when the patient expresses esthetic concerns. If it is deter -
mined that the lesion needs restoration, it may be restored with
tooth-colored materials or amalgam, depending on demands of
the restorative material, preferences of the patient, and caries risk.
Prevention is preferred over restoration. It is rec ommended that
appropriate preventive steps, such as improvement in diet/oral
hygiene and luoride treatment (with or without cementoplasty/
dentinoplasty to eliminate surface roughness), be taken so as to
limit carious breakdown and the need for restoration.
Treatment of Root-Surface Senitivity
It is not unusual for patients to complain of root-surface sensitivity,
which is an annoying sharp pain usually associated with gingival
recession and exposed root surfaces. he most widely accepted
explanation of this phenomenon is the hydrodynamic theory . his
theory postulates that rapid dentinal tubule luid movement toward
the external surface of the tooth elongates odontoblastic processes
(which extend from the pulp through the predentin and into
dentin) and associated aferent nerve ibers. he elongation of the
nerve ibers results in depolarization and the perception of pain
(see Chapter 1 ). Causes of such luid shifts include temperature
changes, air-drying, and extreme osmotic gradients. T reatment
methods that reduce rapid luid shifts, by partially or totally
occluding the ends of the exposed dentinal tubules, may help
reduce the perceived sensitivity.
Dentinal hypersensitivity may become a problem when peri -
odontal surgery causes clinical exposure of root surfaces (such that
dentinal tubules are exposed and open). Numerous forms of
nonsurgical treatment, such as luoride varnishes, oxalate solutions,
glutaraldehyde/HEMA-based desensitizers, resin-based adhesives,
sealants, and desensitizing toothpastes that contain potassium
nitrate, have been used to occlude the open tubules and, thereby,
provide relief. When nonsurgical methods fail to provide relief,
direct restorative treatment that physically covers the exposed dentin
is indicated.have appropriate crown-lengthening surgical procedures performed
before the inal restoration is placed. Usually, a minimum of 6
weeks is required after the surgery before inal restorative procedures
are undertaken.
Orthodontics
Orthodontic therapy, such as realignment or extrusion, may be
required to provide improved interdental spacing, stress distribution,
function, and esthetics. All caries lesions should be corrected with
amalgam or composite restorations before orthodontic treatment
begins. Few indications exist for cast restorations before orthodontic
treatment is completed. In addition, patients undergoing orthodon -
tic treatment should receive more intense focus (especially by the
orthodontist) on the minimization/elimination of risk factors for
caries and gingival/periodontal disease. he orthodontic treatment
plan should include shorter recall intervals for bioilm removal,
examination, and oral hygiene reinforcement.
Oral Surgery
In most instances, impacted, unerupted, and/or hopelessly diseased
teeth should be removed before operative treatment. Oral surgery
procedural steps required for third molar removal may jeopardize
new restorations placed on second molars. In addition, soft tissue
lesions, complicating exostoses, and improperly contoured ridge
areas should be eliminated or corrected before inal restorative care.
Fixed, Removable, and Implant Prosthodontics
Direct restorations should be completed, if possible , before placing
indirect restorations. Large amalgam or composite foundation
restorations must have secondary retention features (g rooves, slots,
pins) placed further from the external surface of the tooth so that
the retention of the foundation material is not compromised during
preparation for the indirect restoration. In removable prosthodontics,
tooth preparations and restorations should allow for the design of
the removable partial denture. his includes allowance for rests,
guide planes, and clasps. he design of the direct restoration and
the selection of appropriate restorative materials must be compatible with the design of the contemplated removable prosthesis. In
cases where dental implants have been or will be placed, direct
restorations should be planned and executed to allow necessary
mesial, distal, and vertical (occlusal) space for implant-supported
indirect restorations. Implant restorations may sometimes have
unusual proximal contours, and adjacent amalgam or composite
restorations should be designed to allow the best possible proximal
contact relationships.
Treatment of Abraion, Eroion, Abfraction,
and Attrition
Abraded or eroded areas should be considered for re storation only
if one or more of the following is true: (1) he area is afected by
caries, (2) the defect is suiciently deep to compromise the structural
integrity of the tooth, (3) intolerable sensitivity exists and is
unresponsive to conservative desensitizing measures, (4) the defect
contributes to a gingival or periodontal problem (chronic bioilm
accumulation), (5) the area is to be involved in the design of a
removable partial denture, (6) the depth of the defect is such that
there is increased risk of pulpal involvement, (7) the defect is
actively progressing, or (8) the patient desires esthetic improvement.
Areas of signiicant occlusal attrition that have exposed dentin,
are sensitive, or annoying should be considered for restoration or
at least protection from additional loss of tooth structure. he
CHAPTER 3 Patient Aement, Examination, Diagnoi ,and Treatment Planning
outcomes require meticulous attention to detail with regard to
the enamel/dentin substrate and the properties of the speciic
adhesive system/composite resin being used. Correct application
will result in the rewarding creation of form, func tion, and lifelike
appearance of missing tooth structure. Determination of patient
caries risk is important when considering the use of composite
resin-based restorations. A systematic review has identiied that
the likelihood of development of recurrent caries adjacent to
composite resin restorations is at least twice that of amalgam
restorations in high caries risk patients.45 Detailed indications for
composite and other tooth-colored restorations are presented in
Chapter 8 .
Treatment With Indirect Cat-Metal Retoration
Partialor full-coverage indirect cast-metal (primarily gold alloy)
onlay restorations still remain among the most predictable and
dependable restorations available to dentistry. hese are the conserva -
tive restoration of choice for compromised teeth in high stress
areas. he beneit of these restorations is that they cover and reinforce
cusps without removal of healthy tooth structure in the middle
and cervical areas of the facial and lingual surfaces (see Online
Chapter 18 ). Indirect cast-metal restoration of the total clinical
crown of teeth allows complete control of all contours and, thereby,
the creation of anatomic shape consistent with optimal occlusal
function and gingival health.
Treatment With Indirect
Tooth-Colored Retoration
Properly designed porcelain-fused-to-metal (PFM) indirect restora -
tions have clinically proven, long-term success in the restoration
of individual teeth and edentulous areas. he use of ceramic materials
without metal substrates has steadily increased in recent years.
Partial-coverage bonded indirect tooth-colored restorations may
be indicated for the restoration of large defects in low stress areas
when esthetics and optimal control of contours is necessary. Fullcoverage bonded indirect tooth-colored restorations also may be
selected for the conservative restoration of weakened posterior
teeth in low stress, esthetically critical areas.
he use of tooth-colored, zirconia-based, indirect restorations
has steadily increased over the last two decades. In vitro and shortterm in vivo research studies suggest that the clinical durability of
these crowns may allow use as an alternative to indirect cast-metal
or PFM restorations. However, there are currently no published
long-term randomized, controlled clinical trials verifying this to
actually be the case. hese restorations may be generated through
the use of traditional impression/dental laboratory techniques or
through the use of computer-assisted digital impression, design
and manufacturing processes. Indirect tooth-colored restorations
are covered in more detail in Chapter 12 .
Treatment of Ethetic Concern
Interest in smile esthetics is growing among many segments of the
population. As a result, a range of treatments has been developed
to manage a wide array of esthetic concerns. Chapter 9 describes
conservative esthetic treatments, which include selectiv e recontouring
of anterior teeth, vital bleaching, and microabrasion. hese conserva -
tive approaches have well-documented outcomes. In addition to
these conservative techniques, advances in direct composite restora -
tions have permitted the closure of diastemas, recontouring of Treatment by Repair and Recontour of
Exiting Retoration
Amalgam, composite, or indirect restorations often may be repaired
or recontoured as opposed to completely removed and replaced.
Growing evidence suggests that the removal and replacement of
restorations result in the cycle of re-restoration, which leads to
increasingly larger tooth preparations and the resultant trauma to
the tooth and supporting structures.39 In addition, resurfacing or
repair of composites and repair of cast restorations has been shown
to be efective.42-44 Also, amalgam restorations with localized defects
may be repaired with amalgam or with sealant resins.17,42 If a restora -
tion has an isolated carious defect, and complete removal of the
caries lesion has been conirmed, then it is acceptable and often
preferable to restore the isolated area without replacement of the
whole restoration. In many instances, recontouring or resurfacing
the existing restoration may delay replacement and is an acceptable
form of treatment.
Treatment by Replacement of
Exiting Retoration
Indications for replacing restorations include the following: (1)
marginal void(s), especially in the gingival one third, that cannot
be repaired and predispose to caries formation; (2) poor proximal
contour or a gingival overhang that contributes to periodontal
breakdown; (3) a marginal ridge discrepancy that contributes to
food impaction; (4) overcontouring of a facial or lingual surface
resulting in bioilm accumulation gingival to the height of contour
and r esultant inlammation of gingiva overprotected from the
cleansing action of food bolus or toothbrush; (5) poor proximal
contact that is either open or improper in location or size, resulting
in interproximal food impaction and inlammation of impacted
gingival papilla; (6) recurrent caries that cannot be treated adequately
by a repair restoration; and (7) supericial marginal gap formation
(ditching) deeper than 0.5 mm that predisposes to caries.44
Indications for replacing tooth-colored restorations include (1)
improper contours that cannot be repaired, (2) large voids, (3)
deep marginal staining, (4) recurrent caries, and (5) unacceptable
esthetics.44 Bonded restorations that have supericial marginal
staining may be corrected by shallow, narrow, marginal repair.
Treatment With Amalgam Retoration
Dental amalgam still is recognized as one of the most successful
direct restorative materials and is especially indicated for patients
deemed to be moderate or high caries risk.45 Inaccurate information
with regard to the safety of amalgam has resulted in controversy
among health care providers, environmentalists, legislators, and
the general population. Although the use of amalgam is considered
safe by multiple independent agencies, the release of elemental
mercury does contribute to environmental levels. Therefore
responsible handling is important. Chapter 10 presents the current
indications for amalgam restorations and Chapter 13 presents a
more complete discussion of legitimate mercury concerns and the
safe use of dental amalgam.
Treatment With Direct Compoite and Other
Tooth-Colored Retoration
Direct composite restorations are indicated for the treatment of
many lesions in anterior and posterior teeth. Successful treatment
CHAPTER 3 Patient Aement, Examination, Diagnoi ,and Treatment Planning
in older patients.49 Perceptions of salty and bitter tastes and olfactory
function decline with age, whereas perceptions of sweet and sour
tastes do not. As a result, food may become tasteless and unap -
petizing, and more sugars, fats, and salts are added in an attempt
to incr ease lavor. Undernourished individuals are encouraged to
consume calorie-rich, complete-nutrition beverages, which also
are rich in reined carbohydrates. Smoking reduces the taste of
foods by causing physical coating of the tongue and regression of
the taste buds on the tongue and olfactory receptors in the roof
of the nasal cavity over time. Inadequate luid intake may lead to
chronic dehydration and altered taste perception. hese practices
increase the risk of dental disease in this population. Dietary
assessment and counseling are crucial in older patients to identify
inadequate diets and suggest modiications that enhance taste and
smell while lowering the risks of dental disease. Herb seasonings
may enhance the lavor of foods in lieu of sugar and salt. Salivary
stimulants, citrus-lavored candies containing xylitol or other sugar
replacements, tongue brushing or scraping, and smoking cessation
are some additional measures that may promote taste and olfactory
perception in older adults.
Dental and periodontal diseases may progress more rapidly in
older adults.47 Dental caries, particularly root caries, is the most
signiicant reason for tooth loss in older adults. Inefective plaque
removal, xerostomia, soft sugar-rich diets, ixed and removable
prostheses, abrasions at the CEJ, gingival recession, and chronic
periodontal inlammation (with increased activity of collagenolytic
enzymes) make root surfaces more prone to caries compared with
other surfaces. Root-surface restorations are challenging to suc -
cessfully perform and are at risk of recurrent decay in the future.
Careful selection of restoration design, materials, and inishing is
essential if the patient is to be able to perform successful bioilm
removal and thereby maximize the longevity of restorations. Also,
many dental practitioners prefer to intervene more aggressively
with dental treatment rather than take a “watchful waiting”
approach. As more teeth are being retained and have large restora -
tions at risk of fracture or recurrent decay, attention must be placed
on developing cost-efective and innovative means of restoring
teeth, particularly for older individuals on a limited budget. he
cost-efective use of silver diamine luoride (SDF) to arrest caries,
even though the treated area becomes darkly stained, may be an
optimal treatment option in this population (see Chapter 2 ).
Prevention of dental disease increases in importance but becomes
more challenging in older adults. Physical limitations such as
arthritis, Parkinson disease, vision impairment, and other chronic
illnesses reduce the patients’ ability to clean their teeth and peri -
odontal tissues efectively. Powered rotation–oscillation toothbrushes
and manual toothbrushes with larger handles, for easier gripping,
are recommended for patients with decreased manual dexterity.
Consistent use of luoride-containing dentifrices and other rem -
ineralization products, antimicrobial mouthrinses, oral pH manage -
ment, lossing, oral irrigation, and chewing of xylitol gum may
reduce the risk of developing dental caries and periodontal
infection.50 Written reminders are useful to serve as aids for older
patients who forget to brush their teeth because of memory loss
associated with Alzheimer disease. Because many older individuals
may have never been taught how to efectively clean their teeth,
the dentist must observe their technique and instruct them in
proper oral hygiene procedures to be performed after each meal.
Dentists must carefully inform patients in the proper application
method of -ppm luoride toothpastes. Incorrect application
(e.g., rinsing/eating/drinking immediately after brushing) severely
limits any potential beneit.teeth, and other tooth additions by means other than extensive
full-coverage indirect restorations.
Treatment Conideration for Older Patient
In the past, older adults constituted a relatively minor proportion
of the population. Older individuals used dental services infrequently
because most were edentulous, had limited inancial resources,
and delayed unmet dental needs until they became symptomatic.
Today, individuals 65 years and older represent a rapidly growing
segment of the population. Older individuals now are better
educated consumers, have greater inancial resources , are more
prevention minded, and have retained more teeth as compared
with their predecessors. However, older individuals are living with
increasingly more complex medical, mental, emotional, and social
conditions that afect their ability to care for their dentition and
periodontium. hese conditions must be considered when planning
dental treatment. Financial and social barriers prevent some older
individuals from seeking oral health care. Although, as a group,
older adults enjoy greater inancial resources, many remain on
restricted budgets and are faced with tough decisions regarding
the spending of limited resources. T ransportation to and from the
dental oice becomes complicated for those who no longer drive.
A comprehensive review of geriatric dentistry is beyond the scope
of this chapter; rather, some issues that are important for treatment
planning for older patients are highlighted.46-48
Clear and efective communication is crucial. Many older adults
have hearing loss and dentists must speak more distinctly and at
a higher volume. Patients with memory loss appreciate written
summaries and instructions that assist them in remembering details
of the visit and planned treatment when they leave the dental
oice. he use of large simple fonts in written communications
is particularly helpful to patients with diminished visual acuity.
An accurate medical history, risk assessment, and integration
of dental and medical care are particularly important considerations
for older patients. Many chronic diseases of the cardiovascular,
respiratory, endocrine, renal, gastrointestinal, musculoskeletal,
immune, and neurologic systems are associated with aging, inluence
dental disease, and complicate dental treatment decision making.
Cardiovascular disease, Alzheimer disease, depression, osteoarthritis,
rheumatoid arthritis, osteoporosis, cancer, and diabetes are a few
of the diseases that commonly afect older adults, and their medical
management increases in complexity with advancing years. It is
estimated that older individuals living in community settings take
an average of four medications each day; six of the top 10 drugs
prescribed in were used to treat age-related chronic condi -
tions.46,47 Many of these medications have the potential for adverse
drug reactions and drug interactions. Oral adverse efects include
dry mouth (xerostomia), increased bleeding of tissues, lichenoid
reactions, tissue overgrowth, and hypersensitivity reactions. he
dentist must be aware of the impact these medications may have
on dental treatment planning and management. Consultation with
the patient’s physician is highly recommended so as to gain
understanding of these medical, mental, and emotional conditions
and their potential impact on dental treatment. he dentist should
recognize the impact of polypharmacy on salivary low, especially
the use of xerostomic medications, and discuss with the physician
the potential substitution of medications with fewer xerostomic
efects.
Oral changes associated with undernourishment, immunosup -
pression, dehydration, smoking, alcohol use, disease, medications,
and dental problems lead to a depressed sense of taste and smell
CHAPTER 3 Patient Aement, Examination, Diagnoi ,and Treatment Planning
is available. hese alternatives, with their advantages and disad -
vantages, should be presented to the patient. In addition, the
patient should be informed of the risks associated with each
alternative therapy. Dentists must remember that a reasonable
alternative often is not to intervene directly with restorative care.
Rather, based on the nature of dental disease progression, elimination
or reduction of risk factors/indicators may need to be the initial
focus while monitoring the condition. Even these intentional eforts
are part of a treatment plan and must be included in the informed
consent process. Proactive conservative steps, in the case of caries,
may be to attempt to remineralize or arrest the lesion(s). Finally,
the cost of treatment alternatives should be discussed with the
patient. T reatment may proceed when the dentist is sure that the
patient has a full and complete understanding of the alternative
treatments, their associated risks and beneits, and the results of
possible nontreatment.51-53A unique aspect of aging is an increasing reliance on the assistance
of caregivers with activities of daily living. As a result, the dentist
must work with caregivers who provide dental care for patients in
the home, assisted living facility, nursing home, and hospital settings.
he dental professional may need to spend more time educating
and training the caregiver, rather than the patient, in the importance
of oral hygiene and efective plaque removal techniques.
Treatment Plan Approval
Informing patients well about their conditions and treatment options
and then obtaining their consent has become an integral part of
contemporary dental practice.51 One aspect of informed consent
is to provide patients with the necessary information about the
alternative therapies available to manage their oral conditions. For
nearly all conditions, usually more than one treatment alternative
Summary
Proper assessment, examination, diagnosis, and treatment planning
play a crucial role in the delivery of quality dental care. Each
patient must be evaluated (examined) individually in a thorough
and systematic fashion. After the patient’s preferences, risks, and
condition(s) are understood and recorded, a treatment plan may
be developed and implemented. A successful treatment plan carefully
sequences and integrates all necessary procedures indicated for the
patient. Few absolutes exist in treatment planning; the available
information must be considered carefully and incorporated into a sequenced approach that its the desires/needs of the individual.
Patients must have an active role in the process; they must be
informed of the indings, advised of the risks and beneits of
proposed treatment, and given the opportunity to decide the course
of treatment. he process of patient assessment, examination,
diagnosis, and treatment planning represents one of the greatest
challenges in dentistry and is rewarding for both the patient and
the dentist if done properly (i.e., thoroughly and with the patient’s
best interests in mind).
Reference
1. Sackett DL, Rosenberg WM, Gray JA, et al: Evidence-based medicine:
What it is and what it isn’t. Br Med J :71–72, .
2. Bader JD, Shugars DA: Systematic review of selected dental caries
diagnostic and management methods. J Dent Educ 65: – ,
.
3. Young DA, Nový BB, Zeller GG, et al: he American Dental Associa -
tion Caries Classiication System for Clinical Practice, A report of
the American Dental Association Council on Scientiic Afairs. J Am
Dent Assoc (2):79–86, .
4. Kidd EAM, Ricketts DN, Pitts NB: Occlusal caries diagnosis: A
changing challenge for clinicians and epidemiologists. J Dent
21: – , .
5. Lussi A: Validity of diagnostic and treatment decisions of issure
caries. Caries Res 25: – , .
6. Penning C, van Amerongen JP , Seef RE, et al: Validity of probing
for issure caries diagnosis. Caries Res 26: – , .
7. Pretty I, Maupome G: A closer look at diagnosis in clinical dental
practice: Part 1. Reliablity, validity, speciicity, and sensitivity of
diagnostic procedures. J Can Dent Assoc 70: – , .
8. Ekstrand K, Qvist V, hylstrup A: Light microscope study of the
efect of probing occlusal surfaces. Caries Res 21: – , .
9. Yassin OM: In vitro studies of the efect of a dental explorer on the
formation of an artiicial carious lesion. J Dent Child 62: – ,
.
10. Ashley PF , Blinkhorn AS, Davies RM: Occlusal caries diagnosis: An
in vitro histological validation of the Electronic Caries Monitor
(ECM) and other methods. J Dent 26:83–88, .
11. Kidd EA, Joyston-Bechal S, Beighton D: Diagnosis of secondary
caries: a laboratory study. Br Dent J : – , .
12. Hintze H, Wenzel A, Danielsen B, et al: Reliability of visual examina -
tion, iber-optic transillumination, and bite-wing radiography, and reproducibility of direct visual examination following tooth separation
for the identiication of cavitated carious lesions in contacting
approximal surfaces. Caries Res 32: – , .
13. Katz RV: he clinical identiication of root caries. Gerodontology
5:21–24, .
14. Newwitter DS, Katz RV, Clive JM: Detection of root caries: Sensitivity
and speciicity of a modiied explorer. Gerodontics 1:65–67, .
15. Newbrun E: Problems in caries diagnosis. Int Dent J 43: – ,
.
16. Kidd EAM, Joyston-Bechal S, Beighton D: Marginal ditching and
staining as a predictor of secondary caries around amalgam restorations:
A clinical and microbiological study. J Dent Res 74: – , .
17. Mjor IA: Frequency of secondary caries at various anatomical locations.
Oper Dent 10:88–92, .
18. Lussi A, Ganss C. Erosive tooth wear: from diagnosis to therapy, 2nd
edition, revised and extended, Monographs in oral science, ISSN
- ; vol. 25.
19. Grippo JO, Simring M, Coleman TA: Abfraction, abrasion, biocor -
rosion, and the enigma of noncarious cervical lesions: A 20-year
perspective. J Esthet Restor Dent 24:10–25, , 1. .x.
20. Senna P , Del Bel Cury A, Rösing C: Non-carious cervical lesions
and occlusion: a systematic review of clinical studies. J Oral Rehab
39(6): – , , 1. Bader JD, Martin JA, Shugars DA: Incidence rates for complete cusp
fracture. Community Dent Oral Epidemiol 29: – , .
22. Bader JD, Shugars DA, Sturdevant JR: Consequences of posterior
cusp fracture. Gen Dent 52: – , .
23. Bader JD, Shugars DA, Martin JA: Risk indicators for posterior tooth
fracture. J Am Dent Assoc : – , .
24. Sturdevant JR, Bader JD, Shugars DA, et al: A simple method to
estimate restoration volume as a possible predictor for tooth fracture.
J Prosthet Dent 90: – , .
CHAPTER 3 Patient Aement, Examination, Diagnoi ,and Treatment Planning
41. Madison M, Wilcox LR: An evaluation of coronal microleakage in
endodontically-treated teeth: Part III. In vivo study. J Endod 14:
– , .
42. Mertz-Fairhurst EJ, Call-Smith KM, Shuster GS, et al: Clinical
performance of sealed composite restorations placed over caries
compared with sealed and unsealed amalgam restorations. J Am Dent
Assoc : – , .
43. Fitch DR, Boyd WJ, McCoy RB, et al: Amalgam repair of cast gold
crown margins: A microleakage assessment. Gen Dent 30: – ,
.
44. Anusavice K: Criteria for placement and replacement of dental restora -
tions: An international consensus report. Int Dent J 38: – ,
.
45. Rasines Alcaraz MG, Veitz-Keenan A, Sahrmann P , et al: Direct
composite resin illings versus amalgam illings for permanent or
adult posterior teeth (Review). Cochran Database of Systematic Reviews
(3):Art. No.:CD005620, .
46. DeBiase CB, Austin SL: Oral health and older adults. J Dent Hyg
77: – , .
47. Ettinger RL: he unique oral health needs of an aging population.
Dent Clin North Am 41: – , .
48. American Dental Association Council: Access, prevention and
interprofessional relations: Providing dental care in long-term dental
care facilities: A resource manual, . Chicago, American Dental
Association.
49. Winkler S, Garg AK, Mekayarajjananonth T, et al: Depressed taste
and smell in geriatric patients. J Am Dent Assoc : – ,
.
50. Simons D, Brailsford SR, Kidd EA, et al: he efect of medicated
chewing gums and oral health in frail elderly people: a one-year
clinical trial. J Am Geriatr Soc 50: – , .
51. Sikas PM: Informed consent and the law. J Am Dent Assoc
: – , .
52. Christensen GJ: Educating patients: a new necessity. J Am Dent Assoc
:86–87, .
53. Christensen GJ: Educating patients about dental procedures. J Am
Dent Assoc : – , .25. Matteson SR, Joseph LP , Bottomley W, et al: he report of the panel
to develop radiographic selection criteria for dental patients. Gen
Dent 39: – , .
26. Dove SB: Radiographic diagnosis of caries. J Dent Educ 65: – ,
.
27. Christensen GJ: Magniication in dentistry: Useful tool or another
gimmick? J Am Dent Assoc : – , .
28. Forgie A: Magniication: What is available, and will it aid your clinical
practice? Dent Update 28: – , .
29. Strassler HE, Syme SE, Serio F , et al: Enhanced visualization during
dental practice using magniication systems. Compend Cont Educ
Dent 19: – , .
30. Ferreira-Zandona AG, Analoui M, Beiswanger BB, et al: An in vitro
comparison betw een laser luorescence and visual examination for
detection of demineralization in occlusal pits and issures. Caries Res
32: – , .
31. Bader J, Shugars D: Systematic review of the performance of the
DIAGNOdent device for caries detection. J Am Dent Assoc :
– , .
32. Pretty IA, Ekstrand KR: Detection and monitoring of early caries
lesions: a review. Eur Arch Paediatr Dent 17(1):13–25, .
33. Axelsson P: Diagnosis and risk prediction of dental caries , Chicago,
, Quintessence Publishing.
34. American Dental Association Council: Access, Preventi on and
Interprofessional Relations: Caries diagnosis and risk assessment: a
review of preventive strategies and management. J Am Dent Assoc
(Special Suppl): .
35. Hamilton JC, Dennison JB, Stofers KW, et al: Early treatment of
incipient carious lesions: a two-year clinical evaluation. J Am Dent
Assoc : – , .
36. Burt BA: Deinition of Risk. J Dent Edu 65(10): – , .
37. Hunter PB: Risk factors in dental caries. Int Dent J 38(4): – ,
.
38. Downer MC, Azli NA, Bedi R, et al: How long do routine dental
restorations last? A systematic review. Br Dent J : – , .
39. Brantley CF , Bader JD, Shugars DA, et al: Does the cycle of rerestora -
tion lead to larger restorations? J Am Dent Assoc : – ,
.
40. Stefanac SJ, Nesbit SP: Diagnosis and treatment planning in Dentistry ,
ed 3, St Louis, , Elsevier Publishing.
CHAPTER 4 Fundamental of Tooth Preparation
Fundamentals of Tooth Preparation
LEE W. BOUSHELL, RICARDO WALTER
Teeth require intervention (i.e., need some type of preparation)
for various reasons: (1) caries lesion progression to the point
that loss of tooth structure requires restoration; (2) tooth
fracture compromising form and function with or without associated
pain or sensitivity; (3) congenital malformation or improper position
in need of reestablishment of form or function; (4) previous restora -
tion with inadequate occlusal or proximal contact, defective (open)
margins, or poor esthetics; or (5) as par t of fulilling other restorative
needs (see Chapter 3 ). Ever y efort must be made to limit the risk
of iatrogenic damage to adjacent tooth surfaces while seeking to
prepare and restore caries lesions or defects. Teeth requiring
intervention are prepared such that various restorative materials
have the most predictable outcome.
his chapter deines tooth preparation and the historical classiica -
tion of anatomic locations afected by caries lesions. Consideration
is given to factors that directly impact preparation design, followed
by description of the logic and procedural organization of prepara -
tion steps. Additional factors that must be considered in overall
care of the patient may indirectly impact preparation design ( Box
4.1; see Online Chapter 15 ). Chapters that are devoted to the
preparation and restoration of speciic lesions/defects elaborate
on these additional factors. he ability to utilize the information
presented here requires working knowledge of dental anatomy and a
solid understanding of concepts presented in Chapters 1, 2, and 3 .
In the past, most restorative treatment was for cavitated caries
lesions, and the term cavity was used to describe a caries lesion
that had progressed to the point that there was a breach in the
surface integrity of the tooth. Likewise, when the afected tooth
was treated, the cutting or preparation of the remaining tooth
structure (to receive a restorative material) was ref erred to as cavity
preparation . Currently, many indications for treatment are not
related to carious destruction, and the preparation of the tooth
no longer is referred to as cavity preparation , but as tooth
preparation .
Tooth Prepara tion: Deinition and
Foundational Concepts
Tooth preparation is the mechanical alteration of a defective, injured,
or diseased tooth such that placement of restorative material
reestablishes normal form (and therefore function) including esthetic
corrections, where indicated. Generally, the objectives of tooth
preparation are to (1) conserve as much healthy tooth structure
as possible, (2) remove all defects while simultaneously providing
protection of the pulp–dentin complex, (3) form the tooth preparation so that, under the forces of mastication, the tooth or
the restoration (or both) will not fracture and the restoration will
not be displaced, and (4) allow for the esthetic placement of a
restorative material where indicated.
G.V. Black presented a classiication of tooth preparations
according to diseased anatomic areas involved and by the associated
type of treatment.1 Black’s classiication originally was based on
the observed frequency of caries lesions in various surface areas
of teeth. hese classiications were designated as Class I, Class II,
Class III, Class IV, and Class V. Since Black’s original classiication,
an additional class has been added, Class VI. Although the relative
frequency of caries lesion locations may have changed over the
years, the original classiication is still used in the diagnosis of caries
lesions (e.g., Class I Caries). In addition, the various classes are
used to identify lesion-associated preparations and restorations (e.g.,
a Class I amalgam preparation or a Class I amalgam restoration).
All preparations required to treat pit-and-issure caries are termed
Class I preparations . hese include preparations on (1) occlusal
surfaces of premolars and molars, (2) occlusal two thirds of the
facial and lingual surfaces of molars, and (3) the lingual surfaces
of maxillary incisors. Preparations required to correct caries lesions
that develop in the proximal surfaces of posterior teeth are termed
Class II preparations . Preparations required to correct caries lesions
that develop in the proximal surfaces of anterior teeth that do not
include the incisal edge are termed Class III preparations . Preparations
required to correct caries lesions or other defects that develop in
the proximal surfaces of anterior teeth that include the incisal edge
are termed Class IV preparations . Preparations required to correct
caries lesions or other defects that develop in the gingival third of
the facial or lingual surfaces of all teeth are termed Class V prepara -
tions. Preparations required to correct caries lesions or other defects
that develop in the incisal edges of anterior teeth or the occlusal
cusp tips of posterior teeth are termed Class VI preparations .
Much of the rationale supporting the development of tooth
preparation techniques was introduced by Black.1 Modiications
of Black’s principles of tooth preparation have resulted from the
inluence of Bronner, Markley, J. Sturdevant, Sockwell, and C.
Sturdevant; from improvements in restorative materials, instruments,
and techniques; and from the increased knowledge and application
of preventive measures for caries.2-6 Tooth preparation design takes
into consideration the nature of the tooth (the structure of enamel,
the structure of dentin, the position of the pulp in the pulp–dentin
complex, the enamel connection to the dentin) and the nature of
material to be used for restoration of the defect. For example, a
diamond abrasive cutting instrument may be chosen to increase
the roughness, and thereby surface area, of prepared walls and
CHAPTER 4 Fundamental of Tooth Preparation
a design that allows enough material thickness such that lexure
under occlusal load will not occur . his process usually results in
a preparation with fairly uniform (at least uniformly minimal)
depths. Polycrystalline materials generally require a minimum
thickness of 1.5 to 2.0 mm so as to withstand occlusal loading
without lexure. he periphery of preparations for polycrystalline
materials are designed to allow thickness (i.e., bu lk) of the margins
(edges) of the planned restoration. he design of the cavosurface
margins for these materials is therefore as close to 90 degrees as
possible as this marginal coniguration allows maximum thickness
of the polycrystalline material that will subsequently be placed
in the preparation ( Fig. 4.2 ; also see Fig. 1.12 ). Preparations for
polycrystalline restorative materials often require strategic, addi -
tional removal of healthy tooth structure to allow for material
limitations.
Restorative materials that are polymeric in nature (e.g., composite
resin) have greater ability to lex without fracture. herefore they
are not prone to fracture when occlusal loading causes material
lexure. Preparations for polymeric restoratives generally only require
removal of the diseased tooth structure as these materials have no
minimum material thickness requirement. he thin restoration
will lex as needed. he periphery of preparations for polymeric
materials do not require any particular design to allow for bulk
of material at the margins of the planned restoration. Polymeric
restorative materials may be as thin as is required to replace lost
tooth structure and reestablish normal anatomy. For this reason,
preparations for polymeric restorative materials generally allow
maximum conservation of natural tooth structure and therefore
are considered to be “minimally invasive” by design. he attachment
between polymeric materials and enamel remains stab le over time.
However, the attachment between polymeric materials and dentin
deteriorates over time.
Tooth preparations are usually limited to the clinical crowns
of teeth. he clinical crown is the portion of the tooth (usually
predominantly covered by enamel) that is exposed in the oral
cavity. Frequently tooth preparation leaves much of the clinical
crown surface uninvolved and is referred to as an intracoronal tooth
preparation. he appearance of the completed preparation has been
conceptually described as “boxlike” ( Fig. 4.3 ). he goal of the
operative dentist is always maximum conservation of any remaining margins when planning for an adhesively retained composite resin
restoration (see Online Fig. 14.24 ).
Highly mineralized enamel depends on the resiliency of its
dentin support. Every preparation is designed to conserve as much
dentin as possible for the strength of the enamel a nd the protection
of the pulp. he durable attachment between enamel and dentin
(the dentinoenamel junction [DEJ]) enables enamel to withstand
the rigors of mastication. When caries (or any defect) has com -
promised the DEJ, then associated supericial enamel becomes
prone to fracture under cyclic occlusal loading. Most preparation
designs remove enamel that has lost its attachment to the underlying
dentin (see Chapter 8 for exceptions). he nature of enamel forma -
tion (see Chapter 1 ) requires that the preparation walls be, at
minimum, oriented 90 degrees to the external surface of the enamel
so as to maintain a continuous connection with the essential
supporting dentin beneath ( Fig. 4.1, a). An enamel wall with this
coniguration is able to withstand the forces associated with occl usal
loading. An even more durable wall coniguration results when
the preparation has full-length enamel rods buttressed by shorter
enamel rods on the preparation side of the wall ( Fig. 4.1 , b). Tooth
preparations must also include design features that take into account
the physical limitations of the planned restorative material.
Dental restorative materials are best considered in terms of their
ability to survive the stresses of the oral environment in comparison
with natural tooth structure. Natural tooth structure is able t o
withstand the cyclic loading of mastication because of its ability
to undergo small amounts of lexure without fracture or separation
of the enamel from the dentin. Ideal restorative materials would
be able to mimic the durability of natural tooth structure. All
current restorative materials fall short of the ideal. Tooth preparation
design takes into consideration that dental restorative materials
are structurally either polycrystalline or polymeric.
Restorative materials that are polycrystalline in nature (e.g., dental
amalgam, glass-ceramic) have very limited ability to lex without
fracturing. herefore they are prone to fracture when occlusal
loading causes material lexure. Preparations for polycrystalline
materials require removal of diseased tooth structure followed by Patient Factors
• Desires
• Home care
• Risk status
• Age
• Cooperation
• Anesthesia
Anatomical Factors
• Enamel rod orientation
• Dentin thickness
• Pulp location
• Coronal contours
• Extent of previous restoration
Procedural Factors
• Operator skill
• Instrument design
• Type of rotary cutting instrument
• Ability to isolateLesion/Defect Factors
• Bone support
• Occlusion
• Severity
• Gingival status
• Pulpal status
• Fracture development
Restorative Material Factors
• Physical properties
• Color characteristics
• Cost effectivenessFactors to Consider Before and During
Tooth Preparation• BOX 4.1
b
a
• Fig. 4.1 All enamel walls must consist of either full-length enamel rods
on sound dentin ( a) or full-length enamel rods on sound dentin supported
on preparation side by shortened rods also on sound dentin ( b).
CHAPTER 4 Fundamental of Tooth Preparation
When carious destruction of the clinical crown is severe (i.e., the
remaining enamel has lost a large amount of the dentinal support),
additional eforts to encircle and reinforce the remaining tooth
structure are required. hese additional preparation eforts most
frequently require removal of most or all of the remaining enamel
and therefore include the whole anatomic crown. All external enamel
surfaces are involved and the preparation efort is therefore referred
to as an extracoronal preparation. In concept, all the enamel (at least
the correct physical dimensions and frequently the physical appear -
ance) is to be replaced. In addition, missing dentin may need to be
replaced with an appropriate restorative material to act as a dentin
substitute. he dentin substitute, along with remaining healthy
dentin, acts to support the new restorative material that is replacing
the enamel. he goal of the extracoronal preparation is to create
enough physical space for the planned restorative material to restore
the natural anatomy of the afected tooth. In general, the appearance
of a completed extracoronal preparation is reminisc ent of a tree
stump and is referred to as “stumplike” ( Fig. 4.4 ). he actual amount
of space required depends directly on the physical properties of the
restorative material to be used. he extracoronal restoration generally
reestablishes the anatomy of the crown of the tooth (clinical or
anatomic crown, depending on whether any enamel is remaining)
and is therefore termed a “crown.” he crown must extend well clinical crown knowing that the tooth has already been weakened
from the carious loss of tooth structure. Controlled, conservative
removal of any remaining tooth structure, based on the needs of
the restorative material, is always accomplished with the awareness
that the intracoronal restoration will not add strength to the tooth
over the long term, regardless of the nature of the restorative
material being used.
A
BCcsj
m
a
pdemAxis of preparation
Axis of
preparationrmus’cs’w’
rm’
• Fig. 4.2 Diagram of caries lesion development in the occlusal pit/issure area (ICDAS 4) of a tooth (A)
and in the smooth surface area on the facial (B). Sectional view (C) of initial stage of tooth preparations
for lesions in A and B when planning for a polycrystalline restorative material such as amalgam. C, The
preparation cavosurface angle ( cs), axial wall ( a), pulpal wall (loor) ( p), enamel wall ( e), dentinal wall ( d),
preparation margin ( m), and DEJ ( j). Note, in the upper exploded view, that the cavosurface angle ( cs)
may be visualized by imaginary projections of the preparation wall ( w′) and of the unprepared surface
(us′) contiguous with the margin, forming angle cs′. Angles cs and cs′ are equal because opposite angles
formed at the intersection of two straight lines are equal. Likewise, minimal restorative material angle rm
is equal to angle rm′. Polycrystalline restorative materials require rm to approach 90 degrees. Note the
axis of preparation aligned with the long axis of the mandibular posterior tooth crown.
• Fig. 4.3 Intracoronal preparation with “boxlike” appearance.
CHAPTER 4 Fundamental of Tooth Preparation
tooth sur face. here are two types of internal walls. he axial wall
is an internal wall that is oriented parallel to the long axis of the
tooth. he pulpal wall is an internal wall that is oriented perpen -
dicular to the long axis of the tooth and is located occlusal to the
pulp. his internal wall may also be referred to as the pulpal loor.
An external wall is a prepared surface that extends to the external
tooth surface. Such a wall takes the name of the tooth surface (or
aspect) that the wall is adjacent to ( Fig. 4.5 ). he external wall
that is approximately horizontal (i.e., perpendicular to the occlusal
forces that are directed occlusogingivally and generally parallel to
the long axis of the tooth crown) may also be refer red to as a
preparation loor (e.g., a gingival loor; see Fig. 4.5 ). he enamel
wall is that portion of a prepared external wall consisting of enamel
(see Fig. 4.2C ). he dentinal wall is that portion of a prepared
external wall consisting of dentin, in which mechanical retention
features may be located (see Fig. 4.2C ). Tooth preparation features
or sections that are parallel (or nearly so) to the long axis of the
tooth crown are commonly described as vertical , such as vertical
height of cusps, or vertical walls. he term longitudinal may be
used in lieu of vertical . Tooth preparation features that are per -
pendicular (or nearly so) to the long axis of the tooth are termed
horizontal or transverse .
he junction of two or more prepared surfaces is referred to as
the angle. his transition area from one surface to another is designed
to be smooth and rounded, rather than abrupt or sharp, to limit
stress concentration. A line angle is the junction of two planar
surfaces of diferent orientation along a line ( Figs. 4.6 and 4.7).
An internal line angle is the line angle whose apex points into the
tooth. he external line angle is the line angle whose apex points
away from the tooth. he point angle is the junction of three planar
surfaces of diferent orientation (see Figs. 4.6 and 4.7).
he cavosurface angle is the angle of tooth structure formed by
the junction of a prepared wall and the external surface of the
tooth. he actual junction is referred to as cavosurface margin . he
cavosurface angle may difer with the location on the tooth, the
direction of the enamel rods on the prepared wall, or the type of
restorative material to be used. In Fig. 4.2C , the cavosurface angle
(cs) is determined by projecting the prepared wall in an imaginary
line (w′) and the unprepared enamel surface in an imaginary line
(us′) and noting the angle (cs′) opposite to the cavosurface angle
(cs). For better visualization, these imaginary projections may be
formed by using two periodontal probes, one lying on the unpre -
pared surface and the other on the prepared external tooth wall
(Fig. 4.8 ).beyond any dentin substitute (i.e., include remaining adjacent healthy
tooth structure) if the restorative process is to successfully reestablish
the strength required for durable function of the restored tooth.
he more extensive the preparation, the greater the risk of iatrogenic
damage of adjacent structures or restorations during procedures.
Further information relative to extracoronal tooth preparations and
restorations may be identiied in textbooks devoted to this subject.
Dentistry has developed terminology useful in the communica -
tion of all aspects of preparation design and associated procedures.
Tooth preparation terminology efectively describes preparation
aspects with regard to complexity, anatomic location, threedimensional orientation, and geometry.
Tooth Preparation: Terminology
A tooth preparation is termed simple if only one tooth surface is
involved, compound if two or three surfaces are involved, and complex
if a preparation involves four or more surfaces. A preparation takes
the name of the involved tooth surface(s)—for example, a defect
on the occlusal surface is treated with an occlusal preparat ion.
When discussing or writing a term denoting a combination of
two or more surfaces, the - al ending of the preix word is changed
to an – o. For example, the angle formed by the lingual and incisal
surfaces of an anterior tooth would be termed linguoincisal line
angle and the tooth preparation involving the mesial and occlusal
surfaces is termed mesioocclusal preparation . he preparation involving
the mesial, occlusal, and distal surfaces is a mesioocclusodistal
preparation . For brevity in records and communication, the descrip -
tion of a tooth preparation is abbreviated by using the irst letter,
capitalized, of each tooth surface involved. Examples are as follows:
(1) A simple tooth preparation involving an occlusal surface is an
“O”; (2) a compound preparation involving the mesial and occlusal
surfaces is an “MO”; and (3) a complex preparation involving the
mesial, occlusal, distal, and lingual surfaces is an “MODL.”
he process of creating a preparation in a tooth results in the
formation of preparation walls or loors ( Fig. 4.5 ). An internal
wall is a prepared surface that does not extend to the external
d
dsc
• Fig. 4.4 Extracoronal “stumplike” tooth preparation with dentin ( d) and
dentin substitute (core component of a cast post and core, ds). The
adjacent tooth has been restored with a full porcelain-fused-to-metal
crown ( c). Note staining that has subsequently developed in areas of
iatrogenic damage (arrow).
External
walls:Internal
walls:
Cementoenamel
junction (CEJ)PulpalDistal
Facial
Lingual
GingivalAxial
• Fig. 4.5 The external and internal walls (loors) for Class II tooth prepa -
ration required to treat occlusal and mesioproximal caries lesions.
CHAPTER 4 Fundamental of Tooth Preparation
conceptually divided into initial and inal stages, each with several
steps, so as to facilitate this mental discipline.
he initial stage of the preparation involves what is essentially
a supericial surgical incision (with rotary instrumentation) into
and through the enamel caries lesion to the depth of the DEJ
followed by lateral extension of the preparation walls, at this limited
depth, so as to fully expose the carious dentin lesion or defect. he
lateral extension is controlled so as to only remove enamel with a
compromised (demineralized) DEJ. he placement and orientation
of the preparation walls are designed to resist fracture of the tooth
or restorative material from masticatory forces principally directed
parallel to the long axis of the tooth and to retain the restorative
material in the tooth (except for a Class V preparation and Class
III preparations with no component involving the occlusion).
Occasionally, very narrow grooves or fossae (that do not penetrate
to any great depth into enamel) at the periphery of the preparation
prevent the creation of preparation margins that are clearly deined
and easily restored. Extension of the preparation to include these
nondiseased irregularities would result in unnecessary removal of
healthy tooth structure. A reasonable compromise may be to make
a minor modiication of the external enamel contours, in this
peripheral area only, by selective removal of the surface enamel
associated with the shallow, narrow developmental groove or fossa.
he objective of this process, referred to as enameloplasty , is to
create a smooth, saucer-shaped external surface that is self-cleansing
or easily cleaned ( Fig. 4.9 and Box 4.2 ).Tooth Preparation: Stage and
Procedural Step
Overview
It is imperative that the end result (i.e., the overall shape/goals of
the preparation procedure) be envisioned/considered before the
initiation of any step. The process of tooth preparation is
dfp
dlp mlpmf
mp
ml dldpdf
lpfp mfp
• Fig. 4.6 Schematic representation (for descriptive purpose) of a Class
I tooth preparation illustrating line angles and point angles. Line angles are
faciopulpal ( fp), distofacial ( df), distopulpal ( dp), distolingual ( dl), linguopulpal ( lp), mesiolingual ( ml), mesiopulpal ( mp), and mesiofacial ( mf).
Point angles are distofaciopulpal ( dfp), distolinguopulpal ( dlp), mesiolin -
guopulpal ( mlp), and mesiofaciopulpal ( mfp).
dl df
dfp
fp
afp
af
afg
fg ag lgdp
dlp
lp
ap
alp
al
alg
• Fig. 4.7 Schematic representation (for descriptive purpose) of a Class
II tooth preparation illustrating line angles and point angles. Line angles
are distofacial ( df), faciopulpal ( fp), axiofacial ( af), faciogingival ( fg), axiogin -
gival ( ag), linguogingival ( lg), axiolingual ( al), axiopulpal ( ap), linguopulpal
(lp), distolingual ( dl), and distopulpal ( dp). Point angles are distofaciopulpal
(dfp), axiofaciopulpal ( afp), axiofaciogingival ( afg), axiolinguogingival ( alg),
axiolinguopulpal ( alp), and distolinguopulpal ( dlp).
Minimal restorative
material angle
Cavosurface
angle
• Fig. 4.8 Visualization of the cavosurface angle and the associated
minimal restorative material angle for a typical amalgam tooth preparation.
AB
• Fig. 4.9 A, Enameloplasty on area of imperfect coalescence of enamel.
B, No more than one third of the enamel thickness should be removed.
CHAPTER 4 Fundamental of Tooth Preparation
precisely as possible if optimal treatment outcomes are to be
obtained. he stages and steps in tooth preparation are listed in
Box 4.3 . he sequence of these steps may need to be altered when
extensive caries has increased the risk of pulpal involvement (see
Chapter 2 ).
he concepts of initial and inal stages of tooth preparation are
utilized for caries lesions that have progressed into dentin, have
compromised the dentinal support of enamel, and therefore require
surgical intervention. he information presented is comprehensive
and speciic primarily for tooth preparations designed to receive
direct restorative materials that are not adhesively attached to the
tooth structure and are polycrystalline in nature (i.e., amalgam).
Major diferences that exist for other types of minimally invasive
tooth preparations for polymeric restorative materials (composite
resin) are noted.
Occlual Contact Iden tiication and Rotary
Instrument Axis Alignment
Class I, II, III, IV, and VI preparations may involve surfaces that
are brought into direct occlusal contact with opposing tooth
structure during function. Identiication of the precise area of
occlusal contact is essential so as to prevent the placement of
a preparation margin (and subsequent preparation/restoration
interface) where the occlusal contact occurs. Occlusal contact
on the preparation/restoration interface will increase the risk
of early failure of the restoration. Identiication of the occlusal
contact areas may be accomplished by use of articulating paper
(Fig. 4.10 ).
he anatomic orientation of caries lesion formation in the pit
and issure areas of posterior teeth requires alignment of the rotary
instrument shank axis (through proper positioning of the handpiece)
so that it is parallel with the long axis of the tooth crown prior to
initiation of the preparation (see Online Chapter 14 for information
on handpieces and rotary instruments, speciically Fig. 14.18 ).
Correct alignment of the long axis of the shank limits the likelihood
of iatrogenic removal, and thereby weakening, of adjacent healthy
(occasionally referred to as “sound”) coronal tooth structure. Most
proximal caries lesions associated with posterior teeth also require
that the shank axis be aligned parallel with the long axis of the
tooth crown ( Figs. 4.11 and 4.12; also see Fig. 4.2 ). Caries lesion
formation associated with the facial or lingual sur faces of the
dentition require that the shank axis be aligned perpendicular to
the external surface of the tooth where the lesion is located (see
Fig. 4.12B ).Enameloplasty is accomplished as part of the initial preparation
stage but does not involve extension of the preparation outline
form and may be useful when creating a preparation to be restored
with amalgam or glass-ceramic. Restorative material will not be
placed into the recontoured area. he only diference in the restora -
tion is that the thickness of the restorative material, at the
enameloplastied margin, is slightly decreased because the pulpal
depth of the preparation external wall is slightly decreased. his
approach difers from including adjacent faulty (decalciied, dis -
colored, poorly contoured) enamel areas, during preparation steps
for composite restorations, as these defective areas are physically
covered with adhesively bonded composite material as part of the
restoration. Care is taken when choosing the area that will beneit
from enameloplasty. Usually, a narrow groove should be included
in the initial preparation extension if it penetrates to more than
one third the thickness of the enamel in the area. If one third or
less of the enamel depth is involved, the narrow groove may be
removed by enameloplasty, thus limiting further extension of the
tooth preparation. his procedure is also applicable to supplemental
narrow grooves extending up cusp inclines. If the ends of these
grooves were to be included in the tooth preparation, the cusp
may be weakened to the extent that it would need to be reduced
and covered with restorative material. Another instance in which
enameloplasty may be indicated is the presence of a narrow groove
that approaches or crosses a lingual or facial ridge. Inclusion of
this narrow groove in the preparation would result in the involvement of two surfaces of the tooth, and use of the enameloplasty
procedure may often limit the tooth preparation to one surface.
Once the initial stage is completed, the inal stage of preparation
design may be accomplished.
he inal stage is focused on (1) accurate management of the
lesion/defect that has been isolated, (2) optimal protection of
remaining tooth structure, and (3) preparation enhancemen ts
consistent with best long-term prognosis (durability) of the restora -
tion. he goals of each step in the preparation stages must be
thoroughly understood, and each step must be accomplished as Historically, enameloplasty was utilized as an ultraconservative
procedure on the occlusal surfaces, which were deemed to be at
risk of the development of a pit or issure caries lesion. Extreme
prudence was exercised in the selection of these areas and in the
depth of enamel removed. This procedure was never used unless
the area could be transformed into a cleansable groove (or fossa)
by a minimal reduction of enamel, and unless occlusal contacts
could be maintained. This procedure technically included a
preparation stage but no restoration stage. Currently, clinical
situations such as these (ICDAS 1 or 2) are managed by treatment
with luoride or placement of sealants. Research studies support
the illing of issures/pits and narrow grooves/fossae (i.e., “sealing”)
with low viscosity composite resin materials, without any
mechanical alteration (enameloplasty) of the at-risk tooth anatomy.9
Additionally, “prophylactic odontotomy” procedures were used in
the past. These more aggressive procedures involved preparing
developmental or structural imperfections of the enamel that were
thought to be at increased risk of caries and illing the preparation
with amalgam to prevent caries from developing in these sites.
Prophylactic odontotomy is no longer advocated as a preventive
measure.42Enameloplasty and Prophylactic
Odontotomy• BOX 4.2
Initial Tooth Preparation Stage
Step 1: Initial depth and outline form
Step 2: Primary resistance form
Step 3: Primary retention form
Step 4: Convenience form
Final Tooth Preparation Stage
Step 5: Removal of defective restorative material and/or soft dentin
Step 6: Pulp protection
Step 7: Secondary resistance and retention forms
Step 8: External wall inishing
Step 9: Final procedures: debridement and inspectionSteps of Tooth Preparation • BOX 4.3
CHAPTER 4 Fundamental of Tooth Preparation
• Fig. 4.10 Occlusal contact areas identiied through the use of articulat -
ing paper.
Axis of preparation
• Fig. 4.11 Diagram of a carious issure. Note that the issure is parallel
to the long axis of the posterior tooth crown. The axis of the initial prepara -
tion into the carious issure is aligned with the long axis of the tooth crown
so as to prevent iatrogenic removal of adjacent healthy tooth structure.
AB
C 0.75 mm
Initial
preparation
extensionInitial
preparation
extension
Rotary instrument
axis parallel
to long axis of
tooth crown0.2 mm0.2 mmRotary instrument axis
perpendicular to external
surface of enamel
0.2 mm0.75 - 0.8 mm0.5 mm
DEJDEJ701
DEJ
DEJCEJ
• Fig. 4.12 Initial tooth preparation stage for conventional preparations. A–C, Extensions in all directions
are to healthy, mineralized (“sound”) tooth structure, while maintaining a speciic limited pulpal or axial
depth regardless of whether end (or side) of rotary instrument is in a caries lesion or old restorative mate -
rial. The dentinoenamel junction (DEJ) and the cementoenamel junction (CEJ) are indicated in B. In A,
initial depth is approximately two thirds of 3-mm rotary instrument head length, or 2 mm, as related to
prepared facial and lingual walls, but is half the rotary instrument (speciically the No. carbide bur)
head length, or 1.5 mm, as related to central issure location.
CHAPTER 4 Fundamental of Tooth Preparation
to be altered so as to improve occlusal relationships). Likewise,
the adjacent tooth contour may dictate speciic preparation exten -
sions that enable the creation of appropriate proximal restoration
form. Occasionally the tooth preparation outline for a new restora -
tion contacts or extends slightly into a sound, existing restoration
(e.g., a new MO abutting a sound DO). his approach is an
acceptable practice (i.e., to have a margin of a new restoration
placed into an existing, clinically acceptable restoration). Lastly,
the desired cavosurface marginal coniguration of the proposed
restoration afects the outline form. Restorative materials that need
beveled margins require tooth preparation outline form extensions
that must anticipate the inal cavosurface position and form that
will result after the bevels have been placed.
Step 2: Primary Resistance Form
Primary resistance form may be deined as the shape and placement
of the preparation walls (loors) that best enable the remaining
tooth structure, as well as the anticipated restoration, to withstand
masticatory forces primarily oriented parallel to the long axis of the
tooth. Such loors may be purposefully prepared to provide a level
supporting surface for the restoration, allowing a broader area for
stress distribution. Primary resistance form is obtained through use
of a preparation design that conserves as much healthy tooth structure
as possible. Carefully controlled extension of the preparation walls
allows conservation of the dentin support of adjacent cusps (and
marginal ridges when possible), which helps to maintain maximum
strength and therefore resistance to fracture during the cyclic loading
of mastication. T ransitions between the walls of the preparation
(i.e., the internal line angles) are slightly rounded so as to limit
stress concentration in these areas, which increases tooth resistance
to fracture.8,9 Rounding of external angles within the tooth preparation
(e.g., axiopulpal line angles) limits the likelihood of stress concentra -
tion in the corresponding intaglio surface of restorative materials,
which increases resistance to fracture of the restorative material.
he relatively horizontal pulpal and gingival walls, prepared per -
pendicular to the tooth’s long axis, help the restoration resist occlusal
forces and limit the likelihood of tooth fracture from wedging efects
caused by opposing cusps. It may be necessary to reduce cusps that
no longer have suicient dentin support and cover (or envelope)
them with an adequate thickness of restorative material in order to
provide resistance to fracture of the tooth and/or the restorative
material. Preparation design must allow for adequate thickness of
polycrystalline restorative materials to ensure adequate primary
resistance to restoration fracture. he minimal occlusal thickness,
for appropriate resistance to fracture, of amalgam is 1.5 to 2 mm
and glass-ceramic is 2 mm. Polymeric restorative materials (e.g.,
composite resins) have no minimal thickness.
When developing the outline form in Class I and II preparations,
the end of the cutting instrument prepares a relatively horizontal
pulpal wall of uniform depth into the tooth (i.e., the pulpal wall
follows the original occlusal surface contours and the DEJ, which
are approximately parallel; see Fig. 4.12A and C ). Similarly, in the
proximal portion of Class II preparations, the end of the cutting
instrument prepares a gingival wall (loor) that is approximately
parallel to the occlusal surface and, thereby, relatively perpendicular
to occlusal forces.
When an extensive caries lesion is present, facial or lingual
extension of pulpal or gingival walls may require (1) reduction of
weak cusps for coverage by the restorative material ( Fig. 4.13 ) and/
or (2) extension of the gingival loors around axial tooth line angles
onto facial or lingual surfaces. hese preparation modiications
provide resistance to parallel and also obliquely (laterally) directed Initial Tooth Preparation Stage: Step 1-4
Step 1: Initial Depth and Outline Form
he irst step in tooth preparation is to establish the initial depth
and then, at that depth, extend the walls of the preparation until
the junction between the enamel and supporting dentin is uncom -
promised (i.e., a “sound DEJ” has been reached; see Fig. 4.12 ).
he peripheral walls determine the overall outline of the preparation,
which is referred to as the outline form . It is essential that the
outline form be visualized (i.e., mentally anticipated) as much as
possible before any mechanical alteration of the tooth has begun.
he initial depth of the preparation is 0.2 mm internal to the DEJ
or 0.8 mm internal to the normal root surface (see Fig. 4.12 ).
Establishment of the initial depth is always accomplished even
when there is a large caries lesion (i.e., no healthy tooth structure
immediately adjacent to the point of entry) or when previous
restorative material is present. An exception to this initial depth
of 0.2 mm internal to the DEJ is when the enamel is thin and
greater depth is necessary for the strength of the restorative material
that will be used. he initial preparation depth is 0.5 mm internal
to the DEJ in any area where secondary retention features are
being planned (see Step 7 ). Root-surface preparations may be
shallower than 0.8 mm if the restorative material to be used does
not require secondary retention features. Generally, the goals behind
the establishment of initial depth and outline form on occlusal
surfaces are the preservation of cuspal and margina l ridge strength
(where possible). hese goals are accomplished by limitation of
the depth of the preparation into dentin and the minimization of
faciolingual and mesiodistal extensions. Careless, iatrogenic removal
of healthy dentin further compromises the diseased tooth and
must be avoided. he outline form is designed, regardless of the
type of tooth preparation, such that (1) all unsupported or weakened
(friable) enamel is usually removed, (2) all faults are included, and
(3) all preparation margins are usually placed in a position that
allows inspection and inishing of the subsequent restoration
margins. See Chapters 8 and 10 for exceptions to these general
principles.
Black theorized that, in tooth preparations for smooth-surface
caries, the initial preparation should be further extended to areas
that are normally self-cleansing so as to prevent recurrence of caries
around the periphery of the restoration.1 his principle was known
as extension for prevention and was broadened to include the exten -
sion necessary to remove remaining enamel imperfections, such
as deep, noncarious fossae and grooves, on occlusal surfaces. he
practice of extension for the prevention has virtually been eliminated,
however, because of the relative caries immunity provided by
preventive measures such as luoride application and improved
education relative to oral hygiene and diet. his change has fostered
a more conservative tooth preparation philosophy. Current factors
that dictate extension on smooth surfaces include (1) the extent
of caries or injury and (2) the restorative material to be used.
Likewise, extension for prevention to include the caries-prone areas
on occlusal surfaces has been reduced by treatments that conserve
tooth structure. Such treatments may include enameloplasty,
application of pit-and-issure sealant, and preventive resin or
conservative composite restoration.7
Esthetic considerations not only afect the choice of restorative
material but also the design of the tooth preparation in an efort
to maximize the esthetic result of the restoration. Correcting or
improving occlusal relationships also may necessitate altering the
tooth preparation to accommodate such changes, even when the
involved tooth structure is not faulty (i.e., a cuspal form may need
CHAPTER 4 Fundamental of Tooth Preparation
developed during initial tooth preparation may be adequate to
retain the restorative material in the tooth.
he design of preparation primary retention form is directly
related to the retention needs of the anticipated restorative material.
Amalgam restoration of a Class I or II preparation is retained by
developing external tooth walls that converge occlusally (see Fig.
4.14A ). In this way, when the amalgam is placed in the preparation
and hardens, it cannot be dislodged. However, excessive occlusal
convergence of the external walls will result in unsupported enamel
rods at the cavosurface margin and must be avoided. he external
walls of Class III and V preparations diverge so as to provide strong
enamel margins (see Figs. 1.12B and 4.12A and B ). Retention of
amalgam in these areas requires the creation of secondary features
(coves or grooves) in the dentinal walls that serve to retain the
restoration (see Step 7 ).
Composite restorations are primarily retained in the tooth by
micromechanical and, depending on the adhesive, chemical bonding
that is established between the restoration and the tooth structure.
In such restorations, the preparation surface of th e enamel and
dentin are etched (demineralized) by creation of acidic cond itions
and then iniltrated with resin-based adhesive materials before
placement of the composite.
Cast-metal intracoronal restorations, referred to as inlay restora -
tions, rely on diverging vertical walls that are almost parallel and
a luting cement to provide retention of the casting in the tooth
(see Online Chapter 18 ). During the initial tooth preparation, the
preparation walls are designed not only to provide for draw (for
the casting to be placed into the tooth) but also to provide for an
appropriate small angle of divergence (2–5 degrees per wall) from
the line of draw (to enable retention of the luted restoration). he
amount of divergence required depends on the length of the prepared
walls: he greater the vertical height of the walls, the more divergence
is permitted and recommended, but within the range described.
he path of draw is usually designed to be perpendicular to the
horizontal features of the preparation (see Fig. 4.14B ).
Step 4: Convenience Form
Convenience form is the shape or form that provides adequate
observation, accessibility, and ease in the preparation and restoration
of the tooth. Severe caries destruction may necessitate the extension
of distal, mesial, facial, or lingual walls so as to gain adequate
access to deeper areas of the preparation. Extension of the proximal
walls, so as to obtain clearance with an adjacent proximal surface,
may aford better access for the inishing of preparation walls, the
placement of the matrix, and the inishing of the restoration margins. occlusal forces. he decision to reduce a cusp should be approached
judiciously. he most important aspect in the evaluation of a
suspicious cusp is the judgment of the amount of remaining dentin
support. Cusp reduction should be considered when the outline
form has extended half the distance from a primary groove to a
cusp tip. Cusp reduction is strongly recommended when the outline
form has extended two thirds the distance from an adjacent primary
groove to the cusp tip. he exception to reducing a cusp, where
extension has been two thirds from a primary groove toward the
cusp tip, is when the operator judges that adequate cuspal strength
(adequate dentin support) remains. Reduction of cusps occurs as
early as possible in the preparation process so as to improve access
and visibility for the operator.
Special consideration is given to teeth that have l ost an excessive
amount of dentin support in the central area of the tooth secondary
to endodontic procedures. Adjacent cusps may be considerably
compromised and, as such, may need to be reduced, enveloped,
and covered with restorative material to prevent subsequent cata -
strophic fracture when under occlusal load.10,11 In general, the
greater the occlusal load, the greater is the potential for future
fracture of the tooth and/or restoration. he further posterior the
tooth is, the greater is the efective occlusal load because of its
closer location to the hinge axis (i.e., the temporomandibular joint
[TMJ]).
Weakened, friable tooth structure always should be removed
at this step in the preparation. Unsupported but not friable
enamel may be left for esthetic reasons in anterior teeth where
stresses are minimal and a bonded composite restoration is
anticipated.
Step 3: Primary Retention Form
Primary retention form is the shape or form of the preparation that
prevents displacement or removal of the restoration by tipping or
lifting forces. In many respects, retention form and resistance form
are accomplished at the same time ( Fig. 4.14 ). he retention form
1/2
1/2Primary
groove
Primary
groove Mandibular
molar
Central
grooveCusp tip
Facial
groove2/3
2/3
OK
1/2 to 2/3 – Consider cusp reduction
2/3 or more – Recommend cusp reduction
• Fig. 4.13 Rule for cusp reduction and coverage: If extension from a
primary groove toward the cusp tip is no more than half the distance, no
cusp reduction and coverage should be done; if the extension is one half
to two thirds of the distance, consider cusp reduction and coverage; if
the extension is more than two thirds of the distance, usually reduce the
cusp and cover it with restorative material. Cusp reduction and coverage
has also been referred to as “cusp capping.”
AB
• Fig. 4.14 Basic primary retention form in Class II tooth preparations
for amalgam (A) with vertical external walls of proximal and occlusal por -
tions converging occlusally and for inlay (B) with similar walls slightly
diverging occlusally.
CHAPTER 4 Fundamental of Tooth Preparation
If further demineralization causes exposure of the collagen matrix,
subsequent enzymatic degradation of the matrix begins as a result
of the activity of host matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and
cysteine cathepsins. Denaturation of the collagen, by host proteolytic
enzymes, allows subsequent collagen degradation (of t he denatured
collagen) by bacterial proteases. Bacterial proteases are not able to
degrade intact, nativ e collagen. he process of denaturation and
degradation changes the three-dimensional structure of the collagen
such that remineralization is no longer possible. Carious tissue
that has been demineralized and structurally damaged to this level
feels tactilely soft and is therefore referred to as soft dentin . Soft
dentin (previously referred to as infected dentin because of high
numbers of bacteria) no longer retains the physical properties
necessary to survive in the rigors of the oral envi ronment and must
be removed except in the deepest areas of the preparation where
removal would result in exposure of an asymptomatic, vital pulp
(see Chapter 2 , selective caries removal [SCR] protocol).
he use of color alone to determine how much dentin to remove
is unreliable. For example, an area of dentin that has experienced
episodes of demineralization and remineralization often clinically
appears discolored, compared with normal dentin, yet may be irm
to tactile exploration and should not be removed. Alternatively,
acute (rapid) caries often manifests itself entirely within the normal
range of color for dentin and is tactilely soft. he soft dentin
requires removal except as indicated (see Chapter 2 ). Additionally,
when the conditions in the lesion have allowed remineralization
to occur, the dentin may be distinctly discolored or “stained.” In
this case host defenses not only have enabled remineralization of
the dentin, which is often clinically comparable in irmness (hard -
ness) with surrounding normal dentin, but also have, for the most
part, successfully illed in the dentinal tubules with mineral. his
resultant hypermineralized state of the dentin (mineralization above
that which is found in normal dentin as the lumens of the dentinal
tubules are illed with mineral in addition to the normal mineraliza -
tion of the intertubular dentin) is referred to as sclerotic dentin .
Sclerotic dentin should not be removed.
Removal of carious dentin is accomplished with awareness of
the ability of the vital pulp to efect remineralization of dentin
when the matrix (collagen) has not been denatured. herefore
every efort should be made to limit further pulpal irritation and
limit the likelihood of pulpal involvement during the caries removal
process. he use of sharp spoon excavators and sharp rotary instru -
ments, with intermittent light pressure, may help limit pulpal
irritation. Removal of carious tissue in a moderate lesion (i.e., a
lesion that has not reached the inner one third of dentin) has a
low risk of pulpal involvement. he pulpal and axial caries removal
of a moderate lesion should therefore extend to where the dentin
is irm to tactile sense (i.e., extend to irm dentin ). Removal of a
carious tissue in an advanced lesion (i.e., a lesion that has reached
the inner one third of dentin) has a higher risk of pulpal involve -
ment. he pulpal and axial caries removal of an advanced lesion
should therefore extend to approximately 1 mm from the pulp
with the recognition that dentin in this deep region may still be
soft (soft dentin) to tactile sense. Carious dentin in more peripheral
areas is removed until the dentin is irm.
In dentin, as the caries lesion progresses, a zone of deminer -
alization precedes the invasion of, or infection by, bacteria. It is
currently impossible to clinically identify the speciic depth of
the bacterial invasion. Previous notions of dentin excavation for
the purpose of complete removal of all bacteria have resulted in
exposure of pulp tissue that was not irreversibly inlamed, leading
to overtreatment and increased frequency of adverse outcomes. It he arbitrary extension of facial margins on anterior teeth is usually
contraindicated, however, for esthetic reasons. Clearance with the
adjacent proximal surface is mandatory for glass-ceramic and cast
gold restorations because of the need to inish the preparation
walls, make an accurate impression of the prepared tooth, and
accomplish insertion/inishing. Preparation extensions to increase
the convenience of various procedures are always accomplished in
light of the goal of conserving as much healthy tooth structure as
possible.
Final Stage of Tooth Preparation: Step 5-9
When the design of external wall orientation and position has
fulilled the objectives of initial tooth preparation, the preparation
is carefully inspected for other needs. he preparation may be
complete after the initial tooth preparation stage when the caries
lesion (or other defect) is minimal. In this case the preparation
will then only require (1) desensitization of the prepared dentin
walls for amalgam or (2) modiication of the surface of the enamel
and dentin so as to create an adhesive interface for composite.
Step 5: Removal of Defective Restorative Material
and/or Soft Dentin
Once the caries lesion has been fully exposed (via the initial
preparation), careful pulpal and/or axial extension is accomplished
so as to remove defective restorative material and/or soft d entin as
indicated (see Chapter 2 ). Old restorative material may remain
on the pulpal or axial walls after initial tooth preparation. his
material should be removed if any of the following conditions are
present: (1) the old material may negatively afect the esthetic
result of the new restoration (i.e., old amalgam material left under
a new composite restoration), (2) radiographic evidence indicates
caries lesion development under the old material and clinical
evaluation conirms the radiographic interpretation, (3) the tooth
pulp was symptomatic preoperatively, (4) the dentin along the
periphery of the remaining old restorative material is soft, or (5)
retention of the existing material is compromised and the material
is easily dislodged. If none of these conditions is present, it is
acceptable to leave the remaining old restorative material to serve
as a base, rather than risk unnecessary excavation in close proximity
to the pulp, which may result in pulpal irritation or exposure.
Removal of remaining old restorative material, when indicated,
may be accomplished using sharp rotary instruments and light
intermittent pressure with or without water irrigation/cooling.
Water spray (along with high-volume evacuation) is used when
removing old amalgam material to reduce exposure to mercury
vapor.
In preparations that remain primarily in enamel, isolated faulty
areas (remnants of diseased enamel issure or pit) on the pulpal
wall may require additional minimal extensions. When a pulpal
or axial wall has been established at the proper initial tooth prepara -
tion position, and a small amount of carious tissue remains, only
this tissue should be removed, leaving a rounded, concave area in
the wall. he level or position of the wall peripheral to the excavation
should not be altered.
Clinical decisions that guide carious tissue removal are based
on the relative tactile hardness (irmness) of the dentin associated
with the caries lesion. Carious dentin that has had some mineral
loss, but not to the point of collagen exposure, is not as clinically
hard as normal dentin and is referred to as irm dentin. Firm
dentin, if isolated from the oral environment by so me type of
restoration, will remineralize and therefore should not be removed.12
CHAPTER 4 Fundamental of Tooth Preparation
the liner from dissolution from the phosphoric acid etchant used
prior to composite placement.14,19 Protection of the CaOH 2 liner
with an RMGI base also prevents inadvertent displacement of the
liner during subsequent procedural steps.
Very deep excavations may contain microscopic pulpal expos ures
that are not visible to the naked eye. Hemorrhage is the usual
evidence of a vital pulp exposure, but with microscopic exposures,
such evidence may be lacking. Nevertheless, these exposures may
be large enough to allow direct pulpal access for bacteria or other
restorativ e materials. he ability of a hard-setting CaOH 2 material
to stimulate the formation of reparative dentin when in contact
with pulpal tissue makes it the usual material of choice for applica -
tion to very deep excavations and known pulpal exposures (direct
pulp cap procedures).16 Alternatively, mineral trioxide aggregate
(MTA) liners have been found to be efective for direct pulp
capping.17,20 Liners and bases in exposure areas should be applied
without pressure.
Usually, a RMGI is used for “base” needs. hese materials
efectively bond to tooth structure, release luoride, and have
suicient strength. Placement and contouring of RMGI materials
is readily accomplished. Mechanical retentive prepa ration features
are not typically required for RMGI because of their chemical
bond to the mineral phase of tooth structure. hese materials are
excellent for use under amalgam, gold, ceramic, and composite
restorations. A base should never overill the preparation and,
thereby, compromise the minimum required thickness of the inal
restoration.
A liner may be utilized to seal of the dentin immediately adjacent
to the pulp when traumatic fracture has occurred. he desired
pulpal efects may include sedation and stimulation, the latter
resulting in reparative dentin formation. he speciic pulpal response
desired dictates the choice of liner material. An appropriate text
focused on the emergency management of dental trauma should
be consulted for current treatment strategies.
Step 7: Secondary Retention and Resistance Forms
Placement of secondary retention and resistance forms, as part of
a preparation, follows management of the caries lesion and any
indicated pulpal protection. Each anatomically distinct area requiring
restoration must be independently retentive. When the external
walls of the preparation converge toward each other, as they approach
the external surface of the tooth, then no additional or “secondary”
retention is required. However, correctly oriented external walls
(i.e., walls that have proper dentinal support of the enamel) may
diverge as they approach the external surface of the tooth. For
example, preparation of a proximal caries lesion on a posterior
tooth will frequently result in facial, lingual, and gingival walls
that diverge proximally. Preparation walls that diverge will not
physically retain a restoration that is not bonded in place. Diverging
walls will not resist forces that have the potential to result in the
dislodgement of a restoration. herefore it may become necessary
to strategically modify internal aspects of the preparation so as to
mechanically retain the restoration.
Because many preparation features that improve retention form
also improve resistance form, and the reverse is true, they are
presented together. he secondary retention and resistance forms are
of two types: (1) mechanical preparation features and (2) treatments
of the preparation walls with etching, priming, and adhesive
materials. he second type is not really considered a part of tooth
preparation but, rather, the irst step for the insertion of the
restorative material. Regardless, some general comments are pre -
sented about such treatments.is not necessary that all dentin invaded by bacteria be removed.
In moderate caries lesions, removal of the masses of bacteria and
subsequent sealing of the preparation by a restoration at best destroy
those comparatively few remaining microorganisms and at worst
reduce them to inactivity or dormancy.13 Even in advanced caries
lesions, in which actual invasion of the pulp may have occurred,
the recovery of the pulp requires only that a favorable balance be
established between the virulence of the bacteria and the resistance
of the host. his balance is best accomplished by utilization of the
selective caries removal protocol (see Chapter 2 ). Caries removal
in advanced lesions usually is immediately followed by eforts to
aford protection to the pulp tissue adjacent to the deepest area
of the preparation.
Step 6: Pulp Protection
Deep dentin is very porous and susceptible to desiccation. he
thin remaining wall of dentin provides little protection from (1)
heat generated by rotary instruments during subsequent st eps, (2)
noxious ingredients of various restorative materials, (3) thermal
changes conducted through restorative materials, (4) forces transmit -
ted through materials to the dentin, (5) galvanic shock, and (6)
the ingress of bacteria and/or noxious bacterial toxins through
microleakage.14,15 Deep dentin also is a very poor substrate for
subsequent bonding procedures. herefore eforts to cover deep
dentin, to limit dentinal tubular luid low, and to create a protective
thermal/physical barrier are warranted. Various materials that have
been utilized to establish this protective barrier include suspensions
or dispersions of zinc oxide, calcium hydroxide, or resin-modiied
glass ionomer (RMGI) that are applied to the tooth surface.15
hese materials are referred to as liners when used in a relatively
thin ilm.15 he term base is used to describe the placement of
materials, used in thicker dimensions, beneath permanent restora -
tions to provide for mechanical, chemical, and ther mal protection
of the pulp. Examples of bases include zinc phosphate, zinc
oxide–eugenol, polycarboxylate, and most commonly, some type
of glass ionomer material (usually a RMGI). Generally, it is desirable
to have approximately a 2-mm dimension of bulk between the
pulp and a metallic restorative material. his bulk may include
remaining dentin, liner, or base. Composite resin materials, which
are thermal insulators, do not require the same bulk of material
(dentin + liner/base) between the restoration and the pulp. Although
the placement of liners and bases is not a step in tooth preparation,
in the strict sense of the term, these serve to create an efective
barrier over the deep pulpal/axial dentin prior to receiving the
inal restorative material.
If the removal of soft dentin does not extend deeper than 1
to 2 mm from the initially prepared pulpal or axial wall, usually
no liner is indicated. If the excavation extends to within 0.5 mm
of the pulp, a liner usually is selected to cover the deepest area of
the dentin. he stimulation of reparative dentin (indirect pulp cap
procedure) in this deep area with a calcium hydroxide (CaOH 2)
liner may be efective.16 Current evidence suggests that the actual
type of material used for the liner is not as important as the
overall efective sealing of the dentin with the liner (or base) and
subsequent restoration.17
Zinc oxide–eugenol and calcium hydroxide liners (chemosetting
types that harden) in thicknesses of approximately 0.5 mm or
greater have adequate strength to resist condensation forces of
amalgam and provide insulation against thermal extremes.18 CaOH 2
liners must always be covered with a RMGI when used under
amalgam restorations to prevent dissolution of the liner over time.
In addition, CaOH 2 liners should be covered by a RMGI to protect
CHAPTER 4 Fundamental of Tooth Preparation
of tooth structure. Severe vertical loss of structure associated with
the line angles of the tooth may require the placement of metal
pins. hese pins are anchored in remaining sound dentin, protrude
vertically above the remaining tooth structure, are subsequently
encased during placement of the restorative material, and thereby
enable retention and resistance form. Features that enhance the
retention form of a preparation also enhance the resistance form
(e.g., slots or pins placed in a manner such that, upon completion
of the restoration, the structural integrity of the restoration enhances
the structural integrity of the remaining tooth structure).
Ue of Adheive to Increae Retention and Reitance
Supericial demineralization of preparation walls and subsequent
iniltration of the altered surface with resin-based adhesives allows
for increased retention and resistance of restorations. he structural
makeup of enamel allows the creation of a microscopically roughened
mineral surface when supericially demineralized by acidic condi -
tions. All adhesive systems have some means by which to efect
the necessary demineralization. his essential, initial step is then
followed by iniltration of the roughened surface with resin-based
adhesive materials. Demineralization of the exposed dentin surface
results in exposure of the dentin matrix (collagen), which may
then be iniltrated with adhesive resin materials. Restorative materials
(composite, glass-ceramic) may then be attached to this adhesive
layer through material-speciic mechanisms resulting in increased
retention of the “bonded” restoration. he use of bonding systems
with intracoronal restorations, while enhancing retention, does
not increase the resistance form of the remaining tooth structure
over the long term.
Retention of indirect restorations may be enhanced by the
material used for cementation. Although not considered part of
the tooth preparation, the cementation procedure does afect the
retention of these restorations, and some cementing materials require
pretreatment of the dentin, resulting in varying degrees of micro -
mechanical bonding. Adhesive bonding of etchable glass-ceramic
materials to enamel and dentin increase their resistance to fracture
development when under occlusal load.
Step 8: External Wall Finishing
Finishing the external preparation walls is the further development,
when indicated, of a speciic design (e.g., degree of smoothness
or roughness, the placement of a bevel) immediately adjacent to
or including the cavosurface margin such that the anticipated
restorative material has the greatest likelihood of clinical success.
Proper inishing of the external walls allows the creation of an
optimal marginal junction between the restorative material and
the tooth structure. When this occurs there is a smooth transition
across the marginal junction and both tooth and restorative material
have maximal strength. Awareness of the point of contact of the
opposing functional cusp is essential as occlusal contact directly
on the marginal interface will result in early fatigue and failure of
the margin. When the defect results in a preparation outline form
that places the marginal interface at the point of contact, then the
inal position of the preparation outline is modiied slightly so
that the marginal junction is away from the occlusal contact (review
section Occlusal Contact Identiication and Rotary Instrument
Axis Alignment ).
It is appropriate, for clinical practicality, to consider that enamel
rods are oriented perpendicular to the external tooth surface. Enamel
walls that form a 90-degree angle with the cavosurface may be
considered to have dentinal support and to be strong (see Figs.
4.1 and 4.2C ). Enamel rods that do not run uninterrupted from Mechanical Feature
A variety of mechanical alterations to the preparation enhance
retention form. hese alterations require additional selective removal
of healthy tooth structure .
Retention Grooves and Coves. Vertically oriented grooves
associated with the facial and lingual aspects of a proximal prepara -
tion are used to provide additional retention for the proximal
portions of some Class II amalgam restorations. Horizontal ly
oriented retention grooves are prepared in most Class III and V
preparations for amalgam and in some root-surface tooth prepara -
tions for amalgam and composite resin. Small retentive indentions,
referred to as “coves,” are utilized for retention in the incisal areas
of Class III amalgams.
Historically, retention grooves in Class II preparations for
amalgam restorations were recommended to increase retention of
the proximal portion against movement secondary to creep. Also,
it was thought that retention grooves may increase the resistance
form of the restoration against fracture at the junction of the
proximal and occlusal portions. In vivo studies do not substantiate
the necessity of these grooves in proximocclusal preparations with
occlusal dovetail outline forms or in MOD preparations.4 hey
are recommended, however, for extensive tooth preparations for
amalgam involving wide faciolingual proximal boxes resulting in
notable proximal wall divergence, cusp reduction procedures, or
both. herefore mastery of the techniques of optimal groove design
and placement is indicated.
Preparation Extensions. Additional retention of the restorative
material may be obtained by arbitrarily extending the preparation
for molars onto the facial or lingual surface to include a facial or
lingual groove. Such an extension, when performed for castmetal
restorations, results in additional vertical (almost parallel) walls
for retention. his preparation design may also enhan ce the resistance
form of the remaining tooth by enveloping and contributing
reinforcement.
Skirts. Skirts are preparation features used in cast gold restora -
tions that extend the preparation around some, if not all, of the
line angles of the tooth. When properly prepared, skirts provide
additional, opposing vertical walls that increase retention of the
restoration. he placement of skirts also enables increased resistance
to fracture by allowing the envelopment of the remaining com -
promised tooth structure with the restorative material.
Beveled Enamel Margin
Some cast-metal and composite preparations include beveled
marginal conigurations. he bevels for cast-metal restorations are
used primarily to aford a better junctional relationship between
the metal and the tooth. Additionally, retention form may be
slightly improved when opposing bevels are present. Enamel margins
of some composite restorations may utilize a beveled or lared ( >90
degrees) coniguration so as to increase the retention form of the
preparation by increasing the area of enamel available for bonding.
Step ,Amalgam Pin ,Slot ,and Pin
When the need for increased retention form for amalgam is unusu -
ally great (i.e., there is limited remaining tooth structure available
to help retain the restoration), additional secondary features may
be incorporated into the preparation. Careful orientation of
remaining horizontal and vertical walls during tooth preparation
results in “steps” that increase retention and resistance form of the
restoration. Independently retentive holes with parallel walls (for
“amalgam pins”) and/or horizontal slots (with internal conv erging
walls) may be efectively used when there is moderate vertical loss
CHAPTER 4 Fundamental of Tooth Preparation
type of enamel margin. When a bevel is used for indirect cast gold
restorations, it may allow a better marginal seal in slightly undersized
castings and may assist in the adaptation of castings that fail to
seat by a small amount. In addition, a thin gold margin is more
readily burnished and adapted to the preparation margin.
Beveling enamel margins in composite preparations is indicated
primarily for large restorations that have increase d retention needs
and insuicient amount of prepared enamel for proper retention.
he use of a beveled marginal form increases the surface area
available for bonding, which increases the retention form of the
preparation. Diamond instruments are utilized to create the bevel
so as to maximize the surface area for bonding. he use of a beveled
marginal form is useful for inclusion of minor surface defects just
adjacent to the cavosurface margin as well as afords enhanced
marginal sealing. he esthetic quality of composite restorations of
anterior teeth may be improved by use of a bevel to create an area
of gradual increase in composite thickness from the margin to the
bulk of the restoration. Hand instruments such as e namel hatchets
and margin trimmers may be used in planing enamel walls, cleaving
of unsupported enamel, and establishing enamel bevels.
Step 9: Final Procedures: Debridement and Inspection
Debridement (cleaning) of the tooth preparation involves use of the
air/water syringe to remove visible debris with water and then excess
moisture with a few light bursts of air. In some instances, debris
clings to walls and angles despite the aforementioned eforts, and
it may be necessary to loosen this material with an explorer or small
cotton pellet. It is important not to dehydrate the tooth by overuse
of air as this may damage the odontoblasts associated with the
desiccated tubules ( Fig. 4.17 ). Complete debridement allows careful
inspection of the preparation so as to ensure adherence to all principles
of preparation design. Any inal changes may then be accomplished,
as indicated, followed by steps to disinfect the preparation.the preparation margin to dentin tend to split of, leaving a V-shaped
ditch along the cavosurface margin area of the restoration. Enamel
rods incline slightly apically in the gingival third of the tooth
crown and preparation design in this area should be modiied so
as to ensure strong enamel margins ( Fig. 4.15 ).
When a preparation has extended onto the root surface (i.e.,
no enamel present), the root-surface cavosurface angle should be
either 90 degrees (for amalgam, composite, or ceramic restorations)
or beveled (for intracoronal cast-metal restorations). he 90-degree
root-surface margin provides a butt joint relationship between the
restorative material and the dentin (with overlying cementum)
preparation wall, a coniguration that provides appropriate strength
to both.
An acute, abrupt change in a preparation wall outline form
increases the diiculty of optimal adaptation of the restorative
material. he outline form of all preparation walls should have
smooth curves or straight lines. he line angle that forms where
two walls meet, regardless of whether it is acute or obtuse, should
be slightly curved (“softened”) ( Fig. 4.16 ).
he design of the cavosurface angle depends on the restorative
material being used. Because of the low edge streng th of amalgam
and glass-ceramic, a 90-degree cavosurface angle produces maximal
strength for these materials. Beveling a cavosurface margin would
result in a thin, fracture-prone amalgam or ceramic margin and
is contraindicated. On occlusal surfaces for Class I and II amalgam
restorations, the incline planes of the cusp and the converging
walls (for retentive purposes) of the preparation approximate the
desirable 90-degree butt joint junction, even though the actual
occlusal enamel margin may be greater than 90 degrees (see
Figs. 4.1, 4.2, 4.8, and 4.12 ).
Beveling the external walls is a preparation technique used for
some materials, such as intracoronal cast gold and composite restor ations. As previously noted, beveling will result in the strongest
DEJ
Occlusal view Vertical section Unsupported
enamel rodsSupported
enamel rods15°-20°90°
• Fig. 4.15 Vertical section of Class II tooth preparation. Gingival loor enamel (and margin) is unsup -
ported by dentin and friable unless removed.
Incorrect Correct
Occlusal outline form Reduced cuspBefore Afte r
• Fig. 4.16 The junctions of enamel walls (and respective margins) should be slightly rounded, whether
obtuse or acute.
CHAPTER 4 Fundamental of Tooth Preparation
preparation joins an occlusal lesion with a proximal lesion by
means of a prepared tunnel under the involved marginal ridge.
he objective of this approach is to remove the caries lesion and
leave the marginal ridge essentially intact. However, the development
of appropriately formed preparation walls and the excavation of
the caries lesion may be compromised by lack of access and visibility.
Preservation of the marginal ridge in a strong state is questionable,
especially since the dentinal support (essential for enamel durability
under occlusal loading) of the marginal ridge is no longer present
or is compromised. Generally teeth that have been treated with
tunnel preparations do not perform as well as those treated with
preparations that remove the marginal ridge over the proximal
lesion so as to gain access to the proximal caries lesion. Most
currently published clinical trials focus on the use of glass ionomer
materials to restore tunnel preparations and have found these
materials to be inadequate for use as deinitive, long-term restora -
tions. It is currently unknown whether use of adhesively retained
composite resin materials will result in better long-term clinical
performance. his technique remains controversial and is not
supported in this textbook.12,21
Adheive Amalgam Retoration
In vitro research studies suggest that the use of adhesive systems
may enhance resistance and retention forms of teeth with com -
pound and complex amalgam preparations/restorations.22,23 hese
techniques mechanically bond the amalgam material to tooth
structure in the hope that this will increase the overall strength
of the remaining tooth structure and improve the overall perfor -
mance of the restoration. Although proposed bonding techniques
vary, the essential procedure is to prepare the tooth in a fashion
similar to that typical for amalgam and then utilize an adhesive
to bond the amalgam restoration into the preparation. In addi -
tion, weakened remaining tooth structure is retained and bonded
to the amalgam instead of reduced and covered with amalgam.
he preparation walls, including the walls of compromised areas
(where there is inadequate dentin support), are treated with speciic
adhesive lining materials that mechanically bond to the tooth
and the amalgam. he amalgam is condensed into this adhesive
material before polymerization, and a mechanical bond develops
between the amalgam and adhesive. It has been suggested that
this technique may limit the likelihood of the development o f
postoperative sensitivity, staining of the dental structure, secondary
caries, fracture of the tooth, or partial/total loss of the restora -
tion. However, no clinical improvement over normal, routine
steps utilized in amalgam restoration has been demonstrated.24-28
Therefore this book does not promote the use of bonded
amalgams.
Preparation Treatment to
Enhance Retoration
Diinfection, Deenitization, Stabilization
Disinfection of the preparation prior to insertion of the resto rative
material may be considered. Chlorhexidine (2 weight percent [wt%])
solutions have been successfully used in preparations for disinfection
purposes. Disinfection procedures should not be considered
absolutely essential. Investigators have veriied the presence of
bacteria in the dentinal tubules within the preparation walls. While
it is true that the dentinal tubule lumens, which vary from 1 to Additional Concept in Tooth Preparation
New techniques advocated for the restoration of teeth should be
assessed on the basis of the fundamentals of tooth preparation
presented in this chapter. All preparations in stress-bearing areas,
once completed, should ensure healthy dentinal support of remain -
ing enamel.
Tunnel Tooth Preparation for Amalgam,
Compoite Rein, and Gla Ionomer
In an efort to be conservative in the removal of tooth structure,
some investigators advocate a “tunnel” tooth preparation. his
Evaporation
results in
rapid outward
tubular fluid
movement
Dentin
Pre-dentin
Pulp
OdontoblastAir blast
AFluid movement
leads to stretching
of odontoblastic
processes / nerves
with potential for
aspiration of
odontoblastic
cell bodies into
the tubules
• Fig. 4.17 A, Excessive drying (desiccation) of tooth preparations may
cause odontoblasts to be aspirated into dentinal tubules. B, Nuclei are
seen as dark rods in dentinal tubules. Red arrowheads indicate the nuclei
of the aspirated odontoblasts. Green arrows indicate location of the odon -
toblasts prior to them being drawn into the tubules from outward dentinal
tubular luid low. d, dentin; od, odontoblasts; p, pulp. (B, From Mitsiadis
TA, De Bari C, About I: Apoptosis in development and repair-related
human tooth remodeling: A view from the inside, Exp Cell Res (4): –
, .)
CHAPTER 4 Fundamental of Tooth Preparation
wall treatment for composites includes the etching (surface
demineralization) of enamel and dentin followed by placement
of a resin-based adhesive. he smear layer that forms on wall
surfaces during preparation is either altered or removed from
the enamel and dentin during the etching process. Placement of
the adhesive will allow subsequent formation of strong, durable
mechanical bond between the etched enamel and the composite.
In dentin, a hybrid layer is formed, which is characterized by
an intermingling of the resin adhesive with exposed collagen
ibrils of the intertubular dentin. his initially creates a strong
mechanical bond between the composite and dentin. However, it
has been identiied that the bond to dentin deteriorates over time
as a result of hydrolysis of the adhesive resin component of the
hybrid layer and proteolytic degradation of the collagen compo -
nent of the hybrid layer.38 herefore stabilization of the exposed
collagen may be appropriate as an initial step in the restorative
sequence.
Ongoing dental research has sought to optimize the longterm stability of the hybrid layer. For example, in vivo studies
have shown that chlorhexidine (2 wt% solution) application to
etched dentin is able to limit the activity of local collagenolytic
enzymes (matrix metalloproteinases, or MMPs), which are able
to degrade the exposed collagen matrix. Limiting the activity of
the MMPs may help stabilize the hybrid layer, at least in Class I
preparations for the short term.39 Chlorhexidine is able to inactive
MMPs that are exposed as a result of the etching process. However,
additional new MMPs, being generated by ongoing odontoblastic
activity, will remain active and able to degrade collagen that was
demineralized but not adequately iniltrated with adhesive resin.
Long-term hybrid layer stability, as a result of chlorhexidine
use, has not been demonstrated. hese indings, as we ll as the
decision to incorporate chlorhexidine or other dentin protease
inhibitors as an initial restorative step for hybrid layer stabiliza -
tion, are to be considered in light of clinical studies that reveal
the clinical performance of composite systems that did not use
chlorhexidine is comparable with that of amalgam in patients
who are low caries risk.40 However, it has been found that, in
high caries risk patients, composite restorations do not perform
as well as amalgam restorations.40,41 herefore there may be advan -
tages to the use of agents that stabilize and increase hybrid layer
resistance to proteolytic activity as a irst step of the restoration
sequence.
The use of a 5% glutaraldehyde/35% HEMA solution
theoretically may be used immediately after etching and before
priming of the dentin for the following reasons: (1) to occlude
dentinal tubules and, thereby, limit tubular luid contamination
during hybrid layer formation, (2) to cross-link the acid-exposed
intertubular collagen so as to render it resistant to proteolytic
degradation, and (3) to cross-link and inactivate noncollagenous
proteins that are able to degrade collagen (MMPs and cathepsins).
Recent in vitro evidence is in support of this theory.35 However,
potential cytotoxic efects of free glutaraldehyde and HEMA (i.e.,
not involved in the protein cross-linking and tubular occlusion)
raise legitimate patient safety concerns. Removal of excess glu -
taraldehyde and HEMA by rinsing with water may signiicantly
reduce any risk. he outward low of dentinal tubular luid may
also tend to limit the potential for free glutaraldehyde and/or
HEMA to difuse toward and negatively impact pulpal tissue.
Furthermore, it is necessary to recall that pulpal and axial dentin
in an advanced lesion (see Step 5 above) has been damaged by the
caries process and any bond to this deep dentin is compromised.
herefore deep dentin areas of the advanced lesion s hould be 4 μm in diameter depending on the depth of the preparati on,
present a pathway for the entrance of bacteria, this fact in no way
indicates that caries progression or restoration failure will result.
he number of bacteria in the dentinal tubules is relatively small
compared with the numerous microorganisms found in the
supericial caries lesion. he caries lesion will not progress if the
defect is correctly restored.12
Even when surface disinfection of the preparation has been
attempted, it is doubtful that potential beneits will continue for
any appreciable length of time because of the diference between
the thermal coeicients of expansion of the tooth and restorative
materials. Although difering in amounts, marginal leakage has
been shown for current restorative materials.18,29,30 Caries is unlikely
to develop in association with marginal gaps that are less than
μm.29 Limited protection from further carious activity may
be aforded by some restorative materials.31 he germicidal or
protective efect may be from the luoride content of some toothcolored restorative materials or from the deposition of corrosion
products at the interface between the preparation wall and an
amalgam restoration.
he natural defense mechanisms of the tooth, which result in
the mineralization of the dentinal tubules under a caries lesion,
help limit the potential for invasion of any remaining bacteria.
However, this natural occlusion of the dentinal tubules only will
occur beneath a slowly progressing caries lesion. he precipitation
of mineral in the dentinal tubules beneath a caries lesion (giving
it a transparent appearance) creates a physical barrier to bacterial
ingress. In addition to this host-defense mechanism, the presence
of reparative dentin deposited as a result of pulpal insult constitutes
a signiicant deterrent to bacterial invasion. Bacteria may transition
into dormancy as the result of the more sealed environment of a
restored tooth. When mineral occlusion of the dentinal tubules
has not occurred, there is increased risk of pulpal sensitivity after
the restoration has been placed. herefore routine use of medica -
ments to occlude the dentinal tubules (i.e. “desensitizers”) is recom -
mended in the inalized preparation.
Desensitization may be accomplished by taking steps to limit
rapid fluid movement in the dentinal tubules. Occlusion of
the dentinal tubules limits the potential for rapid tubular luid
movement. Some desensitizers not only are efective disinfectants
but also are able to occlude (“plug”) the dentinal tubules by
cross-linking and precipitating the proteins in the dentinal tubule
luid.32-35 Preparations designed for amalgam restoration should
be desensitized with a solution that contains 5% glutaraldehyde
and 35% 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA) before amalgam
placement.36 he use of this type of desensitizer allows prevention
of rapid luid movement associated with osmotic gradients and
temperature gradients. Osmotic gradients cause a rapid, transi -
tory increase in the amount of marginal microleakage associated
with recently placed amalgam restorations, which may resul t
in sensitivity. Temperature gradients (amalgam is an excellent
thermal conductor) also may result in rapid luid movement
in the dentinal tubules secondary to exposure to temperature
extremes. Alternatively, there are some who advocate the use
of an adhesive on the prepared tooth structure so as to limit
rapid luid movement by “sealing” the dentin before amalgam
placement and in this way limit the potential for postoperative
sensitivity.37
Composite restorations require some treatment of the preparation
before insertion of the restorative material, which may primarily
be considered as part of the restoration procedure (see Chapter 8 );
however, some discussion is appropriate at this point. Preparation
CHAPTER 4 Fundamental of Tooth Preparation
the restorative sequence. Placement of the RMGI may theoretically
limit the ability of any free glutaraldehyde or HEMA to gain access
to tubules in closest proximity to the pulp. Additional testing to
validate the safety and eicacy of this stabilization technique is
indicated.cover ed (i.e., sealed of) with a RMGI prior to any attempt at
demineralization (either by total-etch or self-etch systems) of more
peripheral dentin that might be followed by eforts (such as use
of a 5% glutaraldehyde/35% HEMA solution) to stabil ize and
increase hybrid layer resistance to proteolytic activity as a part of
Summary
his chapter has addressed the principles of tooth preparation.
Every efort should be made to conserve and protect remaining
healthy natural tooth structure during the various steps of prepara -
tion. Tooth preparation is guided through careful consideration of the implications of many factors. Preparation design is strategically
implemented so as to provide the subsequent restoration with an
optimal chance of clinical success.
Reference
1. Black GV: Operative dentistry, ed 8, Woodstock, Ill, – ,
Medico-Dental.
2. Bronner FJ: Mechanical, physiological, and pathological aspects of
operative procedures. Dent Cosmos 73: , .
3. Markley MR: Restorations of silver amalgam. J Am Dent Assoc 43: ,
.
4. Sturdevant JR, Wilder AD, Roberson TM, et al: Clinical study of
conservative designs for Class II amalgams (abstract ). J Dent
Res 67: , .
5. Sockwell CL: Dental handpieces and rotary cutting instruments.
Dent Clin North Am 15: , .
6. Sturdevant CM: he art and science of operative dentistry , ed 1, New
York, , McGraw-Hill.
7. Simonsen RJ: Preventive resin restoration. Quintessence Int 9:69–76,
.
8. Charbeneau GT, Peyton FA: Some efects of cavity instrumentation
on the adaptation of gold castings and amalgam. J Prosthet Dent
8: , .
9. Marzouk MA: Operative dentistry , St Louis, , Ishiyaku
EuroAmerica.
10. Linn J, Messer HH: Efect of restorative procedures on the strength
of endodontically treated molars. J Endo 20(10): – ,
.
11. Hansen EK, Asmussen E, Christiansen NC: In vivo fractures of
endodontically treated posterior teeth restored with amalgam. Endod
Dent Traumatol 6(2):49–55, .
12. Fejerskov O, Nyvad B, Kidd E, editors: Dental caries: he disease
and its clinical management , 3rd ed, Oxford, , Wiley
Blackwell.
13. Reeves R, Stanley HR: he relationship of bacterial penetration and
pulpal pathosis in carious teeth. Oral Surg 22:59, .
14. Ritter AV, Swift EJ: Current restorative concepts of pulp protection.
Endod Topics 5:41–48, .
15. Murray PE, Hafez AA, Smith AJ, et al: Bacterial microleakage and
pulp inlammation associated with various restorative materials. Dent
Mater 18: – , .
16. Swift EJ, T rope M, Ritter AV: Vital pulp therapy for the mature
tooth—can it work? Endod Topics 5:49–56, .
17. Hilton TJ: Keys to clinical success with pulp capping: A review of
the literature. Oper Dent 34(5): – , , 1. Wiegand A, Attin T: T reatment of proximal caries lesions by tunnel
restorations. Dent Mat 23(12): – , .
22. Boyer DB, Roth L: Fracture resistance of teeth with bonded amalgams.
Am J Dent 7:91–94, .23. Zidan O, Abdel-Keriem U: he efect of amalgam bonding on the
stifness of teeth weakened by cavity preparation. Dent Mater
19: – , .
24. Mach Z, Regent J, Staninec M, et al: he integrity of bonded amalgam
restorations: A clinical evaluation after ive years. J Am Dent Assoc
: – , .
25. Smales RJ, Wetherell JD: Review of bonded amalgam restorations,
and assessment in a general practice over ive years. Oper Dent
25: – , .
26. Baratieri LN, Machado A, Van Noort R, et al: Efect of pulp protection
technique on the clinical performance of amalgam restorations:
hree-year results. Oper Dent 29: – , .
27. Summitt JB, Burgess JO, Berry TG, et al: Six-year clinical evaluation
of bonded and pinretained complex amalgam restorations. Oper
Dent 29: – , .
28. Agnihotry A, Fedorowicz Z, Nasser M: Adhesively bonded versus
non-bonded amalgam restorations for dental caries. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev (3):CD007517, , 1. Shay DE, Allen TJ, Mantz RF: Antibacterial efects of some dental
restorative materials. J Dent Res 35:25, .
32. Schüpbach P , Lutz F , Finger WJ: Closing of dentinal tubules by
Gluma Desensitizer. Eur J Oral Sci : – , .
33. Qin C, Xu J, Zhang Y: Spectroscopic investigation of the function
of aqueous 2hydroxyethylmethacrylate/glutaraldehyde solution as
a dentin desensitizer. Eur J Oral Sci : – , .
34. Munksgaard EC: Amine-induced polymerization of aqueous HEMA/
aldehyde during action as a dentin bonding agent. J Dent Res
69: – , .
35. Lee J, Sabatini C: Glutaraldehyde collagen cross-linking stabilizes
resin-dentin interfaces and reduces bond degradation. Eur J Oral Sci
:63–71, .
36. Boksman L, Swift EJ, Jr: Current usage of glutaraldehyde/HEMA.
J Esthet Rest Dent 23(6): – , , 1. .x.
37. Ben-Amar A: Reduction of microleakage around new amalgam restora -
tions. J Am Dent Assoc : , .
38. Pashley DH, Tay FR, Breschi L, et al: State of the art etch-and-rinse
adhesives. Dent Mater 27:1–16, .
39. Carrilho MRO, Geraldeli S, Tay F , et al: In vivo preservation of the
hybrid layer by chlorhexidine. J Dent Res 86: – , .
40. Opdam NJM, Bronkhorst EM, Loomans BAC, et al: 12-year Survival
of Composite vs. Amalgam Restorations. J Dent Res 89: – ,
, 1.
41. Rasiines Alcaraz MG, Veiz-Keenan A, Sahrmann P , et al: Direct
composite illings versus amalgam illings for permanent or adult
posterior teeth. Cochran Database of Systematic Reviews (3):Art.
No.:CD005620, , 1. Mechanical adhesion —interlocking of the adhesive with
irregularities in the surface of the substrate, or adherend
2. Adsorption adhesion —chemical bonding between the adhesive
and the adherend; the forces involved may be primary (ionic
and covalent) or secondary (hydrogen bonds, dipole interaction,
or van der Waals) valence forces
3. Difusion adhesion —interlocking between mobile molecules,
such as the adhesion of two polymers through difusi on of
polymer chain ends across an interface
4. Electrostatic adhesion —an electrical double layer at the interface
of a metal with a polymer that is part of the total bonding
mechanism
In dentistry, bonding of resin-based materials to tooth structure
is a result of four possible mechanisms, as follows4:
1. Mechanical —penetration of resin and formation of resin tags
within the tooth surface
2. Adsorption —chemical bonding to the inorganic component
(hydroxyapatite) or organic components (mainly type I collagen)
of tooth structure
3. Difusion —precipitation of substances on the tooth surfaces to
which resin monomers can bond mechanically or chemically
4. A combination of the previous three mechanismsFor good adhesion, close contact must exist between the adhesive
and the substrate (enamel or dentin). he surface tension of the
adhesive must be lower than the surface energy of the substrate.
Failures of adhesive joints occur in three locations, which are
generally combined when an actual failure occurs: (1) cohesive
failure in the substrate; (2) cohesive failure within the adhesive;
and (3) adhesive failure, or failure at the interface of substrate and
adhesive.
A major problem in bonding resins to tooth structure is that
all methacrylate-based dental resins shrink during free-radical
addition polymerization.5 Dental adhesives must provide a strong
initial bond to resist the stresses of resin shrinkage.
Trend in Retorative Dentitry
he introduction of enamel bonding, the increasing demand for
restorative and nonrestorative esthetic treatments, and the ubiquity
of luoride have combined to transform the practice of operative
dentistry.6,7 he classic concepts of tooth preparation were advocated
in the early 1900s,8 but these have changed drastically. This
transformation in philosophy has resulted in a more conservative
approach to tooth preparation, with regard to not only the basic
concepts of retention form but also the resistance form of the
remaining tooth structure. Bonding techniques allow more conserva -
tive tooth preparations, less reliance on macromechanical retention,
and less removal of unsupported enamel.
he availability of new scientiic information on the etiology,
diagnosis, and treatment of carious lesions and the introduction
of reliable adhesive restorative materials have substantially reduced
the need for extensive tooth preparations. With improvements in
materials, indications for resin-based materials have progressively
shifted from the anterior segment only to posterior teeth as well.
Adhesive restorative techniques currently are used to accomplish
the following:
1. Restore Class I, II, III, IV, V, and VI carious lesions or traumatic
defects.
2. Change the shape and the color of anterior teeth (e.g., with
full or partial resin veneers).9,10
3. Improve retention for porcelain-fused-to-metal (ceramometal)
or metallic crowns.11,12
4. Bond all-ceramic restorations ( Fig. 5.1 ).13,14
5. Seal pits and issures.15
6. Bond orthodontic brackets.16
CHAPTER 5 Fundamental Concept of Enamel and Dentin Adheion
some studies using lower concentrations have reported similar
adhesion values.42-45 An etching time of 60 seconds originally was
recommended for permanent enamel using 30% to 40% phosphoric
acid. Although one study concluded that shorter etch times resulted
in lower bond strengths, other studies using scanning electron
microscopy (SEM) showed that a 15-second etch resul ted in a
surface roughness similar to that provided by a 60-second etch.46-49
Other in vitro studies have shown similar bond strengths and
leakage for etching times of 15 and 60 seconds.50-54
As measured in the laboratory, shear bond strengths of composite
to phosphoric acid-etched enamel usually exceed 20 megapascals
(MPa) and can range up to 53 MPa, depending on the test method
used.55-58 Such bond strengths provide adequate retention for a
broad variety of procedures and prevent leakage around enamel
margins of restorations.53
Acid etching transforms the smooth enamel into an irregular
surface ( Fig. 5.3 ) and increases its surface-free energy. When a
luid resin-based material is applied to the irregular etched surface,
the resin penetrates into the surface, aided by capillary action.
Monomers in the material polymerize, and the material becomes
interlocked with the enamel surface ( Fig. 5.4 ).41 he formation
of resin microtags within the enamel surface is the fundamental
mechanism of resin-enamel adhesion.41,46,59 Fig. 5.5 shows a
replica of an etched enamel surface visualized through the exten -
sions of resin that penetrated the irregular enamel surface. he
acid-etch technique has revolutionized the practice of restorative
dentistry.7. Bond splints for tooth luxations and periodontally involved
anterior teeth and conservative tooth-replacement prostheses.17-20
8. Repair existing restorations (composite, amalgam, ceramic, or
ceramometal).21-24
9. Provide foundations for crowns.25,26
10. Desensitize noncarious cervical lesions (NCCLs) and exposed
root surfaces.27-30
11. Impregnate enamel and dentin making them less susceptible
to caries.31,32
12. Bond fractured fragments of anterior teeth ( Fig. 5.2 ).33
13. Bond prefabricated iber, metal, and cast posts.34
14. Reinforce fragile endodontically treated roots internally.35,36
15. Seal root canals during endodontic therapy.37,38
16. Seal surgically resected root apices.39,40
Enamel Adheion
Inspired by the industrial use of 85% phosphoric acid to facilitate
adhesion of paints and resins to metallic surfaces, Buonocore
envisioned the use of acids to etch enamel for sealing pits and
issures.6,41 Since Buonocore’s introduction of the acid-etch tech -
nique, many dental researchers have attempted to achieve methods
for reliable and durable adhesion between resins and tooth
structures.
Various concentrations of phosphoric acid have been used to
etch enamel. Most current phosphoric acid gels have concentrations
of 30% to 40%, with 37% being the most common, although
A B
C
• Fig. 5.1 A, Preoperative view of anterior teeth in a 24-year-old patient with defective composite res -
torations. The treatment plan included bonded porcelain veneers on teeth #7, #8, and #10 to match the
natural aspect of tooth #9. B, Porcelain veneers were bonded with a two-step etch-and-rinse adhesive
and a light-activated resin cement. C, Final aspect 1 week after the bonding procedure.
CHAPTER 5 Fundamental Concept of Enamel and Dentin Adheion
importance of micromechanical bonding, similar to what occurs
in enamel bonding, has become accepted.60,67 Dentin adhesion
relies primarily on the penetration of adhesive monomers into the
networ k of collagen ibrils left exposed by acid etching ( Fig. 5.6 ).67,68
However, for adhesive materials that do not require etching, such
as glass ionomer cements and some phosphate-based self-etch
adhesives, chemical bonding between polycarboxylic or phosphate
monomers and hydroxyapatite has been shown to be an important
part of the bonding mechanism.62-66 Contemporary strategies for
bonding to dentin are summarized in .
Challenge in Dentin Bonding
Substrate
Bonding to enamel is a relatively simple process, without major
technical requirements or diiculties. Bonding to dentin presents
a much greater challenge. Sev eral factors account for this diference
between enamel and dentin bonding. Enamel is a highly mineralized
tissue composed of more than 90% (by volume) hydroxyapatite,
whereas dentin contains a substantial proportion of water and
organic material, primarily type I collagen ( Fig. 5.7 ).69 Dentin also
contains a dense network of tubules that connect the pulp with
the dentinoenamel junction (DEJ) ( Fig. 5.8 ). A cuf of hypermineral -
ized dentin called peritubular dentin lines the tubules. he less
mineralized intertubular dentin contains collagen ibrils with the
characteristic collagen banding ( Fig. 5.9 ). Intertubular dentin is
penetrated by submicron channels, which allow the passage of Dentin Adheion
he classic concepts of operative dentistry were challenged in the
1980s and 1990s by the introduction of new adhesive techniques,
irst for enamel and then for dentin. Nevertheless, adhesion to
dentin remains diicult. Adhesive materials can interact with dentin
in diferent ways—mechanically, chemically, or both.7,60-66 he
AB
CD
• Fig. 5.2 A, Intraoral frontal view of a 20-year-old female presenting with complicated crown fracture
on tooth #9 after endodontic treatment. The fracture extends subgingivally on the mesial aspect of the
lingual surface. B, A two-step etch-and-rinse ethanol-based adhesive applied to the crown fragment and
tooth. C, Extraoral view 6 months after rebonding. D, Extraoral view 3 years after rebonding. (From
Macedo GV, Ritter AV: Essentials of rebonding tooth fragments for the best functional and esthetic out -
comes, Pediatr Dent 31(2): – , .)
• Fig. 5.3 Scanning electron micrograph of enamel etched with 35%
phosphoric acid (3M Oral Care) for 15 seconds.
CHAPTER 5 Fundamental Concept of Enamel and Dentin Adheion
dentin tubules decreases with increasing distance from the pulp.
he number of tubules decreases from about 45, /mm2 close
to the pulp to about 20, /mm2 near the DEJ.73 he tubules
occupy an area of only 1% of the total surface near the DEJ,
whereas they occupy 22% of the surface close to the pulp.74 he
average tubule diameter ranges from 0.63 μm at the periphery to
2.37 μm near the pulp.75
Adhesion can be afected by the remaining dentin thickness
after tooth preparation. Bond strengths are generally less in deep
dentin than in supericial dentin.76-78 Some dentin adhesives,
including one-step self-etch adhesives, do not seem to be afected
by dentin depth.79 When the concentration of cross-linked car -
boxyterminal telopeptide of type I collagen was evaluated using
an immunoassay to detect the degree of collagen degradation,
signiicantly increased degradation was measured for a two-step
etch-and-rinse adhesive compared to a one-step self-etch adhesive.80
In the same study, collagen in deep dentin underwent signiicantly
more degradation than collagen in supericial dentin after thermal
fatigue.80 Degradation of collagen by dentin proteinases is known
to negatively afect the bonded interface.
Whenever tooth structure is prepared with a bur or other
instrument, residual organic and inorganic components form a
“smear layer” of debris on the surface.81,82 he smear layer ills
the oriices of dentin tubules, forming “smear plugs” ( Fig. 5.11 ),
and decreases dentin permeability by nearly 90% in vitro.83 he
composition of the smear layer is basically hydroxyapatit e and
altered denatured collagen. his altered collagen ca n acquire a
gelatinized consistency because of the friction and heat created by
the preparation procedure.84 Submicron porosity of the smear layer
still allows for difusion of dentinal luid.85 Removal of the smear
layer and smear plugs with acidic solutions results in an increase
of the luid low onto the exposed dentin surface. his luid can
interfere with adhesion because hydrophobic resins do not adhere
to hydrophilic substrates, even if resin tags are formed in the dentin
tubules.7,86
Several additional factors afect dentin permeability. Besides
the use of vasoconstrictors in local anesthetics, w hich decrease
pulpal pressure and luid low in the tubules, factors such as the
radius and length of the tubules, the viscosity of dentin luid, the
pressure gradient, the molecular size of the substances dissolved
in the tubular luid, and the rate of removal of substances by the
blood vessels in the pulp afect permeability. All of these variables tubular liquid and ibrils between neighboring tubules, forming
intertubular anastomoses.
Dentin is an intrinsically hydrated tissue, penetrated by a maze
of luid-illed tubules. Movement of luid from the pulp to the
DEJ is a result of a slight but constant pulpal pressure.70 Pulpal
pressure has a magnitude of 25 to 30 mm Hg or 34 to
40 cm H 2O.71,72 Dentinal tubules enclose cellular extensions from
the odontoblasts and are in direct communication with the pulp
(Fig. 5.10 ). Inside the tubule lumen, other ibrous organic structure s
such as the lamina limitans are present, which substantially decreases
the functional radius of the tubule. he relative area occupied by
0.5 /H9262m B
0.5 /H9262mA
• Fig. 5.4 A and B, Transmission electron micrographs of the enameladhesive interface after application of Adper Single Bond (3M Oral Care)
as per manufacturer’s instructions. Acid etching with 35% phosphoric acid
opened spaces between enamel prisms (arrows), allowing the permeation
of resin monomers between the crystallites (arrowheads). A , Adhesive; E,
enamel.
• Fig. 5.5 Replica of enamel etched with 35% phosphoric acid. Enamel
was dissolved completely in 6N hydrochloric acid for 24 hours. The resin
extensions correspond to the interprismatic spaces (asterisks).
CHAPTER 5 Fundamental Concept of Enamel and Dentin Adheion
35% 5.0kV 12.0mm x 5.00k SE(M) 10.0 /H9262m 35% 5.0kV 12.0mm x 10.00k SE(M) 5.0/H9262mA BD Col D S Col T T
• Fig. 5.6 A, Dentin etched with 35% phosphoric acid. B, Higher magniication view of etched dentin.
Col, Collagen exposed by the acid; D, normal dentin; T, dentinal tubule; S, residual silica particles used
as acid gel thickener.
Current Strategies for Adhesion of Resins to Dentin
Etchant (E) Primer (P) Bonding Agent (B)
Three-step etch-andrinsea
E + P + BRemoves the smear layer
Exposes intertubular and peritubular collagen
Opens tubules in a funnel coniguration
Decreases surface-free energyIncludes bifunctional molecules
(simultaneously hydrophilic
and hydrophobic)
Envelops the external surface
of collagen ibrils
Reestablishes surface-free
energy to levels compatible
with a more hydrophobic
restorative materialIncludes monomers that are mostly
hydrophobic such as Bis-GMA;
however, can contain a small
percentage of hydrophilic monomers
such as HEMA
Copolymerizes with the primer molecules
Penetrates and polymerizes into the
interibrillar spaces to serve as a
structural backbone to the hybrid layer
Two-step etch-andrinse
E + [PB]Removes the smear layer
Exposes intertubular and peritubular collagen
Opens tubules in a funnel coniguration
Decreases surface-free energyPenetrates into the dentin tubules to form resin tags
The irst coat applied on etched dentin works as a primer—it increases
the surface-free energy of dentin
The second coat (and third, fourth, and so on) acts as the bonding agent
used in three-step systems—it ills the spaces between the dense
network of collagen ibrils
Two-step self-etch
[EP] + BEnamel etch is typically shallow
The self-etching primer (SEP) does not remove
the smear layer, but ixes it and exposes
about 0.5–1 μm of intertubular collagen
because of its acidity (pH = 1.2–2)
The smear plug is impregnated with acidic
monomers, but it is not removed; some SEP
monomers bond chemically to dentin
When it impregnates the smear plug, the SEP
prepares the pathway for the penetration of
the subsequently placed luid resin into the
microchannels that permeate the smear plugUses the same type of bonding agent included in the three-step
etch-and-rinse systems
The resin tags form on resin penetration into the microchannels of the
primer-impregnated smear plug
One-step self-etch
[EPB]Etches enamel, but etch pattern is typically shallow
Incorporates the smear layer into interface
Being an aqueous solution of a phosphonated monomer, it demineralizes and penetrates dentin simultaneously, leaving a
precipitate on the hybrid layer
Forms a thin layer of adhesive, leading to low bond strengths; a multicoat approach is recommended; an extra layer of a
hydrophobic bonding resin improves bond strengths and clinical performance
Incompatible with self-cure composite resins unless coated with an hydrophobic bonding resin
aAlthough the meaning of the two terms is the same, the term “etch-and-rinse” is preferred over “total-etch.”
CHAPTER 5 Fundamental Concept of Enamel and Dentin Adheion
In addition to the C-factor, the magnitude of the polymerization
shrinkage stress depends on several other variables, including the
rate of the polymerization reaction, the degree of conversion, the
composite stifness and its rate of acquisition of stifness during
polymerization, the nature and relative volume of the inorganic
iller, the type of monomers in the composite, the composite make dentin a dynamic substrate and consequently a diicult
substrate for bonding.74,87
Stresses at the Resin–Dentin Interface
Composites shrink as they polymerize, creating considerable
stresses within the composite mass, depending on the coniguration
of the preparation.88-91 When the composite is bonded to one
surface only (e.g., for a direct facial veneer), stresses within the
composite are relieved by low from the unbonded surface. Stress
relief within a three-dimensional bonded restoration is limited
however by its coniguration factor (C-factor).92 In an occlusal
preparation, composite is bonded to ive tooth surfaces—mesial,
distal, buccal, lingual, and pulpal. he occlusal surface of the
composite is the only “free” or unrestrained surface. In such a
situation, the ratio between the number of bonded surfaces and
the number of unbonded surfaces is 5 : 1, giving the restoration
a coniguration factor equal to 5. Stress relief is limited because
low can occur only from the single free surface.92,93 Unrelieved
stresses in the composite contribute to internal bond disruption and
marginal gaps around restorations that may increase microleakage
and potential postoperative sensitivity.94 he C-factor might be
partially responsible for the decrease in bond strengths observed
when deep dentin is bonded as part of a three-dimensional
preparation.95
Dentin
Mineral
50%
Mineral
88%Water
25%Water
10%Organic
25%Organic
2%Enamel
• Fig. 5.7 Composition of enamel and dentin by volume percent.
15 /H9262m
• Fig. 5.8 Scanning electron micrograph of dentin that was fractured
longitudinally to show dentinal tubules.
3 /H9262m
0.6 /H9262mA
B
• Fig. 5.9 A, Scanning electron micrograph of etched dentin showing
exposed collagen ibrils. B, Higher magniication shows the characteristic
collagen banding in intertubular collagen. Supericial collagen was dis -
solved by collagenase to remove the most supericial collagen ibrils that
were damaged by tooth preparation.
CHAPTER 5 Fundamental Concept of Enamel and Dentin Adheion
curing light irradiance, , incremental insertion techniques, ,
and application of intermediate low-modulus liners. None of
these methods has been efective in completely eliminating the
deleterious efects of polymerization shrinkage stress, which include
cuspal delection, tooth cracking, marginal leakage and gap formation,
reduction of adhesive bond strengths, and decreased physical
properties of the resin restorative material. Nevertheless, polym -
erization shrinkage stresses of composites remain a concern, and
stress relief in a restoration is important. Polymerization is initiated
on the surface of the restoration, close to the light source, eliminating
this surface as a potential stress relief pathway. Several methods
have been advocated to improve the low capacity of composites
used in Class II tooth preparations. One of those methods is the
use of a lowable composite between the composite and the tooth
wall. Conceptually, this lowable low-modulus composite would
serve as a shock absorber and simultaneously protect the interface
against fatigue stresses. , he use of lowable composites as an
intermediate layer in NCCLs or as the gingival increment of Class
II preparations however has not been proved efective clinically. -
Likewise, the application of a glass ionomer cement base underneath
posterior composite restorations does not improve the restoration
survival rate at 18 years. Also, modiications of the current
resin-based composites have been proposed as a means to reduce
stress without compromising mechanical properties. Studies have
shown that some commercial composites speciically designed to
have reduced polymerization contraction and/or stress produce
less deleterious outcomes on marginal adaptation and cuspal
delection. - However, further studies demonstrated that, in
spite of the lower total shrinkage obtained with the recent lowshrinkage composite, shrinkage stress is not necessarily reduced.
Each time a restoration is exposed to wide temperature variations
in the oral environment (e.g., drinking cofee and eating ice cream),
the restoration undergoes volumetric changes of diferent magnitude
compared with those of the tooth structure. his occurs because
the linear coeicient of thermal expansion (CTE) of hybrid and
microilled composites is about two to three times and four times
greater than that of dentin, respectively. - Microleakage around
dentin margins is potentiated by this discrepancy in linear coeicient
of thermal expansion between the restoration and the substrate. ,
Enamel bond strengths usually are suicient to prevent the formation
of marginal gaps by polymerization contraction stresses. hese
stresses might however be powerful enough to cause enamel defects
at the margins. Although the extension of the enamel cavosurface
bevel helps improve the enamel peripheral seal in vitro and reduce
the stresses,88, , recent systematic reviews have questioned the
need for enamel beveling prior to acid etching. ,
Loading and unloading of restored teeth can result in transitional
or permanent interfacial gaps. Additionally, the tooth substrate
itself might be weakened by cyclic loading. A study found
that 71% of Class V composite restorations in third molars with
antagonists had signiicantly more leakage than restorations placed
in teeth without opposing contact. Another study found that
cyclic loading and preparation coniguration signiicantly reduced
the bond strengths of self-etch and etch-and-rinse adhesives. ,
Development
Beginning
During the 1950s, it was reported that a resin containing glycero -
phosphoric acid dimethacrylate (GPDM) could bond to a
hydrochloric acid–etched dentin surface. (Note: A complete listing
of the chemical names mentioned in this chapter is provided in insertion technique, and the opacity of the composite.96- It has
been reported that immediate bond strengths of approximately
17 MPa are necessary to resist the contraction stresses that develop
in the composite during polymerization, to prevent marginal
debonding.90, However, this magnitude of bond strengths may
not be enough to counteract the polymerization contraction stresses
in some composite restorations, as stifer composite materials, in
general, result in increased stresses than those generated by more
elastic composite materials.
he water absorption in composites results in partial relief of
the contraction residual stresses from polymerization. However,
the magnitude of hygroscopic expansion from water absorption
depends on the volume of the restoration and the speciic monomers
used in the composition of composites, , as more hydrophilic
materials may actually result in a net expansion. Composite
materials that contain bisphenol A ethoxylated dimethacrylate
(Bis-EMA) undergo less water sorption than composites with
traditional monomers such as bisphenol A-glycidyl methacrylate
(Bis-GMA) and urethane dimethacrylate (UDMA). Silorane-based
composites have the lowest hygroscopic expansion.
Several clinical strategies have been suggested to reduce the
efects of polymerization shrinkage stress, including control of
*
• Fig. 5.10 Scanning electron micrograph of deep dentin displaying an
odontoblastic process in a dentinal tubule (asterisk).
• Fig. 5.11 Scanning electron micrograph of a smear plug blocking the
entrance of a dentinal tubule. SP, Smear plug.
CHAPTER 5 Fundamental Concept of Enamel and Dentin Adheion
by the loosely attached smear layer, these resins were relatively
devoid of hydrophilic groups and had large contact angles on
intrinsically moist surfaces. hey did not wet dentin well, did
not penetrate the entire depth of the smear layer, and therefore
could not r each the supericial dentin to establish ionic bonding.84
Whatever bonding did occur was due to interaction with calcium
ions in the smear layer.
he in vitro performance of second-generation adhesives after
6 months was unacceptable. he bonding material tended to
peel from the dentin surface after water storage, indicating that
the interface between dentin and some types of chlorophosphate
ester–based materials (e.g., second-generation dentin bonding
systems) was unstable. , he in vivo performance of these
materials was found to be clinically unaccep years after
placement in cervical tooth preparations without additional reten -
tion, such as beveling and acid etching. ,
Third Generation
he concept of phosphoric acid etching of dentin before application
of a phosphate ester–type bonding agent was introduced by
Fusayama et al. in . Because of the hydrophobic nature of
the bonding resin however, acid etching did not pr oduce a signiicant
improvement in dentin bond str engths despite the low of the
resin into the open dentinal tubules.86, Pulpal inlammatory
responses were thought to be triggered by the application of acid
on dentin surfaces, providing another reason to avoid etching. ,
Nevertheless, continuing the etched dentin philosophy, Kuraray
introduced Clearil New Bond in . his phosphate-based
material contained HEMA and a 10-carbon molecule known as
10-MDP (10-methacryloyloxydecyl dihydrogen phosphate), which
includes a long hydrophobic component and a short hydrophilic
component. T reatment of the smear layer with acidic primers
was proposed using an aqueous solution of 2.5% maleic acid, 55%
HEMA, and a trace of methacrylic acid (Scotchbond 2, 3M Dental
Products).95 Scotchbond 2 was the irst dentin bonding system to
receive “provisional” and “full acceptance” from the American
Dental Association (ADA). With this type of smear layer treat -
ment, manufacturers efectively combined the dentin etching
philosophy advocated in Japan with the more cautious approach
advocated in Europe and the United States. he result was preserva -
tion of a modiied smear layer with slight demineralization of the
underlying intertubular dentin surface. Clinical results were mixed,
with some reports of good performance and some reports of poor
performance. ,
he removal of the smear layer using chelating agents such as
EDTA was recommended in the original Gluma system (Bayer
Dental, Leverkusen, Germany) before the application of a primer
solution of 5% glutaraldehyde and 35% HEMA in water. he
efectiveness of this system might have been impaired however by
the manufacturer’s questionable recommendation of placing the
composite over uncured unilled resin.
Most other third-generation materials were designed not to
remove the entire smear layer, but to modify it and allow penetration
of acidic monomers such as phenyl-P or PENTA (see ).
Despite promising laboratory results, some of the bonding mecha -
nisms never resulted in satisfactory clinical results.
Current Option for Rein–Dentin Bonding
Three-Step Etch-and-Rinse Adhesives
Although the smear layer acts as a “difusion barrier” that reduces
the permeability of dentin, it may be considered an obstacle that .) he bond strengths of this primitive adhesion technique
were severely reduced by immersion in water. A few years before
that report, another researcher had used the same monomer
chemically activated with sulinic acid, and that combination would
later be known commercially as Sevriton Cavity Seal (Amalgamated
Dental Company, London, England). ,
First Generation
he development of the surface-active comonomer NPG-GMA
was the basis for Cervident (S.S. White Burs, Inc., Lakewood,
NJ), which is considered the irst-generation dentin bonding
system. , heoretically, this comonomer could chelate with
calcium on the tooth surface to generate water-resistant chemical
bonds of resin to dentinal calcium. , he in vitro dentin bond
strengths of this material were, however, in the range of only 2 to
3 MPa. Likewise, the in vivo results were discouraging as
Cervident had poor clinical results when used to restore NCCLs
without mechanical retention.
Second Generation
In , the Clearil Bond System Fc was introduced in Japan
(Kuraray Co., Ltd., Osaka, Japan). Generally recognized as the irst
product of the second generation of dentin adhesives, it was a
phosphate-ester material (phenyl-P and hydroxyethyl methacrylate
[HEMA] in ethanol). Its mechanism of action was based on the
polar interaction between negatively charged phosphate groups in
the resin and positively charged calcium ions in the smear layer.
he smear layer was the weakest link in the system because of its
relatively loose attachment to the dentin surface. Examination of
both sides of failed bonds revealed the presence of smear layer debris.
Several other phosphate-ester dentin bonding systems were
introduced in the early 1980s, including Scotchbond (3M Dental
Products, St. Paul, MN), Bondlite (Kerr Corporation, Orange,
CA), and Prisma Universal Bond (DENTSPLY Caulk, Milford,
DE). hese second-generation dentin bonding systems typically
had in vitro bond strengths of only 1 to 5 MPa, whic h was consider -
ably below the 10-MPa value estimated as the threshold value for
acceptable in vivo retention.84, In addition to the problems caused Abbreviations Commonly Used in Dentin/
Enamel Adhesion Literature and in This
Chapter
Abbreviation Chemical Name
Bis-EMA Bisphenol A ethoxylated dimethacrylate
Bis-GMA Bisphenol A-glycidyl methacrylate
EDTA Ethylenediamine tetra-acetic acid
GPDM Glycerophosphoric acid dimethacrylate
HEMA Hydroxyethyl methacrylate
10-MDP 10-Methacryloyloxy decyl dihydrogen phosphate
4-META 4-Methacryloxyethyl trimellitate anhydride
NPG-GMA N-phenylglycine glycidyl methacrylate
PENTA Dipentaerythritol penta-acrylate monophosphate
Phenyl-P 2-(Methacryloxy) ethyl phenyl hydrogen phosphate
UDMA Urethane dimethacrylate
CHAPTER 5 Fundamental Concept of Enamel and Dentin Adheion
Adhesive systems such as All-Bond 2 and All-Bond 3 (Bisco,
Inc., Schaumburg, IL), OptiBond FL (Kerr Corporation), and
Scotchbond Multi-Purpose (3M Oral Care, St. Paul, MN) ( Table
5.3) are described by some authors as fourth-generation adhesives.
However, because they include three essential components that
are applied sequentially, they are more accurately described as
three-step etch-and-rinse systems. he three essential components
are (1) a phosphoric acid–etching gel that is rinsed of; (2) a primer must be removed or chemically modiied to permit resin bonding
to the underlying dentin substrate.65,83, , Based on that con -
sideration, a new generation of dentin adhesives was introduced
for use on acid-etched dentin. Removal of the smear layer via
acid etching led to improvements in the in vitro bond strengths
of resins to dentin. - Because the clinical technique involves
simultaneous application of an acid to enamel and dentin, this
method was originally known as the “total-etch” technique. Now
more commonly called etch-and-rinse technique , it was the most
popular strategy for dentin bonding during the 1990s and remains
somewhat popular today ( Fig. 5.12 ).
Application of acid to dentin results in partial or total removal
of the smear layer and demineralization of the underlying dentin.
Acids demineralize intertubular and peritubular dentin, open the
dentin tubules, and expose a dense iligree of collagen ibrils (see
Fig. 5.6 ), increasing the microporosity of the intertubular dentin
(Fig. 5.13 ).67, Dentin is demineralized by up to approximately
7.5 μm depending on the type of acid, application time, and
concentration.67,
Despite the obvious penetration of early adhesives into the
dentinal tubules, etching did not result in a signiicant improvement
in bond strengths, possibly as a result of the hydrophobic nature
of the phosphonated resin. On the basis of concerns about the
potential for inlammatory pulpal responses, acids were believed
to be contraindicated for direct application on dentin, and the
total-etch technique was not readily accepted in Europe or the
United States. Adhesive systems based on the total-etch p hilosophy
have proved successful however in vitro and in vivo. , -
Primer/Adhesive + Composite Acid-Etching + Rinsing
Composite
Dentin Adhesive
Hybrid Layer
T
U
B
U
L
EEtched Dentin with
Exposed Collagen FibersDentin Smear Layer
Prepared with Bur
• Fig. 5.12 Bonding of resin to dentin using an etch-and-rinse technique.
2 /H9262mT
• Fig. 5.13 Scanning electron micrograph of dentin that was kept moist
after rinsing off the etchant. The abundant intertubular porosity serves as
a pathway for the penetration of the dentin adhesive. T, Dentinal tubule.
CHAPTER 5 Fundamental Concept of Enamel and Dentin Adheion
suggests that an abrupt shift from hybrid tissue to mineralized
tissue occurs, without any empty space or pathway that could
result in leakage ( Figs. 5.14 and 5.15). he demarcation line seems
to consist of hydroxyapatite crystals embedded in the resin from
the hybrid layer (see Fig. 5.15B ). For self-etch adhesive systems,
the transition is more gradual, with a super icial zone of resinimpregnated smear residues and a deeper zone, close to the
unafected dentin, rich in hydroxyapatite crystals ( Fig. 5.16 ).
Two-Step Etch-and-Rinse Adhesives
Much of the research and development (R&D) has focused on
the simpliication of the bonding procedure. A number of dental
materials manufacturers market a simpliied, two-step etch-and-rinse
adhesive system. Some authors refer to these as ifth-generation
adhesives. A separate etching step still is required. In vitro dentin
bond strengths obtained with two-step etch-and-rinse adhesives
have improved so much that they approach the level of enamel
bonding.56 However, three-step etch-and-rinse adhesives result in
better laboratory and clinical performance than two-step etchand-rinse adhesives. , -
Numerous two-step etch-and-rinse adhesive systems are availa ble
(see ), including One-Step Plus (Bisco, Inc.), Prime &
Bond NT (DENTSPLY Sirona, York, PA, USA), Adper Single containing reactive hydrophilic monomers in ethanol, acetone, or
water; and (3) a nonsolvated unilled or illed resin bonding agent.
Some authors refer to this third step as adhesive . It contains
hydrophobic monomers such as Bis-GMA, frequently combined
with hydrophilic molecules such as HEMA.
he acid-etching step not only alters the mineral content of
the dentin substrate but also changes its surface-free energy.77,
he latter is an undesirable efect because for good interfacial
contact, any adhesive must have a low surface tension, and the
substrate must have a high surface-free energy.84, , Phosphoric
acid etching of dentin removes hydroxyapatite, which has high
surface energy, exposing the low surface energy collagen. A correla -
tion exists between the ability of an adhesive to spread on the
dentin surface and the concentration of calcium on that same
surface. he primer in a three-step system is designed to increase
the critical surface tension of dentin, and a direct correlation between
surface energy of dentin and shear bond strengths has been shown.77
When primer and bonding resin are applied to etched dentin,
they penetrate the intertubular dentin, forming a resin–dentin
interdifusion zone or hybrid layer. hey also penetrate and polymer -
ize in the open dentinal tubules, forming resin tags. For most
etch-and-rinse adhesives, the ultramorphologic characterization of
the transition between the hybrid layer and the unafected dentin Adhesive Systems Categorized by Adhesion Strategy
Type Brand Names (Manufacturer)COMPONENTS
1 2 3
Three-step etch-andrinseAdper Scotchbond Multi-Purpose (3M Oral Care)
All-Bond 2 (Bisco, Inc.)
All-Bond 3 (Bisco, Inc.)
OptiBond FL (Kerr Corporation)
Solobond Plus (Voco)
Syntac (Ivoclar Vivadent)Phosphoric acid Hydrophilic primer Bonding resin
Two-step etch-and-rinse Admira Bond (Voco)
Adper Single Bond Plus (3M Oral Care)
ExciTE F (Ivoclar Vivadent)
One-Step Plus (Bisco, Inc.)
OptiBond SOLO Plus (Kerr Corporation)
Prime & Bond NT (DENTSPLY Sirona)
Prime & Bond XP (DENTSPLY Sirona)Phosphoric acid Combined
(hydrophilic primer + bonding resin)
Two-step self-etch AdheSE (Ivoclar Vivadent)
All-Bond SE (Bisco)
Clearil SE Bond (Kuraray Noritake Dental Inc)
Clearil SE Protect (Kuraray Noritake Dental Inc)
OptiBond XTR (Kerr Corporation)Self-etching primer Bonding resin
One-step self-etch Clearil S3 Bond Plus (Kuraray Noritake Dental Inc)
Futurabond M (Voco)
iBond (Heraeus Kulzer)
OptiBond All-in-One (Kerr Corporation)
Xeno IV (DENTSPLY Sirona)
Xeno V+ (DENTSPLY Sirona)All-in-one
Self-etch hydrophilic primer/bonding resin
Two-step etch-and-rinse
orAdhese Universal (Ivoclar Vivadent)
All-Bond Universal (Bisco, Inc.)
Clearil Universal Bond (Kuraray Noritake Dental Inc)
Futurabond U (Voco)
One Coat 7 Universal (Coltene)
Prime & Bond Elect (DENTSPLY Sirona)
Scotchbond Universal Adhesive (3M Oral Care)
Prime & Bond Active (DENTSPLY Sirona)Phosphoric acid Hydrophilic bonding resin
One-step self-etch Self-etch hydrophilic primer/bonding resin
CHAPTER 5 Fundamental Concept of Enamel and Dentin Adheion
hydrophilic components from the primer that are mixed with the
hydrophobic monomers from the bonding agent. For this reason,
hydrolytic degradation, which directly relates to the hydrophilicity
of the adhesive, is more evident in two-step etch-and-rinse
adhesives when compar ed to their nonsimpliied predecessors. ,
Active rubbing application and the use of multiple coats of the
adhesive have been shown to somewhat compensate for the lack
of a hydrophobic resin bonding agent layer as the last step in
two-step etch-and-rinse adhesives. ,
Two-Step Self-Etch Adhesives
An alternative bonding strategy is the self-etch approach ( Fig.
5.17; see Fig. 5.16 ).
Introduced in Japan, two-step self-etch adhesives (SEAs) contain
an acidic monomer that functions as a self-etching primer and a
hydrophobic nonsolvated bonding r esin. he acidic primers include
a phosphonated and/or carboxylated resin molecule that perfo rms
two functions simultaneously—etching and priming of dentin
and enamel. In contrast to conventional etchants, the acidic primers
are not rinsed of. he bonding mechanism of SEAs is based on
the simultaneous etching and priming of enamel and dentin, forming
a continuum in the substrate and incorporating smear plugs into
the resin tags ( Fig. 5.18 ). , In addition to simplifying the bonding
technique, the elimination of rinsing and drying steps reduces the
possibility of overwetting or overdrying dentin, either of which
can afect adhesion adversely. , Also, water is always a component
of the acidic primer because it is needed for the monomers to
ionize and trigger demineralization of hard dental tissues; this
makes SEAs less susceptible to variations in the degree of substrate
moisture but more susceptible to chemical instability due to
hydrolytic degradation. , ,182Bond Plus (3M Oral Care), OptiBond SOLO Plus (Kerr Corpora -
tion), PQ1 (Ultradent Products, South Jordan, UT), ExciTE F
(Ivoclar Vivadent, Schaan, Liechtenstein), One Coat Bond (Coltene,
Altstätten, Switzerland), and Prime & Bond XP (DENTSPLY
Sirona).
Diferent from three-step etch-and-rinse adhesives, these simpli -
ied etch-and-rinse materials do not contain a hydrophobic bonding
agent as the last bonding step. he primer/adhesive single solution
in two-step etch-and-rinse adhesives contains solvents and
• Fig. 5.14 Scanning electron micrograph of the transition between
composite resin (C)–adhesive (A), adhesive–hybrid layer (H), and hybrid
layer–dentin.
A B
• Fig. 5.15 Transmission electron micrograph of a resin–dentin interface formed by the etch-and-rinse
adhesive Adper Single Bond Plus (3M Oral Care). This specimen was not decalciied or stained; the
unaltered dentin appears darker and the hybrid layer appears lighter. A, General view showing the com -
posite (C), the adhesive (A), the hybrid layer (H), a illed resin tag (T), and the unaffected dentin (D). B,
Higher magniication of the transition between the hybrid layer and unaffected dentin. Note the iller in
the resin tag as small dark dots (nanoiller).
CHAPTER 5 Fundamental Concept of Enamel and Dentin Adheion
H
• Fig. 5.16 Transmission electron micrograph of a resin–dentin interface formed with the two-step selfetch adhesive Clearil SE Bond (Kuraray Noritake Dental Inc.). Residual hydroxyapatite crystals and
residual components of the smear layer are embedded in the resin within the hybrid layer (H).
Adhesive + Composite Self-Etching Primer
Composite
Hybrid
Layer
ResinImpregnated
Smear PlugDentin AdhesiveNo Rinsing Dentin Smear Layer
Created with Bur
Primer
• Fig. 5.17 Bonding to dentin using a self-etch primer.
CHAPTER 5 Fundamental Concept of Enamel and Dentin Adheion
to their pH in three categories: mild, moderate , and aggressive , with
Clearil SE Bond being a mild SEA. Mild SEAs tend to provide
excellent dentin bond strengths and poorer enamel bonds, whereas
more aggressive self-etch systems provide the reverse. Clearil SE
Bond resulted in 93% retention rate in Class V composite restora -
tions at 13 years with selective enamel etching of the margins
versus 86% without enamel etching, but the diference was not
statistically significant. Selective enamel etching improved
marginal adaptation and marginal discoloration compared to the
self-etch strategy. In posterior restorations, Clearil SE Bond
resulted in % retention rate at 2 years with a tendency for
deterioration of the composite margins compared with the etchand-rinse control Adper Single Bond. he clinical success of
Clearil SE Bond might be a result of its chemical composition,
speciically the monomer 10-MDP , which has been shown to bond
chemically to calcium in hydroxyapatite through a mechanism
known as nanolayering.65,
SEAs are less technique sensitive than are etch-and-rinse
adhesives. Additionally, SEAs are less likely to result in a discrepancy
between the depth of demineralization and the depth of resin
infiltration because SEAs demineralize and infiltrate dentin
simultaneously. Recently, however, that concept has been chal -
lenged by showing that Clearil SE Bond may also present partially
demineralized dentin beneath the hybrid layer. SEAs do not
remove the smear layer from dentin completely (see Figs. 5.16
and 5.17), and in some cases smear layer remnants may interfere
with in vitro bond strengths. For some self-etch adhesives, collagen
ibrils in the hybrid layer are not totally enveloped by the adhesive,
leaving a partially demineralized dentin layer. Strong one-step
SEAs continue the demineralization of the adjacent dentin structure Because they are user friendly and do not require the etching
and rinsing step, SEAs have become very popular. One disad -
vantage is that some SEAs do not etch enamel as well as phosphoric
acid, particularly if the enamel has not been instrumented. ,
However, some of the in vitro enamel bond strengths obtained
with SEAs may not relect their actual bonding efectiveness as
the use of silicon carbide (Si-C) paper in in vitro experiments
creates smear layers that are not clinically relevant. If enamel is
not etched adequately, the seal of enamel margins in vivo might
be compromised. , When enamel bonds are stressed in the
laboratory by thermal cycling, some of the irst SEAs were more
likely than etch-and-rinse systems to undergo deterioration. his
decrease in bond strengths with thermal fatigue might be a sign
that a potential exists for enamel microleakage whe n SEAs are
employed to bond to enamel. In a 10-year recall of an older genera -
tion SEA, 39 of 44 restorations had marginal discoloration. he
enamel bond strengths of some newer SEAs approach the enamel
bond strengths of phosphoric acid–based adhesives however, sug -
gesting that SEAs are gradually being developed to replace etchand-rinse adhesive systems.
Several two-step SEAs are available, including AdheSE (Ivoclar
Vivadent), All-Bond SE (Bisco, Inc.), Clearil SE Bond or Clearil
SE Bond 2 (Kuraray Noritake Dental Inc., Tokyo, Japan), Clearil
SE Protect (Kuraray Noritake Dental Inc.), and OptiBond XTR
(Kerr Corporation) (see ). Clearil SE Bond contains an
aqueous mixture of a phosphoric acid ester monomer (10-MDP),
with a much higher pH than that of phosphoric acid etchants.
Although the pH of a 34% to 37% phosphoric acid gel is much
lower than 1.0, the pH of Clearil SE Primer (Kuraray Noritake
Dental Inc.) is 1.9 to 2.0. , SEAs have been classiied according
10 /H9262m1 /H9262m ABHA
D
TsA
H
T
D
• Fig. 5.18 A, Scanning electron micrograph of a resin–dentin interface formed with Clearil SE Bond
(Kuraray Noritake Dental Inc.) on chemical dissolution of the supericial dentin. B, Transmission electron
micrograph of a resin–dentin interface formed with Clearil SE Bond on EDTA decalciication and staining
with uranyl acetate and lead citrate. A, Adhesive; D, residual dentin (appears gray in B because it was
decalciied with EDTA); H, hybrid layer (appears dark in B because of decalciication followed by staining);
T, resin tag; Ts, resin tag that incorporates the smear plug.
CHAPTER 5 Fundamental Concept of Enamel and Dentin Adheion
he in vitro and clinical behavior of one-step SEAs improves
with the addition of an extra coat of a hydrophobic bonding
layer. - In a clinical study in Class V lesions, the one-step SEA
iBond resulted in 40% retention rate at 18 months. For the
group to which an extra layer of a thick bonding resin was added
(Scotchbond Multi-Purpose Adhesive), the retention rat e increased
to 83.3% at 18 months. his behavior of one-bottle SEAs may
be related to their behavior as semipermeable membranes in vitro
and in vivo. , Simpliied SEAs do not provide a hermetic seal
for vital deep dentin as demonstrated by transudation of dentinal
luid across the polymerized adhesives to form luid droplets on
the surface of the adhesive.
Universal Adhesives
Dentists have used dentin adhesives following the adhesion strategy
recommended by the respective manufacturer. With the advent
of universal adhesives dentists are now using the same dentin
adhesive for diferent adhesion strategies (i.e., self-etch, etch-andrinse, or selective enamel etch adhesive), according to each speciic
clinical situation. Because of their multistrategy approach, this
new generation of one-bottle dental adhesives has become very
popular in dentistry.
hese adhesives are basically one-step self-etch adhesives that
can be used under diferent adhesion strategies (see ). -
As one-step SEAs, universal adhesives also beneit from the applica -
tion of an extra hydrophobic bonding resin. he major diference
between traditional one-step SEAs and universal adhesives is that
most universal adhesives contain 10-MDP (and/or other monomers),
which is capable of bonding ionically to hydroxyapatite through
nanolayering.65, he 10-MDP molecule forms stable calciumphosphate salts without causing strong decalciication. he chemical
bonding formed by 10-MDP is more stable in water than that of
other monomers used in the composition of SEAs, such as 4-META
and phenyl-P . Because the nature of the chemical bonding
provided by 10-MDP depends on the concentration of this molecule,
the extent of chemical bonding in universal adhesives is very weak
compared to that observed for the two-step SEA Clearil SE Bond.
Additionally, the presence of HEMA may hamper the chemical
bonding ability of 10-MDP–containing universal adhesives,
because it reduces the formation of MDP-Ca salts.
The active application (rubbing) of 10-MDP–containing
adhesives results in more intense nanolayering than passive applica -
tion.65 It has also been shown that active application results in
higher bond strengths to intact enamel for most universal adhesives
compared to passive application. hese improvements from
rubbing the adhesive on the bonding substrate may be caused by
higher concentration of 10-MPD molecules in intimate contact
with the hydroxyapatite crystals in addition to higher rate of solvent
evaporation from the enamel and dentin surfaces.65
Diferences in the hydroxyapatite structure in dentin and enamel
dictate the interaction pattern of 10-MDP with these substrates.
he lesser amount and smaller hydroxyapatite crystals in dentin
and their criss-cross orientation compared to a more parallel orienta -
tion in enamel makes dentin more receptive to the chemical
interaction between 10-MDP and hydroxyapatite. his interaction
discloses the formation of a nanolayered structure, which is reduced
in enamel compared to dentin.65
Universal adhesives show signs of interfacial bonding
degradation after 12-month water storage when applied either
as self-etch or etch-and-rinse adhesives, although the self-etch
strategy caused less nanoleakage. In spite of the simpliica -
tion of the bonding protocol, universal adhesives will likely in the tubules, which may also result in exposed collagen ibers.
he presence of a hybrid layer that is not completely iniltrated
by the adhesive may increase the stresses in resin–dentin
interfaces.
Research has been conducted on the potential for remineraliza -
tion of the partially iniltrated demineralized collagen inside the
hybrid layer. One of the methods used to remineralize exposed
dentin collagen ibrils is the application of casein phosphopeptideamorphous calcium phosphate (CPP-ACP), which has been shown
to have the potential to induce biomimetic mineralization of dentin
collagen ibrils. Another method with promising results is to
obtain intraibrillar and interibrillar remineralization of a 5μm-
thick layer of demineralized dentin with the inclusion of carboxylic
acid–containing and phosphonic acid–containing polyelectrolytes
as biomimetic analogues in a phosphate-containing l uid. More
recently it has been demonstrated that intermediate precursors of
calcium phosphate biomineralization may be prefabricated for
loading and release with the goal of achieving collagen intraibrillar
mineralization with released luidic intermediate precursors. hese
authors reported that collagen ibrils can be mineralized using
polyacid-stabilized amorphous calcium phosphate loaded with
amine-functionalized mesoporous silica nanoparticles. These
nanoparticles may be included in the composition of dentin
adhesives as controlled release devices for the delivery of the
amorphous calcium phosphate prenucleation clusters to remineralize
deiciently iniltrated hybrid layers.
Despite the prevailing opinion that SEAs cause less postoperative
sensitivity compared with etch-and-rinse systems, recent clinical
studies have shown no relationship between the type of adhesive
and the occurrence of postoperative sensitivity. -
One-Step Self-Etch Adhesives
Continuing the trend toward simpliication, no-rinse self-etch
materials that incorporate the fundamental steps of etching, priming,
and bonding into one solution have become increasingly popular.
In contrast to conventional adhesive systems that contain an
intermediate light-cured, low-viscosity bonding resin to join the
composite restorative material to the primed dentin–enamel
substrate, these one-step SEAs contain uncured ionic monomers
that contact the composite restorative material directly. , heir
acidic unreacted monomers are responsible in part for the incompat -
ibility between these simpliied adhesives and self-cured composites
(discussed later). Additionally, one-step SEAs tend to behave as
semipermeable membranes, facilitating hydrolytic degradation of
the resin–dentin interface. Because these adhesives must be acidic
enough to be able to demineralize enamel and penetrate dentin
smear layers, the hydrophilicity of their resin monomers, usually
organophosphates and carboxylates, also is high. Some of these
resin monomers are too hydrophilic, which makes them liable to
water degradation. ,
One-step SEAs, which have etching, priming, and bonding
functions delivered in a single solution, include AdheSE One
F (Ivoclar Vivadent), All-Bond SE (Bisco Inc.), Bond Force
(Tokuyama Dental Corporation Inc., Tokyo, Japan), Clearil S3
Bond Plus (Kuraray Noritake Dental Inc.), iBOND Self-Etch
(Heraeus Kulzer GmbH, Hanau, Germany), OptiBond All-inOne (Kerr Corporation), and Xeno IV (DENTSPLY Sirona)
(see ). he pH of one-step SEAs afects their clinical
properties. Also, application of multiple coats signiicantly increases
dentin bond strengths and decreases leakage, suggesting that
some of the one-step SEAs might not coat the dentin surface
uniformly.
CHAPTER 5 Fundamental Concept of Enamel and Dentin Adheion
he use of etch-and-rinse adhesive systems on moist dentin is
made possible by incorporation of the organic solvents acetone or
ethanol in the primers or adhesives. Because the solvent can displace
water from the dentin surface and the moist collagen network, it
promotes the infiltration of resin monomers throughout the
nanospaces of the dense collagen web. he moist bonding technique
has been shown repeatedly to enhance bond strengths of etchand-rinse adhesives in vitro because water preserves the porosity
of the collagen network available for monomer interdi fusion. , ,
Studies showed that the excess water after rinsing the etching gel
can be removed with a damp cotton pellet, high-volume suction,
disposable brush, or laboratory tissue paper without adversely
afecting bond strengths. , If the dentin surface is dried with
air in vitro, the collagen mesh may undergo immediate collapse
and prevent resin monomers from penetrating ( Fig. 5.20 ). ,
When etched dentin is dried using an air syringe, in vitro bond
strengths decrease substantially, especially for acetone-based and
(to a lesser extent) ethanol-based dentin adhesive systems. , ,
When water is removed, the elastic characteristics of collagen may
be lost. While in a wet state, wide gaps separate the collagen
molecules from each other. In a dry state, the molecules are
arranged more compactly. his is because extraibrillar spaces in
hydrated type I collagen are illed with water, whereas dried collagen
has fewer extraibrillar spaces open for the penetration of the
monomers included in the adhesive systems. During air-drying,
water that occupies the interibrillar spaces previously illed with
hydroxyapatite crystals is lost by evaporation, res ulting in a decrease
of the volume of the collagen network to about one third of its
original volume. Under the scanning electron microscope, the
adhesive does not seem to penetrate etched intertubular dentin
that has been dried. Under the transmission electron microscope
(TEM), collagen ibrils coalesce into a structure without individual -
ized interibrillar spaces. When air-dried demineralized dentin
is rewetted with water, the collagen matrix may reexpand and
recover its primary dimensions to the levels of the original hydrated
state. , , his spatial reexpansion is a result of the spaces be tween
ibrils being reilled with water, but also reexpansion occurs because
type I collagen itself is capable of undergoing expansion on rehydra -
tion. he stifness of decalciied dentin increases when the tissue
is dehydrated chemically in water-miscible solvents or physically
in air. he increase in stifness is reversed when specimens are undergo the same degradation pattern observed with older
one-step SEAs.
Moit Veru Dry Dentin Surface With
Etch-and-Rine Adheive
Because vital dentin is inherently wet, complete drying of dentin
is diicult to achieve clinically. , Water has been considered
an obstacle for attaining an efective adhesion of resins to dentin,
so research has shifted toward the development of dentin adhesives
that are compatible with humid environments. he “moist bonding”
technique used with etch-and-rinse adhesives prevents the spatial
alterations (i.e., collagen collapse) that occur on drying demineralized
dentin ( Fig. 5.19 ; compare with Fig. 5.13 ). Such alterations
might prevent the monomers from penetrating the labyrinth of
nanochannels formed by dissolution of hydroxyapatite crystals
between collagen ibrils. ,
3 /H9262m
• Fig. 5.19 Scanning electron micrograph of dentin collagen after acid
etching with 35% phosphoric acid. Dentin was air-dried. The intertubular
porosity disappeared as a consequence of the collapse of the collagen
secondary to the evaporation of water that served as a backbone to keep
collagen ibrils raised.
Collapsed CollagenDried Etched Dentin Moist Etched Dentin
Collagen
FibersInterfibrillar
WaterAIR
DentinResidual
Mineral
Crystals
• Fig. 5.20 Collapse of etched dentin by air-drying.
CHAPTER 5 Fundamental Concept of Enamel and Dentin Adheion
the time needed to replace water with ethanol in the dentin collagen
network would make the technique diicult to implement in a
clinical setting.
Role of Water in Self-Etch Adheive
Water plays diferent roles in the bonding mechanisms of self-etch
adhesives and etch-and-rinse adhesives. Unlike etch -and-rinse
adhesives, self-etch systems do not include separate acid-etching
and rinsing steps. The functions of etching and priming are
simultaneously performed by the acidic monomers. Water (10–30
weight percent [wt%]) is added to the hydrophilic formulations
to ionize the acidic methacrylate monomers (usually phosphate
or carboxylic) and to solubilize calcium and phosphate ions that
form from the interaction of the monomers with dentin and
enamel. , When SEAs are formulated, a compromise must be
made to provide suicient water for adequate ionization of the
acidic monomers without lowering the monomer concentration
to levels that would jeopardize the bonding eicacy. Increasing
the water concentration from 0 to 60 volume percent (vol%) in
the acidic primer resulted in improved acidic monomer ionization
and increased depth of dentin demineralization created by the
acidic monomers. However, increasing the water concentration
dilutes the concentration of the acidic monomer, thereby lowering
the bonding eicacy of the respective adhesive system.
he mechanical properties of one-step SEAs might be signii -
cantly compromised in the presence of water, which is less likely
to occur with two-step SEAs. One-step SEAs have higher water
absorption or solubility than two-step self-etch adhesives. ,
Role of Protein in Dentin Bonding
Despite eforts to generate new dental materials that can enhance
dentin bonding, the stability of the hybrid layer and thus long-term
acceptable bond strength are still a challenge. Stability of the hybrid
layer due to hydrolytic degradation of dentin collagen ibrils that
have been exposed by acid etching of dentin and not completely
embedded by adhesive during the bonding procedure continues
to be extensively studied. he degradation is enzyme driven and
compromises the hybrid layer, which becomes the restoration’s
weakest link. , his observation is important because acid etching
demineralizes dentin and may leave a layer of exposed collagen at
the bottom of the hybrid layer. , However, it has been reported
that when demineralized dentin is restored with an adhesive system,
the demineralized layer might undergo remineralization within 4
months.
Some evidence also suggests that phosphoric acid causes
denaturation of collagen ibrils in dentin. , Concerns about
potential efects of phosphoric acid on dentin collagen arose from
its known susceptibility to other acids such as bacterial lactic acid
in caries processes. However, it has been demonstrated that
treatment of collagen with phosphoric acid does not signiicantly
alter the biochemistry of dentin collagen as per analyses of collagen
intramolecular and intermolecular cross-links. Although evidence
suggests that longer etching times might denature the collagen
ibril, the normal 15-second etch does not change the spatial
coniguration of the collagen molecule. Etching for 15 seconds
does not compromise the bonding substrate.
Collagen type I is the main organic component of dentin.69
he mineralized dentin structure carries a well-compressive load,
as mineral crystals minimize movement and deformation of the
collagen. In physiologic conditions (dentin formation), particles rehydrated in water. Rewetting dentin after air-drying to check
for the enamel frosty aspect is an acceptable clinical procedure.68,
In addition, pooled moisture should not remain on the tooth
because excess water can dilute the primer and render it less efec -
tive. , A glistening hydrated surface is preferred ( Fig. 5.21 ).
Although having adequate dentin surface moisture is important,
agitation of the hydrophilic primer/adhesive during application
of two-step etch-and-rinse adhesives may be critical for optimal
adhesive iniltration into the demineralized collage n network. hat
procedure also may aid in the evaporation of residual water in the
adhesive and hybrid layers preventing nanoleakage. , , It is
speculated that active rubbing of the adhesive compresses the
demineralized collagen network, which is illed with the adhesive
upon pressure release and expansion of the collagen. A recent
clinical trial compared the performance of Prime & Bond NT
using no rubbing action, slight rubbing action, and vigorous rubbing
action in the restoration of NCCLs. While retention rates of 82.5%
were found for the no rubbing action and slight rubbing action
groups, 92.5% of the restorations in the vigorous rubbing action
group were retained after 24 months of clinical service.
In case universal adhesives are applied using an etch-and-rinse
strategy, it may not be necessary to leave dentin moist for two
reasons:
(1) Universal adhesives contain 10% to 20% water, which may
be able to rewet dried dentin. heir bond strengths to dentin that
has been air-dried for 10 seconds is similar to their bond strengths
to moist dentin.
(2) Manufacturers recommend the evaporation of the solvent
with air for 5 seconds after the application of the universal adhesive
(10 seconds for All-Bond Universal); however, 5 seconds is not
enough to evaporate the water added to the composition of the
adhesive. If dentists leave dentin moist prior to applying universal
adhesives, the amount of residual water left into t he dentin substrate
after air-drying will reduce bond strengths and substantially increase
hydrolytic degradation of the bonded interface.
Recently, some in vitro research has evaluated the possibility
of replacing water with ethanol in the etched dentin collagen
network, a technique known as “ethanol wet-bonding.” , When
acid-etched dentin is saturated with % ethanol instead of water,
the bond strengths of both hydrophilic and hydrophobic resins
increase signiicantly. , Although ethanol wet-bonding appears
promising, it involves an extra step of replacing rinse water with
% ethanol, and no clinical studies are available. Additionally,
• Fig. 5.21 Clinical aspect of moist dentin—a glistening appearance
without accumulation of water. (From Rubinstein S, Nidetz A: The art and
science of the direct posterior restoration: Recreating form, color, and
translucency, Alpha Omegan (1):30–35, .)
CHAPTER 5 Fundamental Concept of Enamel and Dentin Adheion
preserve the integrity of the hybrid layer and reduce the rate of
resin–dentin bond degradation within the irst few months after
restoration. , When chlorhexidine is used, the integrity of the
hybrid layer and the magnitude of bond strengths are preserved
in aged resin–dentin interfaces. - When phosphoric acid is
applied without the subsequent application of chlorhexidine, it
does not inhibit the collagenolytic activity of mineralized dentin.
In contrast, the use of chlorhexidine after acid etching—even in
very low concentrations—strongly inhibits that activity.
However, the role of MMPs in dentin bonding is not completely
clear for several r easons: (1) he immunoreactivity of MMP-2 is
localized preferably in predentin and around the DEJ in teeth
from subjects age 12 to 30 years; (2) MMP-2 and MMP-9 are
both gelatinases and ar e unable to degrade the collagen ibrils
directly, so the initial degradation step has to be performed by
another mechanism; (3) MMPs do not inhibit the degradation of
bonded interfaces created by self-etch adhesives; and (4) preservation
of the hybrid layer can occur even in the absence of MMP
inhibitors. -
Microleakage and Nanoleakage
“Microleakage” is deined as the passage of bacteria and their
toxins between restoration margins and tooth preparation walls.
Clinically, microleakage becomes important when one considers
that pulpal irritation is more likely caused by bacteria than by
chemical toxicity of restorative materials. - An adhesive restora -
tion might not bond suiciently to etched dentin to prevent gap
formation at margins. Several studies have shown that the pulpal
response to restorative materials is related to the degree of marginal
leakage. - Bacteria are able to survive and proliferate within
the luid-illed marginal gaps under composite restorations. If the
restoration is hermetically sealed, bacteria may not be able to
survive. ,
Despite the common presence of marginal gaps, their occurrence
at the resin–dentin interface does not necessarily cause debonding
of the restoration. Despite having shown excellent marginal seal
in vitro, OptiBond (Kerr Corporation) does not completely seal
the interface in vivo.94 Other reports showed excellent clinical
retention of OptiBond and OptiBond FL in Class V lesions at 12
and 13 years, respectively.94, , If a dentin adhesive system does
not adhere intimately to the dentin substrate, an interfacial gap
eventually develops; bacteria may penetrate through this gap and
cause demineralization of the substrate around the restoration
margins. Despite the probability of an incomplete dentin margin
seal, Class V clinical studies using etch-and-rinse dentin adhesive
systems reported no findings of pulpal inflammation or
necrosis.76,
Important to point out is that in vitro microleakage measure -
ments for a speciic adhesive material often do not correlate with
clinical behavior of the same material. Additionally, silver nitrate
penetration may be a particularly demanding test of marginal seal
because silver ions are smaller than the bacteria that colonize the
oral cavity.
When all margins of the restoration are in enamel, the quality
and integrity of the bonds remain unchanged with time, at least
in vitro. Degradation of the bonds might result from hydrolysis,
which occurs either in the adhesive resin or in the collagen ibril
that are not fully enveloped by the adhesive in the hybrid layer,
especially when margins are in dentin. - he degree of degrada -
tion of the bonded interface is more pronounced with simpliied
adhesives (i.e., one-step self-etch and two-step etch-and-rinse are deposited within (intraibrillar) and on the surface (interibrillar)
of collagen ibrils. , Structures such as bone and dentin have
different mechanical properties from nonmineralized tissues.
Mineralized structures are much stifer, and although they tolerate
compression well, they cannot extend much in tension. When
phosphoric acid treatment removes the mineral around and within
collagen ibrils, the tension and compressive strength of the collagen
change. hen, the cross-linking of collagen ibrils is extremely
important in providing the mechanical and adaptive response. ,
In this regard, hydration also plays a major role. In hydrated and
nonmineralized collagen, hydrogen bonds form between collagen
and water, which allows for slipping and movement. However, as
the collagen is dried, bonds form directly between collagen molecules
and within ibrils, preventing sliding and stifening the structure.
With dehydration, the stress point lowers and collagen ibrils break
more easily. In dentin bonding, ideally collagen should be
demineralized as minimally as possible, keeping the demineralized
collagen hydrated and iniltrated with a hydrophilic adhesive to
ensure proper penetration within the exposed collagen ibrils.
Ninety percent of the protein content of dentin is type I collagen
and the remaining are noncollagenous proteins. he noncollagenous
proteins fall into several categories: proteoglycans (PGs), SIBLINGs,
growth factors, matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), serum proteins,
among others. A few of these noncollagenous proteins act as
nucleators for mineral growth and dentin mineralization. he most
characterized dentin mineral nucleator is dentin phosphoprotein
(DPP). his protein is able to bind calcium and present it to
collagen at the mineralization front during the formation of
dentin. It contains a large number of aspartic acid residues and
thus is acidic. Biomimetic analogs of such proteins tha t are as
acidic as DPP are able to create amorphous calcium phosphate
precursors and to bind to dentin collagen. - Polyacrylic,
polycarboxylic, and polyvinylphosphonic acids have been used as
analogs of dentin noncollagenous phosphoproteins and have been
able to induce intraibrillar mineralization within hybrid layers
when exposed to a remineralization media containing a calcium
hydroxide–releasing material. -
Another noncollagenous protein category of importance in
dentin bonding is the MMP family. Matrix metalloproteinases are
zinc-dependent and calcium-dependent endopeptidases capable
of degrading all extracellular matrix components. - In ,
one study suggested that the direct inhibition of the MMP activity
by chlorhexidine might explain the beneicial efects of chlorhexidine
in the treatment of periodontitis. Chlorhexidine was irst used
in dentin bonding as a dentin disinfectant prior to the application
of the dentin adhesive. SEM revealed that chlorhexidi ne debris
remained on the dentin surface and within the tubules of etched
dentin after rinsing, but chlorhexidine had no signiicant efect
on the dentin shear bond strengths.
More recently, research has shifted toward the preservation of
the hybrid layer through the inhibition of speciic dentin proteases
capable of degrading collagen, using chlorhexidine as a protease
inhibitor. Collagen ibrils that are not encapsulated by resin
might be vulnerable to degradation by endogenous MMPs after
acid etching. Collagenolytic and gelatinolytic activities found
in partially demineralized dentin imply the existence of MMP in
human dentin. Dentin contains gelatinases (MMP-2 and
MMP-9), collagenase (MMP-8), and enamelysin (MMP-20 ). -
hese enzymes are trapped within the mineralized dentin matrix
during odontogenesis. ,
Dentin collagenolytic and gelatinolytic activities can be overcome
by protease inhibitors, indicating that MMP inhibition might
CHAPTER 5 Fundamental Concept of Enamel and Dentin Adheion
Biocompatibility
Besides demineralizing the dentin surface, phosphoric acid removes
the smear lay er and opens the oriices of the tubules (see Fig.
5.12).67, Despite past apprehension about potential acid penetra -
tion into the dentin tubules and pulp space, the interaction of
etchants with dentin is limited to the supericial 1 to 7 μm.67,
It is unlikely that the acid is directly responsible for any injury to
the pulp. , Acid penetration occurs primarily along the tubules,
with penetration of intertubular dentin occurring at a lower
rate. , he efects of etchants on dentin are limited by the
bufering efect of hydroxyapatite and other dentin components,
including collagen, which may act as a barrier that reduces the
rate of demineralization. , Marshall et al. elucidated the
importance of pH with regard to the efects of acids on dentin
surfaces. Etching rates increase dramatically with lower pH.
Small diferences in pH between acidic gels of similar phosphoric
acid concentration may be responsible for distinct depths of dentin
demineralization. Manufacturers add thickeners to facilitate handling
and other modiiers (e.g., bufers, surfactants, and colorants) to
their etching gels, which may contribute to that phenomenon.
Several early studies suggested that acidic components included
in restorative materials such as silicate cements would trigger adverse
pulp reactions. , For several decades, the development of adhesive
systems was limited by the belief that acids applied to dentin
during restorative procedures caused pulpal inlammation. he
use of bases and liners was considered essential to protect the pulp
from the toxicity of restorative materials. his concept has, however,
changed over the years. , , ,
Dentin adhesive systems are well tolerated by the pulp-dentin
complex in the absence of bacterial infection. To prevent bacterial
infection, restorations must be hermetically sealed. he pulp response
to dentin adhesives, when teeth are restored in an ideal clinical
environment, has been studied using histologic assessment of animal
pulps or in human premolars extracted for orthodontic reasons
and in third molars extracted for surgical reasons. , , - Some
clinical studies also have reported normal pulp responses after the
application of adhesive on the dentin-pulp complex when the pulp
is macroscopically exposed, although reports involved only one
tooth. , Another study showed that the newest dentin adhesive
systems are not harmful when applied to exposed pulps. Several
reports have shown however that etching the pulp and applying
a dentin adhesive directly on the exposed pulp tissue results in
severe inlammation and eventual formation of pulpal abscesses. -
he solution for this disparity would be long-term follow-up of
patients in whom the pulp was treated with acid and adhesive.
Ethical concerns do not allow the routine use of pulpal etching
in patients. It is known however that the thicker the remaining
dentin left between the pulpal aspect of the preparation and the
pulp, the better the prognosis for that speciic pulp. he concept
of pulp capping remains a controversial topic.
Adverse pulpal reactions after a restorative procedure are not
caused by the material used in that procedure but by bacteria
remaining in, or penetrating, the preparation. In some cases, adverse
reactions are caused by a combination of factors, as follows:
1. Bacterial invasion of the pulp, either from the tooth preparation
or from an existing carious lesion286,
2. Bacterial penetration into the pulp caused by a faulty
restoration286
3. Pressure gradient caused by excessive desiccation or by excessive
pressure during cementation328,
4. T raumatic injuries330,331adhesives). A nearly 50% reduction in bond strengths of the 24-hour
control has been reported at 1 year with a one-step SEA.
he term “nanoleakage” has been used to describe small porosities
in the hybrid layer or at the transition between the hybrid layer
and the mineralized dentin that allow the penetration of minuscule
particles of a silver nitrate dye. When ammoniacal silver nitrate
is used, silver deposits penetrate the hybrid layer formed by either
etch-and-rinse or self-etch adhesive materials. Penetration of
ammoniacal silver nitrate results in two distinct patterns of nanoleak -
age: (1) a spotted pattern in the hybrid layer of self-etch adhesives,
which might be caused by incomplete resin iniltration ( Fig. 5.22A ),
and (2) a reticular pattern that occurs in the adhesive layer, most
likely caused by areas where water was not totally removed from
the bonding area (see Fig. 5.22B ). he term “water trees” is
associated with porosities in the polymerized adhesive layer.
Silver uptake in hybrid layers formed by one-step SEAs is associated
with areas of increased permeability within the polymerized resin
from which water was incompletely removed. he residual water
prevents complete polymerization. here has been, however,
some discussion regarding the clinical relevance of nanoleakage
and the methods used to assess it.
A
D3-Ag 8.0kV 13.7mm x 2.50k YAGBSE 20.0 /H9262mB
• Fig. 5.22 Nanoleakage under the electron microscope. A, Spotted
pattern in the hybrid layer formed by a one-step self-etch adhesive under
the transmission electron microscope. B, Reticular pattern and “water
trees” in the adhesive layer formed by a one-step self-etch adhesive under
the scanning electron microscope in backscattered mode.
CHAPTER 5 Fundamental Concept of Enamel and Dentin Adheion
results of in vitro bond strength tests have been validated with
clinical results because improvements seen in the laboratory
environment from the earlier generations to contemporary adhesive
systems hav e been conirmed in clinical trials.
A systematic analysis of the correlation between in vitro marginal
adaptation and the outcome of clinical trials of Class V restorations
revealed that the correlation is weak and only present for studies
that used the same composite for the in vitro and in vivo evalua -
tion. Another systematic review found a correlation between
bond strength data and clinical retention rates of Class V restora -
tions, speciically when the bond strength specimens were aged
prior to testing. he clinical parameter in Class V restorations
that is more directly related to bond strength data is marginal
adaptation. Clinical studies with dentin adhesive systems are
expensive for manufacturers and take at least 18 months to 3 years.
Cost is a major concern, in part because of the constant develop -
ments in the area of adhesion, making new materials quickly
obsolete. N o inancial incentive exists for the manufacturer to
invest in a clinical study of a material that may not be on the
market by the time the study is concluded. Consequently, in vitro
studies are still used predominantly by manufacturers to anticipate
the clinical behavior of their materials.
Several factors contribute to the questionable use of in vitro
tests to predict clinical behavior. Among others, variables including
age and storage conditions of the teeth used, dentin depth, degree
of sclerosis, tooth surface to be bonded, dentin roughness, and
type of test used frequently are not controllable.4,5, , According
to some authors, one of the major drawbacks of laboratory bond
strength testing is the usual lack of simulated pulpal pressure to
replicate the pulpal pressure that occurs in vivo. Other authors
have reported, however, that the pulpal pressure does not interfere
signiicantly with bond strength results.
Clinical Performance
Several clinical factors may inluence the success of an adhesive
restoration. he mineral content of dentin increases in diferent
situations, including aged dentin, dentin beneath a carious lesion,
and dentin exposed to the oral cavity in NCCLs in which the
tubules become obliterated with tricalcium phosphate crys -
tals. , , he dentin that undergoes these compositional changes
is called sclerotic dentin and is much more resistant to acid etching
than “normal” dentin. , Consequently, the penetration of a
dentin adhesive is limited. - Irrespective of the use of a etchand-rinse or a self-etch technique, bonding to sclerotic dentin in
NCCLs has resulted in low bond strengths. , Additionally, the
clinical efectiveness of dentin adhesives is less in sclerotic cervical
lesions than in normal dentin. , Nevertheless, some speciic
dentin adhesives may perform better in sclerotic dentin than in
normal dentin.
Some evidence suggests that masticatory forces not only might
cause NCCLs but also might contribute to the failure of Class V
restorations. , , Bruxism or any other eccentric movement
may generate lateral forces that cause concentration of stresses
around the cervical area of the teeth. Although this stress may be
of very low magnitude, the fatigue caused by cyclic stresses may
cause failure of bonds between resin and dentin. Considering the
challenges to successfully bond to NCCLs, these have been used
often as ultimate clinical test to assess adhesives.
he type of composite used might play an important role in
clinical longevity of Class V, as well as Class II, restorations. ,
Composites shrink as they polymerize, but the amount of shrinkage 5. Iatrogenic tooth preparation—excessive pressure, hea t, or
friction328,
6. Pulpal temperature rise induced during the polymerization of
composites, especially lowable composites333,
7. Stress derived from polymerization contraction of composites
and adhesives335
8. Unpolymerized resin monomers336
With regard to the biocompatibility issue, tooth preparations
with enamel peripheries are important. When all margins are in
enamel, polymerization shrinkage stresses at the interface are
counteracted by strong enamel adhesion. Marginal gaps are less
likely to form, and the restoration is sealed against bacteria.
Relevance of In Vitro Studie
One of the major concerns with laboratory bond strength testing
is the wide range of results obtained for the same material in
diferent testing sites. It is not an uncommon occurrence for the
same dentin adhesive system to have average shear bond strengths
of 20 MPa in one laboratory and bond strengths less than 10 MPa
in another.84, Also, dentin bond strengths for a speciic dentin
adhesive vary depending on the speciic test used—microtensile,
shear, or microshear. Some perplexity exists that no correlation
can be established between bond strength and degree of resin
penetration into the hybrid layer. , To illustrate this discrepancy,
some reports have suggested that dentin adhesives do not penetrate
the whole depth of the demineralized dentin layer but still result
in bond strengths greater than 20 MPa. , Intuitively, one would
expect an inverse relationship between bond strength and microleak -
age, but that relationship has not been conirmed.
he microtensile bond strength testing methodology has become
popular in recent decades. his method allows for the assessment
of bond strengths using bonded surfaces with a cross-sectional
area in the range of 1 to 1.5 mm2 or even less ( Fig. 5.23 ). Micro -
tensile testing has several advantages over conventional shear and
tensile bond strength methods for the following reasons:
1. It permits the use of only one tooth to fabricate several bonded
dentin-resin rods.
2. It allows for testing substrates of clinical signiicance, such as
carious dentin, cervical sclerotic dentin, and enamel.
3. It results in fewer defects occurring in the small-area specimen s,
as relected in higher bond strengths.
4. It allows for the testing of regional diferences in bond strengths
within the same tooth.
However, the results of the microtensile bond strength methodol -
ogy vary in function of several testing parameters, including storage
time, the cross-sectional shape of the microspecimen, remaining
dentin thickness, and jig design. ,
Although in vitro bond strength studies are only rough categoriz -
ing tools for evaluating the relative eicacy of bonding materials,
they are excellent tools for screening new materials and for compar -
ing the same parameter among diferent adhesive systems. he
• Fig. 5.23 Preparation of specimens for microtensile bond strength
testing.
CHAPTER 5 Fundamental Concept of Enamel and Dentin Adheion
discoloration. his meta-analysis concluded that roughened dentin
and rubber-dam use r esulted in a statistically signiicantly higher
retention rate than unprepared dentin or no rubber dam. Enamel
beveling howev er had no inluence on any of the examined variables.
Overall, one-step SEAs had a signiicantly worse clinical index
than two-step SEAs and three-step etch-and-rinse adhesives.
Because universal adhesives are fairly recent materials, systematic
reviews of clinical studies are not yet available. T wo clinical trials
have reported acceptable clinical efectiveness for the irst universal
adhesive introduced to the market, Scotchbond Universal Adhesive
(Single Bond Universal in some regions) (3M Oral Care). , A
3-year clinical study compared this adhesive applied in diferent
adhesion strategies (self-etch, selective enamel etch, etch-and-rinse
applied on moist dentin, etch-and-rinse applied on air-dried dentin)
and concluded that while there was no statistical diference among
bonding strategies, there were signs of marginal degradation when
the universal adhesive was applied in full self-etch mode.
In summary, results from recent clinical studies and systematic
reviews suggest that chemical bonding to dentin calcium may play
a crucial role in stable adhesion to NCCLs, as GIC-based materials
and mild two-step SEAs result in excellent retention rate. Roughen -
ing dentin in NCCLs may increase retention rate, whereas enamel
beveling does not seem to be a signiicant factor. Although there
is conlicting data on the inluence of rubber-dam is olation, its
use may decrease the failure rate of restorations in NCCLs. GICbased materials are still the standard to restore NCCLs in terms
of retention rate.
Incompatibility Iue With Self-Cure and
Dual-Cure Compoite
Chemically activated and dual-activated composites still have
signiicant use in restorative dentistry, especially in areas of prepara -
tions with limited access to light. Examples include crown founda -
tions, bonded posts, and ceramic and composite inlay s, onlays,
and crowns.
Several studies have reported incompatibility between speciic
light-cured adhesives and chemically activated comp osites. , ,
In one study, Prime & Bond NT, which contains PENTA, a
monomer with an acidic phosphate group, did not bond to a
self-cured composite unless the adhesive was mixed with a sulinic
acid activator. In another study, the reductions in mean bond
strength of adhesives decreased by 45% to 91% when self-cured
composite was used instead of light-cured composite. he most
drastic reduction was associated with Prime & Bond NT. he
inhibition of polymerization of the self-cured composites by
adhesives with speciic compositions seems to be related directly
to the pH of the adhesive. One-Step, which caused the least
reduction in bond strengths between self-cured and light-cured
composite in that speciic study, was the adhesive with the highest
pH. Prime & Bond NT had the lowest (more acidic) pH.
Similarly, an adverse chemical interaction occurs between catalytic
components of chemically cured composites and acidic one-step
self-etch adhesives. , In contrast, despite the acidity of their
primers, some two-step self-etch adhesives might be compatible
with self-cure and dual-cure composites, owing to the presence of
a thick resin layer that is less permeable and more hydrophobic
than the layer formed with all-in-one systems. ,
he issue related to the acidity of one-step adhesives also applies
to recently introduced universal adhesives. his issue is particularly
relevant because the indication for universal adhesives has been
expanded to indirect restorations, including those made of depends on the inorganic load of each speciic composite. Microilled
composites have a low elastic (or Young) modulus, which means
that they are better able to relieve stresses caused by polymerization
or by tooth lexure. , Materials that have a higher Young modulus
do not relieve stresses by low; they are unable to compensate for
the stresses accumulated during polymerization. hese stresses
subsequently might be transferred to the adhesive i nterface and
cause debonding. As adhesives have improved however, restorative
material stifness might be less important. A 2-year clinical study
of a three-step etch-and-rinse adhesive showed no diference in
retention rates of Class V composite restorations based on stifness
of the restorative material. Another clinical study reported that
composite stifness did not afect the clinical longevity of cervical
composite restorations.
A systematic review published in analyzed the literature
published from January to May on the clinical efective -
ness of adhesives to restore NCCLs to determine if simpliied
adhesives were as clinically efective as conventional three-step
adhesives in terms of retention rate. Although GIC-based materials
are usually outperformed by adhesively bonded restorations in in
vitro studies, their clinical retention to tooth structure is more
efective and durable than any other type of adhesive material.
hree-step etch-and-rinse adhesives and two-step SEAs showed a
clinically reliable clinical performance. he clinical efectiveness
of two-step etch-and-rinse adhesives was less favorable, while the
worst clinical performance was found for one-step SEAs.
A meta-analysis published in , for which 50 clinical studies
and 40 adhesive systems matched the inclusion criteria, reported
that the clinical performance of dentin adhesives in NCCLs up
to 3 years is signiicantly inluenced by the type of adhesive system
used and whether or not the dentin/enamel is roughened. GICbased materials, two-step SEAs, and three-step etch-and-rinse
adhesives performed better than adhesives of the other categories.
he use of rubber dam isolation did not increase the chance of
survival of restorations in this meta-analysis.
Peumans et al. conducted a systematic review in which they
analyzed annual failure rates in NCCLs in publications, including
AADR/IADR abstracts, up to . Dentin adhesive materials
were divided into six main categories: three-step etch-and-rinse
adhesives, two-step etch-and-rinse adhesives, two-step SEAs, one-step
SEAs, GIC-based materials, and self-adhesive composites. Both
classes of SEAs were further subdivided as “mild” and “intermediately
strong” (pH ≥1.5) and “strong” (pH <1.5). GIC-based materials
had a 2% annual failure rate (AFR), which was the lowest for all
adhesive classes analyzed. he AFR for two-step mild SEAs was
2.5% and for three-step etch-and-rinse adhesives was 3.1%. Higher
AFRs were measured for one-step strong SEAs (5.4%), two-step
etch-and rinse adhesives (5.8%), and two-step strong SEAs (7.9%).
Selective enamel etching did not signiicantly inluence the retention
rate of SEAs.
Another recent meta-analysis analyzed prospective clinical trials
on restorations of NCCLs with an observation period of at least
18 months. Eighty-one studies involving experiments for
47 adhesives matched the inclusion criteria. he respecti ve authors
concluded that 12.3% of the cervical restorations were lost, 27.9%
exhibited marginal discoloration, and 34.6% exhibited marginal
deterioration after 5 years of service. he clinical indexa was 17.4%
of failures after 5 years and 32.3% after 8 years; however, a great
variability was measured for retention loss and marginal
aClinical index = (4xR + 2xMD + 1xMI) / 7 (R = Retention; MD = marginal
discoloration; MI = detectable margins).
CHAPTER 5 Fundamental Concept of Enamel and Dentin Adheion
he use of dentin adhesives to treat hypersensitive root surfaces
has gained popularity.27,28 Reductions in sensitivity can result from
formation of resin tags and a hybrid layer388 when a dentin adhesive
is used. he precipitation of proteins from the dentinal luid in
the tubules may also account for the eicacy of desensitizing
solutions. Other factors may be involved in the action of dentin
desensitizing solutions. he primer of the multibottle adhesive
system All-Bond 2 has a desensitizing efect, even wi thout consistent
resin tag formation. In a clinical study using the primer of the
original GLUMA adhesive system (an aqueous solution of 5%
glutaraldehyde and 35% HEMA, currently marketed as GLUMA
Desensitizer [Heraeus Kulzer GmbH]), the desensitizing solution
was applied to crown preparations. he authors concluded that
GLUMA primer reduced dentin sensitivity through a protein
denaturation process with concomitant changes in dentin perme -
ability. Glutaraldehyde has long been used as a fixative that
cross-links proteins. his theory has been supported by studies
using confocal microscopy, which found the formation of transversal
septa occluding the dentinal tubules after application of GLUMA
Desensitizer. Another study evaluated dentin permeability in
dogs up to 3 months. At the end of this period, GLUMA Desen -
sitizer had the lowest permeability value, providing a longer lasting
tubule-occluding efect. Most desensitizing agents, however, are
able to greatly decrease dentin permeability.
he same glutaraldehyde-based desensitizing agent has been
suggested as a rewetting agent on etched dentin to help prevent
postoperative sensitivity under posterior composite restorations. ,
In spite of the favorable in vitro bond strengths, one clinical pilot
study found that the operative technique might be more relevant
to prevent postoperative sensitivity than the use of the glutaraldehydebased desensitizer. A randomized clinical trial of Class I restora -
tions in molars and premolars included a glutaraldehyde-containing
two-step etch-and-rinse adhesive, a glutaraldehydecontaining
one-step SEA, and a glutaraldehyde-free two-step etch-and-rinse
adhesive. here was no diference in postoperative sensitivity after
48 hours and after 7 days.
he use of a dentin desensitizer before cementing full-coverage
crowns is supported by studies that showed dentin-desensitizing
solutions do not interfere with crown retention, regardless of the
type of luting cement used. ,
Adhesion to Root Canal Dentin
Adhesive strategies used in root dentin are similar to those used
in coronal dentin. here are however diferences in terms of bonding
substrate and the restorative technique.
A. Subtrate for Adheion
Dentin located in the root walls of teeth that have been endodonti -
cally treated contains 9% less moisture than root dentin of vital
teeth. hat is a positive feature for dentin adhesion. However,
the area occupied by the more calciied transparent dentin in the
root, also called sclerotic dentin, , widens with aging. Addition -
ally the apical area of root dentin has fewer tubules than the
occlusal part.
he cutting instruments and cutting speed used for root dentin
during endodontic therapy, as well as the irrigatio n methods (includ -
ing chelating and deproteinizing solutions), are diferent from those
used for coronal dentin, which results in diferent composition of
the respective smear layers and dentin substrate. , Diferently
from the smear layer formed during a conventional coronal prepara -
tion, the morphology of the smear layer formed in the root canal
walls includes two zones. he deepest part of endodontic smear glass-matrix ceramics and oxide-based ceramics, wit hout the need
for additional primers. - While some current universal adhesives
contain different functional monomers, the compatibility of
universal adhesives with chemically activated and dual-cured
resin-based composite materials has not been thoroughly investi -
gated, especially taking into consideration that the pH of universal
adhesives varies from to 1.6 to 3.2. , Among others, Clearil
Universal Bond (pH = 2.3, Kuraray Noritake Dental Inc.), One
Coat 7 Universal (pH = 2.8, Coltene), Prime & Bond Elect (pH
= 2.5, DENTSPLY Sirona), and Scotchbond Universal Adhesive
(pH = 2.7, 3M Oral Care) are examples of universal adhesives for
which the respective manufacturer recommends mixing the universa l
adhesive with a chemical activator when used with composite
materials that contain a chemical activator, such as dual-cured
buildup composite materials and dual-cured resin cements. AdheSE
Universal (pH = 2.5–3, Ivoclar Vivadent) and All-Bond Universal
(pH = 3.1–3.2, Bisco Inc.) are examples of universal adhesives for
which the respective manufacturer does not recommend adding
a chemical activator due the relatively high pH of the adhesive
solution. he manufacturer of the universal adhesive Xeno Select
(DENTSPLY Sirona, also known as Prime & Bond One Select in
some countries) does not recommend this adhesive for any indirect
restorations due to its low pH (1.6).
All current universal adhesives that are recommended for indirect
restorations resulted in high bond strengths to sandblasted zirconia
if used in light-cured mode (without adding a dual-cured activator)
with a dual-cured amine-free resin cement (NX3, Kerr Corpora -
tion). his may explain why the manufacturer of Scotchbond
Universal Adhesive recommends combining the adhesive with its
proprietary amine-free dual-cured resin cement without the need
to mix the adhesive with the respective chemical activator. he
same adhesive must be mixed with the chemical activator if it is
used with a conventional dual-cured resin cement based on the
peroxide-amine redox system.
Expanded Clinical Indication for
Dentin Adheive
Desensitization
Dentin hypersensitivity is a common clinical condition that is
diicult to treat because the treatment outcome is not consistently
successful. Most authorities agree that the hydrodynamic theory
best explains dentin hypersensitivity. he equivalency of various
hydrodynamic stimuli has been evaluated from measurements of
the luid movement induced in vitro and relating this to the
hydraulic conductance of the same dentin specimen. here are
other mechanisms responsible for tooth sensitivity including those
triggered by dental whitening agents.
Patients may complain of discomfort when teeth are subjected
to temperature changes, osmotic gradients such as t hose caused
by sweet or salty foods, or even tactile stimuli. he cervical area
of teeth is the most common site of hypersensitivity. Cervical
hypersensitivity may be caused not only by chemical erosion but
also by mechanical abrasion or even occlusal stresses. ,
heories about the transmission of pain stimuli in dentin sensitiv -
ity suggest that pain is ampliied when the dentinal tubules are
open to the oral cavity. , Dentin hypersensitivity can be a major
problem for periodontal patients who frequently have gingival
recession and exposed root surfaces. he relationship between dentin
hypersensitivity and the patency of dentin tubules in vivo has been
established; occlusion of the tubules seems to decrease that
sensitivity.
CHAPTER 5 Fundamental Concept of Enamel and Dentin Adheion
also suggested that self-adhesive resin cements may improve the
retention of glass iber posts into the root canal, while being
less technique sensitive.
here is some controversy regarding the use of eugenol-containing
sealers and their inluence on the retention of luted posts, as eugenol
is a phenolic component that can scavenge free radicals and delay
or inhibit the polymerization of resin-based materials. Some
authors have reported lower bond strengths to root canal dentin
when eugenol-based sealers were used with the root canal treat -
ment. - Other authors have reported no signiicant diferences
in bond strengths to root canal dentin when eugenol-based sealers
were used. ,
Unilled controls revealed signiicantly higher retentive post
strengths compared to root-illed groups indicating that remnants
of sealer might hamper adhesion inside the root canal. , When
the post is luted 1 week after the completion of the root canal
treatment, bond strengths to root canal dentin are not compromise d
regardless of the presence of eugenol in the endodontic sealer. ,
Indirect Adhesive Restorations
Some current dentin adhesive systems bond to various substrates
besides dentin.7, , - Developments in adhesion technology
have led to new indications for bonding to tooth structure, such
as indirect ceramic and resin-based restorations (crowns, inlays,
onlays, and veneers). he use of a dentin/enamel adhesive system
in conjunction with a resin cement provides durable bonding of
indirect restorations to tooth structure.13,
A. Gla-Matrix Ceramic
Silica-based or glass-matrix ceramics434 are still extensively used
for porcelain veneers, inlays/onlays, and single crowns. Examples
of glass-matrix ceramics are feldspathic porcelain, leucite-reinforced,
and lithium disilicate–reinforced ceramics. Glass-matrix ceramic
restorations must be etched internally with ~5% to ~10% hydro -
luoric acid (HF) for 20 to seconds - to create retentive
microporosities ( Fig. 5.25 ) analogous to those created in enamel
by phosphoric acid etching. HF must be rinsed of thoroughly
with running water. he adhesion of a resin luting cement to
glass-matrix ceramics is achieved through a combination of mechani -
cal retention from HF etching and chemical adhesion provided
by the silane coupling agent to achieve durable adhesion.13, Etched
porcelain is an inorganic substrate, which silane makes more
receptive to organic materials, the adhesive system, and resin cement.
Silane coupling agents were introduced in to bond organic
with inorganic substances. In , this technology was trans -
ferred to dentistry to couple inorganic iller particles with Bis-GMA
resin to form a composite resin. - After rinsing of the HF and
air-drying, a silane coupling agent is applied on the etched glassmatrix ceramics intaglio surface and air-dried. he silane acts as
a primer because it modiies the surface characteristics of etched
glass-matrix ceramics. he application of a silane solution on
HF-etched surfaces increases bond strengths between resin-based
composite materials and glass-matrix ceramics up to 50% compared
to HF alone, including bond strengths obtained with feldspathic
porcelain and lithium disilicate–reinforced ceramic blocks. ,
With the introduction of universal one-bottle adhesives and
new silane solutions containing 10-MDP , some manufacturers do
not recommend the application of a separate silane coupling agent
to HF-etched glass-matrix ceramic surface. Clearil Universal Bond
and Scotchbond Universal Adhesive are examples of universal
adhesives that contain a silane in their composition; however, the
combination of resin monomers with a silane in the same solution layer is 1 to 2 μm thick and similar to that formed in coronal
dentin. he most supericial zone forms smear plugs into the dentinal
tubules to a depth of at least 10 μm, which are not as accessible
to dentin adhesives. Furthermore, there is a great variability in the
composition of this deepest smear layer407, aside from the presence
of more organic tissue remnants and residual gutta-percha and
endodontic sealer in some occasions.
B. Retorative Technique
As discussed, stress relief within a three-dimensional bonded restora -
tion is limited by its C-factor.92 While the magnitude of the C-factor
typically varies from 1 to 5 in direct coronal restorations, the estimated
C-factor in the root canal may exceed , which is extremely
unfavorable for restorative procedures that involve composite-based
materials. he polymerization shrinkage stress also depends on
the degree of compliance (or deformation) of the substrate, which
provides stress relief for luted restorations. As this compliance
is minimal in the root canal space, all root canal luting procedures
that involve radical polymerization resins are challenging.
he concept of anatomic or relined iber post (a glass iber post
relined with composite to reduce the volume of resin luting cement
to retain the glass iber post in the root canal) - has been
recently advocated as a technique to increase the pushout bond
strengths and decrease the polymerization stress associated with
increased volume of resin cement. his concept however does not
seem to take into account the slow chemical polymerization of
resin luting cements used in the root canal. he use of chemically
cured composites, as well as the utilization of hand-mixed resin
materials, may partially compensate for the polymerization stresses
that develop in the interface formed by root dentin and the
composite material. , he polymerization stresses decrease and
the development of the curing stress decreases with increasing of
the layer thickness of chemically cured composites up to a thickness
of 2.7 mm. here is no strong evidence to recommend this
technique over the use a nonrelined glass iber post.
Although both the etch-and-rinse and the self-etch strategies
are still often used to bond to root canal dentin, more recently
the use of self-adhesive resin cements (i.e., no separate dentin
conditioner or adhesive required) has gained popularity for their
user-friendliness and better sealing ability than conventional adhesive
systems ( Fig. 5.24 ). , A systematic review of in vitro studies
• Fig. 5.24 Scanning electron micrograph (backscattered mode) of a
dentin/self-adhesive resin cement/iber post interface. D, Root dentin; C,
self-adhesive resin cement; P, iber post.
CHAPTER 5 Fundamental Concept of Enamel and Dentin Adheion
zirconia. Although the luting material may not be a determining
factor after aging, as long as resin-based cement is used, adhesion
to zirconia is increased after mechanical and chemical surface
pretreatment and the use of a 10-MDP–based r esin cement. he
recommended chemical treatment of the Y-TZP intaglio is the
application of a 10-MDP–based primer or a 10-MDP–based
universal adhesive solution. , , , , Chemical bonding between
10-MDP solutions and Y -TZP substrates was conirmed with
time-of-light secondary ion mass spectroscopy. When dual-cure
resin cements were used on Y-TZP surfaces that had not been
air-abraded, higher bond strengths were achieved when a speciic
10-MDP–containing zirconia primer was used, conirming its
chemical bonding ability. Nevertheless, micromechanical retention
plays a more prominent role in adhesion to Y-TZP than chemical
bonding.
As surface contamination and aging in water have negative
efects on adhesion to zirconia, the residual alumina particles and
other surface contamination must be removed prior to adhesive
luting. he protocol for removing surface contaminants from
intaglio surfaces of Y-TZP restorations includes cleaning the restora -
tion in distilled water or ethanol for at least 3 minutes in an
ultrasonic device, followed by rinsing with copious amounts of
water spray and drying the surface with a strong stream of oil-free
air.
he durability of Y-TZP–based biomaterials has been questioned.
In a phenomenon currently known as low-temperature
degradation of Y-TZP was irst described for applications near
250oC. It was revealed that Y-TZP could undergo a slow supericial
t→m transformation in a humid atmosphere followed by micro -
cracking and loss in strength. In the t→m transformation
of a 3Y-TZP from 70°C to °C in water and in steam was
reported, conirming the susceptibility of Y-TZP to degradation
in humid environments. Stress corrosion by water molecules
was also described as responsible for slow crack propagation in
Y-TZP under cyclic loading. his slow aging under humid
environment was associated with roughening and microcracking,
which led to increased wear and the release of wear debris in the
body from hip replacement zirconia prostheses.
Regarding the oral environment, Y-TZP–based materials may
undergo fatigue and subcritical crack growth under functional
loading with subsequent reduction in lexural strength. , New remains controversial. , Bond strengths to lithium disilicate–
reinforced and leucite-reinforced ceramics are lower when a
silane-containing universal adhesive is used compared to the
application of a silane solution followed by a conventional multistep
adhesive or a universal adhesive. , Contact angle and bond
strength measurements have demonstrated that a silane primer
may not be compatible mixed with resin monomers in the same
solution.
Some clinicians use sandblasting with aluminum oxide particles
(airborne-particle abrasion) in the internal surface of glass-matrix
ceramics restorations to roughen the intaglio surface. Mean bond
strengths decrease however when hydroluoric acid etching is not
used. Additionally airborne-particle abrasion of glass-matrix
ceramics with alumina particles results in immediate lower intrinsic
strength447 triggered by the reduction in flexural strength of
feldspathic porcelains448 as well as of lithium disilicate–reinforced
ceramics.
B. Polycrytalline Ceramic
he discovery of a stress-induced transformation from the metastable
tetragonal form to the stable monoclinic form (t→m) - has
led to a new class of strong, tough, dense, relatively law-tolerant
oxide-based or polycrystalline ceramics known as zirconium oxide
or zirconia. - his t→m phase transformation can occur in the
vicinity of a propagating crack, causing an increase in volume,
thereby closing the crack tip and preventing furthe r crack propaga -
tion. , hese high-strength ceramic materials have become
extremely popular in dentistry, especially yttria-stabilized tetragonal
zirconia polycrystal (Y-TZP) and ceria-stabilized tetragonal zirconia
polycrystal/alumina (Ce-TZP/Al 2O3). -
HF etching does not improve bond strengths to oxide-based
or polycrystalline ceramics, , , - since these substrates do not
contain a glass matrix. Accordingly, other surface conditioning
methods have been used in the last two decades to improve bond
strengths of resin luting cements to polycrystalline ceram -
ics. , , , Some of the newest protocols include airborne-particle
abrasion, tribochemical silica coating, and primers or silanes mixed
with functional monomers such as the phosphate ester monomer
10-MDP . , - Recent meta-analysis and systematic reviews of
in vitro studies430, , concluded that the combination of mechani -
cal and chemical pretreatment is recommended for bonding to
B
A
• Fig. 5.25 Scanning electron micrograph of lithium disilicate–reinforced ceramics (IPS e.max CAD,
Ivoclar Vivadent). A, Top view, etched with 5% hydroluoric acid for 20 seconds. B, Lateral view, etched
with 9.6% hydroluoric acid for 20 seconds.
CHAPTER 5 Fundamental Concept of Enamel and Dentin Adheion
tooth compared to other tooth-colored restorative materials.
Vita Enamic (VITA Zahnfabrik H. Rauter GmbH & Co. KG,
Bad Säckingen, Germany) is a PICN containing an aluminum
oxide–enriched feldspathic porcelain (86 wt%) into which 14 wt%
urethane dimethacrylate and triethylene glycol dimethacrylate
polymer material is injected. he bond strengths obtained with
HF-etched PICN materials are similar to those obtained with
lithium disilicate–reinforced ceramics.
Indirect tooth-colored restorations are luted with low-viscosity
composite resin materials. Many of these resin cements are dual
cured—that is, they polymerize both chemically and by light
activation. Some materials marketed as “dual cure” may not
polymerize eiciently in the absence of a curing light. - Selfadhesive cements, a recent category of resins, have become very
popular to cement oxide–based ceramic restorations. Self-adhesive
cements are dual-cured phosphate monomer-based resin cements
(BisCem, Bisco Inc.; G-CEM LinkAce, GC Corporation; Maxcem
Elite, Kerr Corporation; Panavia SA Cement Plus, Kuraray Noritake
Dental Inc.; RelyX Unicem 2, 3M Oral Care; SmartCem2,
DENTSPLY Sirona; Solocem, Coltene; SpeedCEM Plus, Ivoclar
Vivadent) that do not require any pretreatment of the tooth
substrate. he acidic phosphate groups r eact with the iller and
simultaneously etch enamel or dentin in the same manner as do
self-etch adhesives. A chemical interaction between self-adhesive
cements and hydroxyapatite has been reported, , but this
interaction depends of the activation mode and the speciic selfadhesive resin cement tested. he pH of some self-adhesive
cements increases from 1 to 5 or 6 during their acid-base setting
reaction. he setting pH pr oiles of self-adhesive resin cements
depend on the brand and mode of cure. In spite of their dual-curing
ability, the physical properties improve signiicantly when light
activated. , Self-adhesive resin cements result in lower bond
strengths to etched glass-matrix ceramics than traditional resin
cements.437ceria-stabilized zirconia (Ce-TZP) materials do not undergo the
same r eduction in lexural strength compared to Y-TZP . Signiicant
decrease in bond strengths were noticed after aging through water
storage at 37°C for 3 days or days and 37, thermal cycles ,
regardless of the surface conditioning method (airborne-particle
abrasion or tribochemical silica coating abrasion) and the luting
system used.
he clinical relevance of these structural changes in Y-TZP used
in dentistry is not clear, as most in vitro studies have tested Y-TZP
without a glaze coating. , he Y-TZP structure is not usually
exposed directly to the oral environment except for zirconia abutments474 and for glazed monolithic zirconia restorations that are
adjusted prior to cementation.
C. Rein-Matrix Ceramic
Resin-based CAD/CAM materials for indirect restorations have
become recently popular. Ambarino High-Glass (Creamed GmbH
& Co. Produktions, Marburg, Germany), Brilliant Crios (Coltene),
Ceramill COMP (Amann Girrbach AG, Herrschaftswiesen, Austria),
Cerasmart (GC Corporation, Tokyo, Japan), and Lava Ultimate
(3M Oral Care) are examples of CAD/CAM resin blocks currently
available. hese new resin-based CAD/CAM materials have a much
lower modulus of elasticity compared to CAD/CAM ceramic
materials. , It is recommended to treat the intaglio surface with
airborne particle abrasion without any chemical etching. , Air
abrasion with alumina particles improves fracture resistance of
Lava Ultimate compared to polished specimens, which may be
a result of better mechanical interlocking of the bonding resins
into the resin microporosities and better stress distribution at higher
loads. Most universal adhesives also seem to bond efectively to
air-abraded resin-based CAD/CAM materials.
Hybrid resin-ceramic materials consisting of a polymer-iniltrated
ceramic network (PICN) have been recently introduced with the
goal to more closely mimic the physical properties of the natural
Summary
Reliable bonding of resins to enamel and dentin has revolutionized
the practice of operative dentistry. Improvements in dentin bonding
materials and techniques are likely to continue. Even as the materials
themselves become better and easier to use however, proper attention to technique and a good understanding of the bonding process
remain essential for clinical success, with emphasis in evidence-based
dentistry.
Reference
1. Packham DE: Adhesion. In Packham DE, editor: Handbook of
adhesion , Essex, UK, , Longman Scientiic & Technical, pp
18–20.
2. Akinmade AO, Nicholson JW: Glass-ionomer cements as adhesives:
part I. Fundamental aspects and their clinical relevance. J Mater
Sci Mater Med 4:95– , .
3. Allen KW: heories of adhesion. In Packham DE, editor: Handbook
of adhesion , Essex, UK, , Longman Scientiic & Technical, pp
– .
4. Söderholm K-JM: Correlation of in vivo and in vitro performance
of adhesive restorative materials: a report of the ASC MD156 Task
Group on test methods for the adhesion of restorative materials.
Dent Mater 7:74–83, .
5. Rueggeberg FA: Substrate for adhesion testing to tooth structure:
review of the literature. Dent Mater 7:2–10, .
6. Buonocore MG: A simple method of increasing the adhesion of
acrylic illing materials to enamel surfaces. J Dent Res 34: – ,
.7. Van Meerbeek B, Perdigão J, Lambrechts P , et al: he clinical
performance of adhesives. J Dent 26:1–20, .
8. Black GV: A work on operative dentistry in two volumes , ed 3,
Chicago, , Medico-Dental Publishing Company.
9. Peumans M, Van Meerbeek B, Lambrechts P , et al: he 5-year clinical
performance of direct composite additions to correct tooth form
and position. I. Esthetic qualities. Clin Oral Investig 1:12–18, .
10. Coelho-de-Souza FH, Gonçalves DS, Sales MP , et al: Direct anterior
composite veneers in vital and non-vital teeth: a retrospective clinical
evaluation. J Dent 43: – , .
11. Christensen GJ: Cementing porcelain-fused-to-metal crowns. J Am
Dent Assoc : – , .
12. Jokstad A: A split-mouth randomized clinical trial of single crowns
retained with resin-modiied glass-ionomer and zinc phosphate
luting cements. Int J Prosthodont 17: – , .
13. Layton DM, Clarke M, Walton TR: A systematic review and
meta-analysis of the survival of feldspathic porcelain veneers over
5 and 10 years. Int J Prosthodont 25: – , .
14. Heintze SD, Rousson V: Fracture rates of IPS Empress all-ceramic
crowns–a systematic review. Int J Prosthodont 23: – , .
CHAPTER 5 Fundamental Concept of Enamel and Dentin Adheion
38. Teixeira FB, Teix eira EC, hompson J, et al: Dentinal bonding
reaches the root canal system. J Esthet Restor Dent 16: – ,
.
39. Wu MK, Kontakiotis EG, Wesselink PR: Long-term seal pro -
vided by some r oot-end illing materials. J Endod 24: – ,
.
40. Murray MJ, Loushine RJ, Weller RN, et al: Use of self-etching
adhesives to seal resected apices. J Endod 30: – , .
41. Buonocore MG, Matsui A, Gwinnett AJ: Penetration of resin dental
materials into enamel surfaces with reference to bonding. Arch Oral
Biol 13:61–70, .
42. Gwinnett AJ: Histologic changes in human enamel followi ng
treatment with acidic adhesive conditioning agents. Arch Oral Biol
16: – , .
43. Gottlieb EW, Retief DH, Jamison HC: An optimal concentration
of phosphoric acid as an etching agent: part I. tensile bond strength
studies. J Prosthet Dent 48:48–51, .
44. Gwinnett AJ, Kanca JA, 3rd: Micromorphology of the bonded
dentin interface and its relationship to bond strength. Am J Dent
5:73–77, .
45. Soetopo , Beech DR, Hardwick JL: Mechanism of adhesion of
polymers to acid-etched enamel: efect of acid concentration and
washing on bond strength. J Oral Rehabil 5:69–80, .
46. Barkmeier WW, Shafer SE, Gwinnett AJ: Efects of 15 vs 60 second
enamel acid conditioning on adhesion and morphology. Oper Dent
11: – , .
47. Mardaga WJ, Shannon IL: Decreasing the depth of etch for direct
bonding in orthodontics. J Clin Orthod 16: – , .
48. Barkmeier WW, Gwinnett AJ, Shafer SE: Efects of enamel etching
time on bond strength and morphology. J Clin Orthod 19:36–38,
.
49. Nordenvall K-J, Brännström M, Malmgren O: Etching of deciduous
teeth and young and old permanent teeth: a comparison between
15 and 60 seconds of etching. Am J Orthod 78:99– , .
50. Bastos PAM, Retief DH, Bradley EL, et al: Efect of etch duration
on the shear bond strength of a microill composite resin to enamel.
Am J Dent 1: – , .
51. Crim GA, Shay JS: Efect of etchant time on microleakage. J Dent
Child 54: – , .
52. Gilpatrick RO, Ross JA, Simonsen RJ: Resin-to-enamel bond
strengths with various etching times. Quintessence Int 22:47–49,
.
53. Shafer SE, Barkmeier WW, Kelsey WP , 3rd: Efects of reduced acid
conditioning time on enamel microleakage. Gen Dent 35: – ,
.
54. Barkmeier WW, Erickson RL, Kimmes NS, et al: Efect of enamel
etching time on roughness and bond strength. Oper Dent 34: – ,
.
55. De Munck J, Van Meerbeek B, Satoshi I, et al: Microtensile bond
strengths of oneand two-step self-etch adhesives to bur-cut enamel
and dentin. Am J Dent 16: – , .
56. Swift EJ, Jr, Perdigão J, Heymann HO: Enamel bond strengths of
“one-bottle” adhesives. Pediatr Dent 20: – , .
57. Senawongse P , Sattabanasuk V, Shimada Y, et al: Bond str engths of
current adhesive systems on intact and ground enamel. J Esthet
Restor Dent 16: – , .
58. Barkmeier WW, Erickson RL, Latta MA: Fatigue limits of enamel
bonds with moist and dry techniques. Dent Mater 25: – ,
.
59. Gwinnett AJ, Matsui A: A study of enamel adhesives: the physical
relationship between enamel and adhesive. Arch Oral Biol
12: – , .
60. Asmussen E, Hansen EK, Peutzfeldt A: Inluence of the solubility
parameter of intermediary resin on the efectiveness of the Gluma
bonding system. J Dent Res 70: – , .
61. Nakabayashi N, Kojima K, Masuhara E: he promotion of adhesion
by the iniltration of monomers into tooth substrates. J Biomed
Mater Res 16: – , .15. Feigal RJ, Musherure P , Gillespie B, et al: Improved sealant retention
with bonding agents: a clinical study of two-bottle and single-bottle
systems. J Dent Res 79: – , .
16. Fleming PS, Johal A, Pandis N: Self-etch primers and conventional
acid-etch technique for orthodontic bonding: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop :83–94,
.
17. Diangelis AJ, Andreasen JO, Ebeleseder KA, et al: International
Association of Dental T raumatology: International Association of
Dental T raumatology guidelines for the management of traumatic
dental injuries: 1. Fractures and luxations of permanent teeth. Dent
Traumatol 28:2–12, .
18. Kumbuloglu O, Saracoglu A, Ozcan M: Pilot study of unidirectional
E-glass ibre-reinforced composite resin splints: up to 4.5-year
clinical follow-up. J Dent 39: – , .
19. Gupta A, Yelluri RK, Munshi AK: Fiber-reinforced composite resin
bridge: a treatment option in children. Int J Clin Pediatr Dent
8:62–65, .
20. Liu X, Zhang Y, Zhou Z, et al: Retrospective study of combined
splinting restorations in the aesthetic zone of periodontal patients.
Br Dent J : – , .
21. Opdam NJ, Bronkhorst EM, Loomans BA, et al: Longevity of
repaired restorations: a practice based study. J Dent 40: – ,
.
22. Hickel R, Brüshaver K, Ilie N: Repair of restorations–criteria for
decision making and clinical recommendations. Dent Mater 29:28–50,
.
23. Baur V, Ilie N: Repair of dental resin-based composites. Clin Oral
Investig 17: – , .
24. Latta MA, Barkmeier WW: Approaches for intraoral repair of
ceramic restorations. Compend Contin Educ Dent 21: – ,
- , .
25. Combe EC, Shaglouf AM, Watts DC, et al: Mechanical properties
of direct core build-up materials. Dent Mater 15: – , .
26. Hagge MS, Lindemuth JS: Shear bond strength of an autopolymer -
izing core buildup composite bonded to dentin with 9 dentin
adhesive systems. J Prosthet Dent 86: – , .
27. Calamia JR, Styner DL, Rattet AH: Efect of Amalgambond on
cervical sensitivity. Am J Dent 8: – , .
28. Ferrari M, Cagidiaco MC, Kugel G, et al: Clinical evaluation of a
one-bottle bonding system for desensitizing exposed roots. Am J
Dent 12: – , .
29. Veitz-Keenan A, Barna JA, Strober B, et al: T reatments for hyp ersensi -
tive noncarious cervical lesions: a Practitioners Engaged in Applied
Research and Learning (PEARL) Network randomized clinical
efectiveness study. J Am Dent Assoc : – , .
30. Gibson M, Sharif MO, Smith A, et al: A practice-based randomised
controlled trial of the eicacy of three interventions to reduce
dentinal hypersensitivity. J Dent 41: – , .
31. Robinson C, Hallsworth AS, Weatherell JA, et al: Arrest and control
of carious lesions: a study based on preliminary experiments with
resorcinol-formaldehyde resin. J Dent Res 55: – , .
32. Zhang N, Melo MA, Chen C, et al: Development of a multifunctional
adhesive system for prevention of root caries and secondary caries.
Dent Mater 31: – , .
33. Macedo GV, Diaz PI, De O, et al: Reattachment of anterior teeth
fragments: a conservative approach. J Esthet Restor Dent 20:5–18, .
34. Ree M, Schwartz RS: he endo-restorative interface: current concepts.
Dent Clin North Am 54: – , .
35. Goncalves LA, Vansan LP , Paulino SM, et al: Fracture resistance of
weakened roots restored with a transilluminating post and adhesive
restorative materials. J Prosthet Dent 96: – , .
36. Schmitter M, Huy C, Ohlmann B, et al: Fracture resistance of
upper and lower incisors restored with glass iber reinforced posts.
J Endod 32: – , .
37. Doyle MD, Loushine RJ, Agee KA, et al: Improving the performance
of EndoRez root canal sealer with a dual-cured two-step self-etch
adhesive. I. Adhesive strength to dentin. J Endod 32: – , .
CHAPTER 5 Fundamental Concept of Enamel and Dentin Adheion
87. Opdam NJ, Feilzer AJ, Roeters JJ, et al: Class I occlusal composite
resin restorations: in vivo post-operative sensitivity, wall adaptation,
and microleakage. Am J Dent 11: – , .
88. Bowen RL, Nemoto K, Rapson JE: Adhesive bonding of various
materials to hard tooth tissue: forces developing in composite
materials during hardening. J Am Dent Assoc : – ,
.
89. Davidson CL, Feilzer AJ: Polymerization shrinkage and polymerization
shrinkage stress in polymer-based restoratives. J Dent 25: – ,
.
90. Davidson CL, de Gee AJ, Feilz er A: he competition between the
composite-dentin bond strength and the polymerizati on contraction
stress. J Dent Res 63: – , .
91. Hegdahl T, Gjerdet NR: Contraction str esses of composite illing
materials. Acta Odontol Scand 35: – , .
92. Feilzer A, De Gee AJ, Davidson CL: Setting stress in composite
resin in relation to coniguration of the restoration. J Dent Res
66: – , .
93. Davidson CL, de Gee AJ: Relaxation of polymerization contraction
stresses b y low in dental composites. J Dent Res 63: – ,
.
94. Perdigão J, Lambrechts P , Van Meerbeek B, et al: he interaction
of adhesive systems with human dentin. Am J Dent 9: – ,
.
95. Yoshikawa T, Sano H, Burrow MF , et al: Efects of dentin depth
and cavity coniguration on bond strength. J Dent Res 78: – ,
.
96. Carvalho RM, Pereira JC, Yoshiyama M, et al: A review of polymeriza -
tion contraction: the inluence of stress development versus stress
relief. Oper Dent 21:17–24, .
97. Mantri SP , Mantri SS: Management of shrinkage stresses in direct
restorative light-cured composites: a review. J Esthet Restor Dent
25: – , .
98. Masouras K, Silikas N, Watts DC: Correlation of iller content and
elastic properties of resin-composites. Dent Mater 24: – ,
.
99. Gonçalves F , Kawano Y, Braga RR: Contraction stress related to
composite inorganic content. Dent Mater 26: – , .
. Son SA, Park JK, Seo DG, et al: How light attenuation and iller
content afect the microhardness and polymerization shrinkage and
translucency of bulk-ill composites? Clin Oral Investig 21: – ,
.
. Munksgaard EC, Irie M, Asmussen E: Dentin-polymer bond
promoted by Gluma and various resins. J Dent Res 64: – ,
.
. Soares CJ, Bicalho AA, Tantbirojn D, et al: Polymerization shrinkage
stresses in a premolar restored with diferent composite resins and
diferent incremental techniques. J Adhes Dent 15: – , .
. Park JW, Ferracane JL: Water aging reverses residual stresses in
hydrophilic dental composites. J Dent Res 93: – , .
. Sideridou ID, Karabela MM, Vouvoudi ECh: Volumetric dimensional
changes of dental light-cured dimethacrylate resins after sorption
of water or ethanol. Dent Mater 24: – , .
. Wei YJ, Silikas N, Zhang ZT, et al: he relationship between cyclic
hygroscopic dimensional changes and water sorption/desorption of
self-adhering and new resin-matrix composites. Dent Mater
29:e218–e226, .
. Uno S, Asmussen E: Marginal adaptation of a restorative resin
polymerized at reduced. Scand J Dent Res 99: – , .
. Kanca J, 3rd, Suh BI: Pulse activation: reducing resin-based composite
contraction stresses at the enamel cavosurface margins. Am J Dent
12: – , .
. Park J, Chang J, Ferracane J, et al: How should composite be layered
to reduce shrinkage stress: incremental or bulk illing? Dent Mater
24: – , .
. Alomari QD, Reinhardt JW, Boyer DB: Efect of liners on cusp
delection and gap formation in composite restorations. Oper Dent
26: – , .62. Yoshida Y, Van Meerbeek B, Nakayama Y, et al: Evidence of chemical
bonding at biomaterial-hard tissue interfaces. J Dent Res 79: – ,
.
63. Fukuda R, Yoshida Y, Nakayama Y, et al: Bonding eicacy of
polyalkenoic acids to hydroxyapatite, enamel and dentin. Biomaterials
24: – , .
64. Fu B, Sun X, Qian W, et al: Evidence of chemical bonding to
hydroxyapatite by phosphoric acid esters. Biomaterials 26: – ,
.
65. Yoshihara K, Yoshida Y, Hayakawa S, et al: Nano-layering of
phosphoric-acid ester monomer at enamel and dentin. Acta Biomater
7: – , .
66. Mitra SB, Lee CY, Bui HT, et al: Long-term adhesion and mechanism
of bonding of a paste-liquid resin-modiied glass-ionomer. Dent
Mater 25: – , .
67. Van Meerbeek B, Ionkoshi S, Braem M, et al: Morphological aspects
of the resin-dentin interdifusion zone with diferent dentin adhesive
systems. J Dent Res 71: – , .
68. Tay FR, Gwinnett AJ, Wei SH: Ultrastructure of the resin-dentin
interface following reversible and irreversible rewetting. Am J Dent
10:77–82, .
69. Veis A: Mineral-matrix interactions in bone and dentin. J Bone
Miner Res 8(Suppl 2):S493–S497, .
70. Brännström M, Lindén LA, Johnson G: Movement of dentinal and
pulpal luid caused by clinical procedures. J Dent Res 47: – ,
.
71. Terkla LG, Brown AC, Hainisch AP , et al: Testing sealing properties
of restorative materials against moist dentin. J Dent Res 66: – ,
.
72. Van Hassel HJ: Physiology of the human dental pulp. Oral Surg
Oral Med Oral Pathol 32: – , .
73. Garberoglio R, Brännström M: Scanning electron microscopic
investigation of human dentinal tubules. Arch Oral Biol 21: – ,
.
74. Pashley DH: Dentin: a dynamic substrate—a review. Scanning
Microsc 3: – , .
75. Marchetti C, Piacentini C, Menghini P: Morphometric computerized
analysis on the dentinal tubules and the collagen ibers in the dentine
of human permanent teeth. Bull Group Int Rech Sci Stomatol Odontol
35: – , .
76. Suzuki T, Finger WJ: Dentin adhesives: site of dentin vs. bonding
of composite resins. Dent Mater 4: – , .
77. Rosales-Leal JI, Osorio R, Holgado-Terriza JA, et al: Dentin wetting
by four adhesive systems. Dent Mater 17: – , .
78. Sattabanasuk V, Shimada Y, Tagami J: he bond of resin to diferent
dentin surface characteristics. Oper Dent 29: – , .
79. Adebayo OA, Burrow MF , Tyas MJ: Bonding of one-step and
two-step self-etching primer adhesives to dentin with diferent
tubule orientations. Acta Odontol Scand 66: – , .
80. Zhang L, Wang DY, Fan J, et al: Stability of bonds made to supericial
vs. deep dentin, before and after thermocycling. Dent Mater
30: – , .
81. Bowen RL, Eick JD, Henderson DA, et al: Smear layer: removal
and bonding considerations. Oper Dent 3(Suppl):30–34,
.
82. Ishioka S, Caputo AA: Interaction between the dentinal smear layer
and composite bond strengths. J Prosthet Dent 61: – ,
.
83. Pashley DH, Livingston MJ, Greenhill JD: Regional resistances to
luid low in human dentine in vitro. Arch Oral Biol 23: – ,
.
84. Eick JD, Cobb CM, Chappell RP , et al: he dentinal surface: its
inluence on dentinal adhesion: part I. Quintessence Int 22: – ,
.
85. Pashley DH: he efects of acid etching on the pulpodentin complex.
Oper Dent 17: – , .
86. Torney D: he retentive ability of acid-etched dentin. J Prosthet
Dent 39: – , .
CHAPTER 5 Fundamental Concept of Enamel and Dentin Adheion
. Qvist V : he efect of mastication on marginal adaptation of
composite restorations in vivo. J Dent Res 62: – , .
. Nikaido T, Kunzelmann KH, Chen H, et al: Evaluation of thermal
cycling and mechanical loading on bond strength of a self-etching
primer system to dentin. Dent Mater 18: – , .
. Toledano M, Osorio R, Albaladejo A, et al: Efect of cyclic loading
on the microtensile bond strengths of total-etch an d self-etch
adhesives. Oper Dent 31:25–32, .
. Brudevold F , Buonocore M, Wileman W: A report on a resin
composition capable of bonding to human dentin surfaces. J Dent
Res 35: – , .
. McLean JW: Bonding to enamel and dentin [letter]. Quintessence
Int 26: , .
. McLean JW, Kramer IRH: A clinical and pathological evaluation
of a sulphinic acid activated resin for use in restorative dentistry.
Br Dent J 93: , .
. Bowen RL: Adhesive bonding of various materials to hard tooth
tissues: II. Bonding to dentin promoted by a surface-active como -
nomer. J Dent Res 44: – , .
. Barkmeier WW, Cooley RL: Laboratory evaluation of adhesive
systems. Oper Dent 5(Suppl):50–61, .
. Albers HF: Dentin-resin bonding. ADEPT Report 1:33–42, .
. Alexieva C: Character of the hard tooth tissue-polymer bond: II.
Study of the interaction of human tooth enamel and dentin with
N-phenylglycine-glycidyl methacrylate adduct. J Dent Res
58: – , .
. Retief DH, Denys FR: Adhesion to enamel and dentin. Am J Dent
2: – , .
. Jendresen MD: Clinical performance of a new composite resin for
Class V erosion (abstract ). J Dent Res 57: , .
. Eick JD: Smear layer—materials surface. Proc Finn Dent Soc
88: – , .
. Asmussen E, Munksgaard EC: Bonding of restorative materials to
dentine: status of dentine adhesives and impact on cavity design
and illing techniques. Int Dent J 38:97– , .
. Baier RE: Principles of adhesion. Oper Dent 5(Suppl):1–9, .
. Causton BE: Improved bonding of composite restorative to dentine:
a study in vitro of the use of a commercial halogenated phosphate
ester. Br Dent J :93–95, .
. Huang GT, Söderholm K-JM: In vitro investigation of shear bond
strength of a phosphate based dentinal bonding agen t. Scand J Dent
Res 97:84–92, .
. Eliades GC: Dentine bonding systems. In Vanherle G, et a l, editors:
State of the art on dir ect posterior illing materials and dentine bonding ,
Leuven, , Van der Poorten, pp 49–74.
. Tyas MJ, Burns GA, Byrne PF , et al: Clinical evaluation of Scotchbond: three-year results. Aust Dent J 34: – , .
. Van Meerbeek B, Peumans M, Verschueren M, et al: Clinical status
of ten dentin adhesive systems. J Dent Res 73: – , .
. Fusayama T, Nakamura M, Kurosaki N, et al: Non-pressure adhesion
of a new adhesive restorative resin. J Dent Res 58: – , .
. van Dijken JWV, Horstedt P: In vivo adaptation of restorative
materials to dentin. J Prosthet Dent 56: – , .
. Retief DH, Austin JC, Fatti LP: Pulpal response to phosphoric acid.
J Oral Pathol 3: – , .
. Stanley HR, Going RE, Chauncey HH: Human pulp response to
acid pretreatment of dentin and to composite restoration. J Am
Dent Assoc 91: – , .
. American Dental Association Council on Scientiic Afairs: Revised
American Dental Association acceptance program guidelines: Dentin
and enamel adhesives (pp. 1–9), Chicago, , American Dental
Association.
. Mine A, De Munck J, Vivan Cardoso M, et al: Enamel-smear
compromises bonding by mild self-etch adhesives. J Dent Res
89: – , .
. Suyama Y, Lührs AK, De Munck J, et al: Potential smear layer
interference with bonding of self-etching adhesives to dentin. J
Adhes Dent 15: – , . . Ferracane JL, Hilton TJ: Polymerization stress - Is it clinically
meaningful? Dent Mater 32:1–10, .
. Kemp-Scholte CM, Davidson CL: Marginal integrity related to
bond strength and strain capacity of composite resin restorative
systems. J Prosthet Dent 64: – , .
. Finger WJ: Dentin bonding agents: relevance of in vitro investigations.
Am J Dent 1: – , .
. Kemp-Scholte CM, Davidson CL: Complete marginal seal of Class
V resin composite restorations efected by increased lexibility. J
Dent Res 69: – , .
. Lindberg A, van Dijken JW, Hörstedt P: In vivo interfacial adaptation
of Class II resin composite restorations with and without a lowable
resin composite liner. Clin Oral Investig 9:77–83, .
. Reis A, Loguercio AD: A 24-month follow-up of lowable resin
composite as an intermediate layer in non-carious cervical lesions.
Oper Dent 31: – , .
. Efes BG, Dörter C, Gömeç Y, et al: T wo-year clinical evaluation of
ormocer and nanoill composite with and without a lowable liner.
J Adhes Dent 8: – , .
. Celik C, Ozgünaltay G, Attar N: Clinical evaluation of lowable
resins in non-carious cervical lesions: two-year results. Oper Dent
32: – , .
. van Dijken JWV, Pallesen U: Clinical performance of a hybrid resin
composite with and without an intermediate layer of lowable resin
composite: a 7-year evaluation. Dent Mater 27: – , .
. van de Sande FH, Rodolpho PA, Basso GR, et al: 18-year survival
of posterior composite resin restorations with and without glass
ionomer cement as base. Dent Mater 31: – , .
. Condon JR, Ferracane JL: Reduced polymerization stress through
non-bonded nanoiller particles. Biomaterials 23: – , .
. Palin WM, Fleming GJ, Nathwani H, et al: In vitro cuspal delection
and microleakage of maxillary premolars restored with novel lowshrink dental composites. Dent Mater 21: – , .
. Braga RR, Ferracane JL: Alternatives in polymerization contraction
stress management. Crit Rev Oral Biol Med 15: – , .
. Papadogiannis D, Kakaboura A, Palaghias G, et al: Setting charac -
teristics and cavity adaptation of low-shrinking resin composites.
Dent Mater 25: – , .
. Xu HC, Liu WY, Wang T: Measurement of thermal expansion
coeicient of human teeth. Aust Dent J 34: – , .
. Sideridou I, Achilias DS, Kyrikou E: hermal expansion characteristics
of light-cured dental resins and resin composites. Biomaterials
25: – , .
. Versluis A, Douglas WH, Sakaguchi RL: hermal expansion
coeicient of dental composites measured with strain gauges. Dent
Mater 12: – , .
. Bullard RH, Leinfelder KF , Russell CM: Efect of coeicient of
thermal expansion on microleakage. J Am Dent Assoc : – ,
.
. Asmussen E: Clinical relevance of physical, chemical, and bonding
properties of composite resins. Oper Dent 10:61–73, .
. Borges AL, Borges AB, Xavier TA, et al: Impact of quantity of resin,
C-factor, and geometry on resin composite polymerization shrinkage
stress in Class V restorations. Oper Dent 39: – , .
. Hansen EK: Efect of Scotchbond dependent on cavity cleaning,
cavity diameter and cavosurface angle. Scand J Dent Res 92: – ,
.
. Schroeder M, Reis A, Luque-Martinez I, et al: Efect of enamel
bevel on retention of cervical composite resin restorations: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. J Dent 43: – , .
. Mahn E, Rousson V, Heintze S: Meta-analysis of the inluence of
bonding parameters on the clinical outcome of toothcolored cervical
restorations. J Adhes Dent 17: – , .
. Jørgensen KD, Matono R, Shimokobe H: Deformation of cavities
and resin illings in loaded teeth. Scand J Dent Res 84:46–50,
.
. Tonami K, Takahashi H: Efects of aging on tensile fatigue strength
of bovine dentin. Dent Mater J 16: – , .
CHAPTER 5 Fundamental Concept of Enamel and Dentin Adheion
. Ferrari M, Mannocci F , Vichi A, et al: Efect of two etching times
on the sealing ability of Clearil Liner Bond 2 in Class V restorations.
Am J Dent 10:66–70, .
. Opdam NJ, Roeters FJ, Feilzer AJ, et al: Marginal integrity and
postoperative sensitivity in Class 2 resin composite restorations in
vivo. J Dent 26: – , .
. Miyazaki M, Sato M, Onose H: Durability of enamel bond strength
of simpliied bonding systems. Oper Dent 25:75–80, .
. Akimoto N, Takamizu M, Momoi Y: 10-year clinical evaluation of
a self-etching adhesive system. Oper Dent 32:3–10, .
. Tay FR, Sano H, Carvalho R, et al: An ultrastructural study of the
inluence of acidity of self-etching primers and smear layer thickness
on bonding to intact dentin. J Adhes Dent 2:83–98, .
. Pashley DH, Tay FR: Aggressiveness of contemporary self-etching
adhesives: part II: etching efects on unground enamel . Dent Mater
17: – , .
. Peumans M, De Munck J, Van Landuyt K, et al: hirteen-year
randomized controlled clinical trial of a two-step self-etch adhe -
sive in non-carious cervical lesions. Dent Mater 31: – ,
.
. Yoshihara K, Yoshida Y, Nagaoka N, et al: Nano-controlled molecular
interaction at adhesive interfaces for hard tissue reconstruction. Acta
Biomater 6: – , .
. Anchieta RB, Machado LS, Sundfeld RH, et al: Efect of partially
demineralized dentin beneath the hybrid layer on dentin-adhesive
interface micromechanics. J Biomech 48: – , .
. Wang Y, Spencer P: Physiochemical interactions at the interfaces
between self-etch adhesive systems and dentine. J Dent 32: – ,
.
. Wang Y, Spencer P: Continuing etching of an all-in-one adhesive
in wet dentin tubules. J Dent Res 84: – , .
. Cao Y, Mei ML, Xu J, et al: Biomimetic mineralisation of phos -
phorylated dentine by CPP-ACP . J Dent 41: – , .
. Tay FR, Pashley DH: Guided tissue remineralisation of partially
demineralised human dentine. Biomaterials 29: – ,
.
. Zhang W, Luo XJ, Niu LN, et al: Biomimetic intraibrillar mineraliza -
tion of type I collagen with intermediate precursors-loaded meso -
porous carriers. Sci Rep 5: , .
. Niu LN, Zhang W, Pashley DH, et al: Biomimetic remineralization
of dentin. Dent Mater 30:77–96, .
. Akpata ES, Behbehani J: Efect of bonding systems on post-operative
sensitivity from posterior composites. Am J Dent 19: – , .
. Browning WD, Blalock JS, Callan RS, et al: Postoperative sensitivity:
a comparison of two bonding agents. Oper Dent 32: – , .
. Casselli DS, Martins LR: Postoperative sensiti vity in Class I composite
resin restorations in vivo. J Adhes Dent 8:53–58, .
. Wegehaupt F , Betke H, Solloch N, et al: Inluence of cavity lining
and remaining dentin thickness on the occurrence of postoperative
hypersensitivity of composite restorations. J Adhes Dent 11: – ,
.
. Burrow MF , Banomyong D, Harnirattisai C, et al: Efect of
glass-ionomer cement lining on postoperative sensitivity in occlusal
cavities restored with resin composite—A randomized cli nical trial.
Oper Dent 34: – , .
. Reis A, Dourado Loguercio A, Schroeder M, et a l: Does the adhesive
strategy inluence the post-operative sensitivity in adult patients
with posterior resin composite restorations?: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Dent Mater 31: – , .
. Perdigão J: Dentin bonding as a function of dentin structure. Dent
Clin North Am 46: – , .
. Tay FR, Pashley DH, Peters MC: Adhesive permeability afects
composite coupling to dentin treated with a self-etch adhesive. Oper
Dent 28: – , .
. Tay FR, Pashley DH, Yiu CK, et al: Factors contributing to the
incompatibility between simpliied-step adhesives and chemicallycured or dual-cured composites: part I. Single-step self-etching
adhesive. J Adhes Dent 5:27–40, . . Eliades G: Clinical relevance of the formulation and testing of
dentine bonding systems. J Dent 22:73–81, .
. Barkmeier WW, Suh B, Cooley RL: Shear bond strength to dentin
and Ni-Cr-Be alloy with the All-Bond universal adhesive system. J
Esthet Dent 3: – , .
. Kanca J, 3rd: Efect of resin primer solvents and surface wetness
on resin composite bond strength to dentin. Am J Dent 5: – ,
.
. Kanca J, 3rd: Resin bonding to wet substrate: I. Bonding to dentin.
Quintessence Int 23:39–41, .
. Swift EJ, T riolo PT: Bond strengths of Scotchbond Multi-Purpose
to moist dentin and enamel. Am J Dent 5: – , .
. Perdigão J, Lambrechts P , Van Meerbeek B, et al: Morphological
ield emission SEM study of the efect of six phosphoric acid etching
agents on human dentin. Dent Mater 12: – , .
. Ermis RB, Kam O, Celik EU, et al: Clinical evaluation of a
two-step etch & rinse and a two-step self-etch adhesive system
in Class II restorations: two-year results. Oper Dent 34: – ,
.
. Wilder AD, Swift EJ, Jr, Heymann HO, et al: A 12-year clinical
evaluation of a three-step dentin adhesive in noncarious cervical
lesions. J Am Dent Assoc : – , .
. Peumans M, De Munck J, Van Landuyt KL, et al: A 13-year clinical
evaluation of two three-step etch-and-rinse adhesives in non-carious
Class-V lesions. Clin Oral Investig 16: – , .
. Erickson RL: Surface interactions of dentin adhesive materials. Oper
Dent 5(Suppl):81–94, .
. Panighi M, G’Sell C: Inluence of calcium concentration on the
dentin wettability by an adhesive. J Biomed Mater Res 26: – ,
.
. Armstrong SR, Vargas MA, Fang Q, et al: Microtensile bond strength
of a total-etch 3-step, total-etch 2-step, self-etch 2-step, and a
self-etch 1-step dentin bonding system through 15-month water
storage. J Adhes Dent 5:47–56, .
. Peumans M, De Munck J, Mine A, et al: Clinical efectiveness
of contemporary adhesives for the restoration of non-carious
cervical lesions. A systematic review. Dent Mater 30: – ,
.
. De Munck J, Mine A, Poitevin A, et al: Meta-analytical review of
parameters involved in dentin bonding. J Dent Res 91: – ,
.
. Tay FR, Pashley DH: Have dentin adhesives become too hydrophilic?
J Can Dent Assoc 69: – , .
. Loguercio AD, Rafo J, Bassani F , et al: 24-month clinical evaluation
in non-carious cervical lesions of a two-step etch-and-rinse adhesive
applied using a rubbing motion. Clin Oral Investig 15: – ,
.
. Reis A, Pellizzaro A, Dal-Bianco K, et al: Impact of adhesive
application to wet and dry dentin on long-term resin-dentin bond
strengths. Oper Dent 32: – , .
. Perdigão J, Lopes L, Lambrechts P , et al: Efects of a self-etching
primer on enamel shear bond strengths and SEM morphology. Am
J Dent 10: – , .
. Watanabe I, Nakabayashi N, Pashley DH: Bonding to ground
dentin by a Phenyl-P self-etching primer. J Dent Res 73: – ,
.
. Tay FR, Pashley DH, Suh BI, et al: Single-step adhesives are permeable
membranes. J Dent 30: – , .
. Fukuoka A, Koshiro K, Inoue S, et al: Hydrolytic stability of one-step
self-etching adhesives bonded to dentin. J Adhes Dent 13: – ,
.
. Clinician’s preferences , CRA Newsletter 25, .
. Perdigão J, Gomes G, Gondo R, et al: In vitro bonding performance
of all-in-one adhesives. Part I – microtensile bond strengths. J Adhes
Dent 8: – , .
. Perdigão J, Lopes MM, Gomes G: In vitro bonding performance
of self-etch adhesives: II–ultramorphological evaluation. Oper Dent
33: – , .
CHAPTER 5 Fundamental Concept of Enamel and Dentin Adheion
. Sasaki N, Odajima S: Stress-strain curve and Young’s modulus of
a collagen molecule as determined b y the x-ray difraction technique.
J Biomech 29: – , .
. Sasaki N, Shiwa S, Yagihara S, et al: X-ray difraction studies on
the structure of hydrated collagen. Biopolymers 22: – ,
.
. Van der Graaf ER, ten Bosch JJ: Changes in dimension and weight
of human dentine after diferent drying procedures and during
subsequent rehydration. Arch Oral Biol 38:97–99, .
. Eanes ED, Lundy DR, Martin GN: X-ray difraction study of the
mineralization of turkey leg tendon. Calcif Tissue Res 6: – ,
.
. Perdigão J, Frankenberger R: Efect of solvent and re-wetting time
on dentin adhesion. Quintessence Int 32: – , .
. Tay FR, Gwinnett AJ, Pang KM, et al: Resin permeation into
acid-conditioned, moist, and dry dentin: a paradigm using water-free
adhesive primers. J Dent Res 75: – , .
. Swift EJ, Perdigao J, Heymann HO: Bonding to en amel and dentin:
a brief history and state of the art, . Quintessence Int 26:95– ,
.
. Luque-Martinez IV, Perdigão J, Muñoz MA, et al: Efects of solvent
evaporation time on immediate adhesive properties of universal
adhesives to dentin. Dent Mater 30: – , .
. Perdigão J, Reis A, Loguercio AD: Dentin adhesion and MMPs: a
comprehensive review. J Esthet Restor Dent 25: – , .
. Tay FR, Pashley SH, Kapur RR, et al: Bonding BisGMA to dentin—a
proof of concept for hydrophobic dentin bonding. J Dent Res
86: – , .
. Hosaka K, Nishitani Y, Tagami J, et al: Durability of resin-dentin
bonds to watervs. ethanol-saturated dentin. J Dent Res 88: – ,
.
. Salz U, Zimmermann J, Zeuner F , et al: Hydrolytic stability of
self-etching adhesive systems. J Adhes Dent 7: – , .
. Hiraishi N, Nishiyama N, Ikemura K, et al: Water concentration
in self-etching primers afects their aggressiveness and bonding
eicacy to dentin. J Dent Res 84: – , .
. Hosaka K, Nakajima M, Takahashi M, et al: Relationship between
mechanical properties of one-step self-etch adhesives and water
sorption. Dent Mater 26: – , .
. Ito S, Hoshino T, Iijima M, et al: Water sorption/solubility of
self-etching dentin bonding agents. Dent Mater 26: – ,
.
. Hashimoto M, Ohno H, Sano H, et al: In vitro degradation of
resin-dentin bonds analyzed by microtensile bond test, scanning
and transmission electron microscopy. Biomaterials 24: – ,
.
. Tay FR, Pashley DH, Suh BI, et al: Water treeing in simpliied
dentin adhesives–déjà vu? Oper Dent 30: – , .
. Kato G, Nakabayashi N: Efect of phosphoric acid concentration
on wet-bonding to etched dentin. Dent Mater 12: – ,
.
. Sano H, Shono T, Takatsu T, et al: Microporous dentin zone beneath
resin-impregnated layer. Oper Dent 19:59–64, .
. Tatsumi T, Inokoshi S, Yamada T, et al: Remineralization of etched
dentin. J Prosthet Dent 67: – , .
. Okamoto Y, Heeley JD, Dogon IL, et al: Efects of phosphoric acid
and tannic acid on dentine collagen. J Oral Rehabil 18: – ,
.
. El Feninat F , Ellis TH, Sacher E, et al: Moisture-dependent rena -
turation of collagen in phosphoric acid etched human dentin. J
Biomed Mater Res 42: – , .
. Klont B, Ten Cate JM: Denaturation and degradation of dentin
collagen during dentinal caries: possible mechanisms. In hylstrup
A, Leach SA, Qvist V, editors: Dentin and dentin reactions in the
oral cavity , Oxford, , IRL Press, pp155– .
. Ritter AV, Swift EJ, Jr, Yamauchi M: Efects of phosphoric acid and
glutaraldehyde-HEMA on dentin collagen. Eur J Oral Sci
: – , . . Tay FR, Pashley DH: Aggressiveness of contemporary self-etching
adhesives: part I. Depth of penetration beyond dentin smear layers.
Dent Mater 17: – , .
. Ito S, Tay FR, Hashimoto M, et al: Efects of multiple coatings of
two all-in-one adhesives on dentin bonding. J Adhes Dent 7: – ,
.
. Reis A, Leite TM, Matte K, et al: Improving clinical retention of
one-step self-etching adhesive systems with an addi tional hydrophobic
adhesive layer. J Am Dent Assoc : – , .
. Reis A, Albuquerque M, Pegoraro M, et al: Can the durability of
one-step self-etch adhesives be improved by double application or
by an extra layer of hydrophobic resin? J Dent 36: – , .
. Van Landuyt KL, Peumans M, De Munck J, et al: Extension of a
one-step self-etch adhesive into a multi-step adhesive. Dent Mater
22: – , .
. Tay FR, Frankenberger R, Krejci I, et al: Single-bottle adhesives
behave as permeable membranes after polymerization. I. In vivo
evidence. J Dent 32: – , .
. Hanabusa M, Mine A, Kuboki T, et al: Bonding efectiveness of a
new ‘multi-mode’ adhesive to enamel and dentine. J Dent 40: – ,
.
. Perdigão J, Sezinando A, Monteiro PC: Laboratory bondin g ability
of a multi-purpose dentin adhesive. Am J Dent 25: – , .
. Chen C, Niu LN, Xie H, et al: Bonding of universal adhesives to
dentine–Old wine in new bottles? J Dent 43: – , .
. Sezinando A, Luque-Martinez I, Muñoz MA, et al: Inluence of a
hydrophobic resin coating on the immediate and 6-month dentin
bonding of three universal adhesives. Dent Mater 31:e236–e246,
.
. Tian F , Zhou L, Zhang Z, et al: Paucity of nanolayering in resindentin interfaces of MDP-based adhesives. J Dent Res 95: – ,
.
. Van Meerbeek B, Yoshihara K, Yoshida Y, et al: State of the art of
self-etch adhesives. Dent Mater 27:17–28, .
. Yoshida Y, Yoshihara K, Hayakawa S, et al: HEMA inhibits interfacial
nano-layering of the functional monomer MDP . J Dent Res
91: – , .
. Loguercio AD, Muñoz MA, Luque-Martinez I, et al: Does active
application of universal adhesives to enamel in self-etch mode
improve their performance? J Dent 43: – , .
. Marchesi G, Frassetto A, Mazzoni A, et al: Adhesive performance
of a multi-mode adhesive system: 1-year in vitro study. J Dent
42: – , .
. Kanca J, 3rd: Wet bonding: efect of drying time and distance. Am
J Dent 9: – , .
. Eick JD, Gwinnett AJ, Pashley DH, et al: Current concepts on
adhesion to dentin. Crit Rev Oral Biol Med 8: – , .
. Maciel KT, Carvalho RM, Ringle RD, et al: he efect of acetone,
ethanol, HEMA, and air on the stifness of human decalciied dentin
matrix. J Dent Res 75: – , .
. Perdigão J, Swift EJ, Cloe BC: Efects of etchants, surface moisture,
and resin composite on dentin bond strengths. Am J Dent 6:61–64,
.
. Goes MF , Pachane GC, García-Godoy F: Resin bond strength with
diferent methods to remove excess water from the dentin. Am J
Dent 10: – , .
. Magne P , Mahallati R, Bazos P , et al: Direct dentin bonding technique
sensitivity when using air/suction drying steps. J Esthet Restor Dent
20: – , .
. Carvalho RM, Yoshiyama M, Pashley EL, et al: In vitro study on
the dimensional changes of dentine after demineralization. Arch
Oral Biol 41: – , .
. Perdigão J, Van Meerbeek B, Lopes MM, et al: he efect of a rewetting agent on dentin bonding. Dent Mater 15: – , .
. Tay FR, Gwinnett JA, Wei SH: Micromorphological spectrum from
overdrying to overwetting acid-conditioned dentin in water-free
acetone-based, single-bottle primer/adhesives. Dent Mater
12: – , .
CHAPTER 5 Fundamental Concept of Enamel and Dentin Adheion
. Boushell LW, Kaku M, Mochida Y, et al: Immunohistochemical
localization of matrixmetalloproteinase-2 in human coronal dentin.
Arch Oral Biol 53: – , .
. De Munck J, Mine A, Van den Steen PE, et al: Enzymatic degradation
of adhesive-dentin interfaces produced by mild self-etch adhesives.
Eur J Oral Sci : – , .
. Sadek FT, Castellan CS, Braga RR, et al: One-year stability of
resin-dentin bonds created with a hydrophobic ethanol-wet bonding
technique. Dent Mater 26: – , .
. Bergenholtz G, Cox CF , Loesche WJ, et al: Bacterial leakage around
dental restorations its efect on the dental pulp. J Oral Pathol
11: – , .
. Brännström M, Nyborg H: Pulpal reaction to polycarboxylate and
zinc phosphate cements used with inlays in deep cavity preparations.
J Am Dent Assoc 94: – , .
. Brännström M, Vojinovic O, Nordenvall KJ: Bacteria and pulpal
reactions under silicate cement restorations. J Prosthet Dent
41: – , .
. Torstenson B, Nordenvall KJ, Brännström M: Pulpal reaction and
microorganisms under Clearil Composite Resin in deep cavities
with acid etched dentin. Swed Dent J 6: – , .
. Reference deleted in pages.
. Brännström M, Nordenvall J: Bacterial penetration, pulpal reaction
and the inner surface of Concise Enamel Bond: composite illings
in etched and unetched cavities. J Dent Res 57:3–10, .
. Brännström M, Nyborg H: Cavity treatment with a microbicidal
luoride solution: growth of bacteria and efect on the pulp. J Prosthet
Dent 30: – , .
. Mejàre B, Mejàre I, Edwardsson S: Acid etching and composite
resin restorations: a culturing and histologic study on bacterial
penetration. Acta Odontol Scand 3:1–5, .
. Mejàre I, Mejàre B, Edwardsson S: Efect of a tight seal on survival
of bacteria in saliva-contaminated cavities illed with composite
resin. Endod Dent Traumatol 3:6–9, .
. T urkistani A, Nakashima S, Shimada Y, et al: Microgaps and
demineralization progress around composite restorations. J Dent
Res 94: – , .
. Heintze SD: Systematic reviews: I. he correlation between laboratory
tests on marginal quality and bond strength. II. he correlation
between marginal quality and clinical outcome. J Adhes Dent 9
Suppl 1:77– , .
. Perdigão J, Lopes M: Dentin bonding—questions for the new
millennium. J Adhes Dent 1: – , .
. De Munck J, Van Meerbeek B, Yoshida Y, et al: Four-year water
degradation of total-etch adhesives bonded to dentin. J Dent Res
82: – , .
. Hashimoto M, Ohno H, Sano H, et al: Degradation patterns of
diferent adhesives and bonding procedures. J Biomed Mater Res
66B: – , .
. Hashimoto M, Ohno H, Kaga M, et al: In vivo degradation of
resin-dentin bonds in humans over 1 to 3 years. J Dent Res
79: – , .
. Sano H, Yoshiyama M, Ebisu S, et al: Comparative SEM and TEM
observations of nanoleakage within the hybrid layer. Oper Dent
20: – , .
. Li HP , Burrow MF , Tyas MJ: he efect of long-term storage on
nanoleakage. Oper Dent 26: – , .
. Tay FR, Pashley DH, Yoshiyama M: T wo modes of nanoleakage
expression in single-step adhesives. J Dent Res 81: – , .
. Van Meerbeek B: he “myth” of nanoleakage. J Adhes Dent 9: – ,
.
. Pashley DH, Ciucchi B, Sano H, et al: Permeability of dentin to
adhesive agents. Quintessence Int 24: – , .
. Lee HL, Orlowski JA, Scheidt GC, et al: Efects of acid etchants
on dentin. J Dent Res 52: – , .
. Marshall GW, Inai N, Wu-Magidi IC, et al: Dentin demineralization:
efects of dentin depth, pH and diferent acids. Dent Mater
13: – , . . Breschi L, Perdigão J, Gobbi P , et al: Immunolocalization of type
I collagen in etched dentin. J Biomed Mater Res A 66: – ,
.
. Landis WJ, Hodgens KJ, Arena J, et al: Structural relations between
collagen and mineral in bone as determined by high voltage electron
microscopic tomography. Microsc Res T ech 33: – , .
. Landis WJ, Silver FH: Mineral deposition in the extracellular
matrices of vertebrate tissues: identiication of possible apatite
nucleation sites on type I collagen. Cells Tissues Organs :20–24,
.
. Wainwright SA, Biggs WD, Currey JD, et al: Mechanical design in
organisms , Princeton, , Princeton Univ. Press.
. Rivera EM, Yamauchi M: Site comparisons of dentine collagen
cross-links from extracted human teeth. Arch Oral Biol 38: – ,
.
. Miguez PA, Pereira PN, Atsawasuwan P , et al: Collagen cross-linking
and ultimate tensile strength in dentin. J Dent Res 83: – ,
.
. Yang W, Sherman VR, Gludovatz B, et al: On the tear resistance
of skin. Nat Commun 6: , .
. Prasad M, Butler WT, Qin C: Dentin sialophosphoprotein in
biomineralization. Connect Tissue Res 51: – , .
. Eanes ED: Amorphous calcium phosphate. Monogr Oral Sci
18: – , .
. Weiner S: Biomineralization: a structural perspective. J Struct Biol
: – , .
. Weiner S, Sagi I, Addadi L: Structural biology. Choosing the crystal -
lization path less traveled. Science : – , .
. Dahl T, Sabsay B, Veis A: Type I collagen-phosphophoryn interactions:
speciicity of the monomer-monomer binding. J Struct Biol
: – , .
. Tay FR, Pashley DH: Biomimetic remineralization of resin-bonded
acid-etched dentin. J Dent Res 88: – , .
. Mai S, Kim YK, Toledano M, et al: Phosphoric acid esters cannot
replace polyvinylphosphonic acid as phosphoprotein analogs in
biomimetic remineralization of resin-bonded dentin. Dent Mater
25: – , .
. Mai S, Kim YK, Kim J, et al: In vitro remineralization of severely
compromised bonded dentin. J Dent Res 89: – , .
. Mazzoni A, Pashley DH, Nishitani Y, et al: Reactivation of inactivated
endogenous proteolytic activities in phosphoric acid-etched dentine
by etch-and-rinse adhesives. Biomaterials 27: – ,
.
. Sulkala M, Larmas M, Sorsa T, et al: he localization of matrix
metalloproteinase-20 (MMP-20, enamelysin) in mature human
teeth. J Dent Res 81: – , .
. Martin-De Las Heras S, Valenzuela A, Overall CM: he matrix
metalloproteinase gelatinase A in human dentine. Arch Oral Biol
45: – , .
. Gendron R, Grenier D, Sorsa T, et al: Inhibition of the activities
of matrix metalloproteinases 2, 8, and 9 by chlorhexidine. Clin
Diagn Lab Immunol 6: – , .
. Perdigao J, Denehy GE, Swift EJ, Jr: Efects of chlorhexidine on
dentin surfaces and shear bond strengths. Am J Dent 7:81–84,
.
. Pashley DH, Tay FR, Yiu C, et al: Collagen degradation by hostderived enzymes during aging. J Dent Res 83: – , .
. Ricci HA, Sanabe ME, de Souza Costa CA, et al: Chlorhexidine
increases the longevity of in vivo resin-dentin bonds. Eur J Oral Sci
: – , .
. Carrilho MR, Carvalho RM, de Goes MF , et al: Chlorhexidine
preserves dentin bond in vitro. J Dent Res 86:90–94, .
. Hebling J, Pashley DH, Tj ӓderhane L, et al: Chlorhexidine arrests
subclinical degradation of dentin hybrid layers in vivo. J Dent Res
84: – , .
. Loguercio AD, Hass V, Gutierrez MF , et al: Five-year efects of
chlorhexidine on the in vitro durability of resin/dentin interfaces.
J Adhes Dent 18:35–42, .
CHAPTER 5 Fundamental Concept of Enamel and Dentin Adheion
. Ravn JJ: Follow-up study of permanent incisors with enamel fractures
as a result of an acute trauma. Scand J Dent Res 89: – ,
.
. Murray PE, Smith AJ, Garcia-Godoy F , et al: Comparison of
operative procedure variables on pulpal viability in an ex vivo model.
Int Endod J 41: – , .
. Hannig M, Bott B: In-vitro pulp chamber temperature rise during
composite resin polymerization with various light-curing sources.
Dent Mater 15: – , .
. Baroudi K, Silikas N, Watts DC: In vitro pulp chamber temperature
rise from irradiation and ex otherm of lowable composites. Int J
Paediatr Dent 19:48–54, .
. Bergenholtz G: Evidence for bacterial causation of adverse pulpal
responses in resin-based dental restorations. Crit Rev Oral Biol Med
11: – , .
. Knezevic A, Zeljezic D, Kopjar N, et al: Cytotoxicity of composite
materials polymerized with LED curing units. Oper Dent 33:23–30,
.
. Eren D, Bekta ş ÖÖ, Siso SH: hree diferent adhesive systems;
three diferent bond strength test methods. Acta Odontol Scand
71: – , .
. Heintze SD, hunpithayakul C, Armstrong SR, et al: Correlation
between microtensile bond strength data and clinical outcome of
Class V restorations. Dent Mater 27: – , .
. Paul SJ, Welter DA, Ghazi M, et al: Nanoleakage at the dentin
adhesive interface vs microtensile bond strength. Oper Dent
24: – , .
. Eick JD, Robinson SJ, Chappell RP , et al: he dentinal surface: its
inluence on dentinal adhesion: part III. Quintessence Int 24: – ,
.
. Tam LE, Pilliar RM: Fracture surface characterization of dentinbonded interfacial fracture toughness specimens. J Dent Res
73: – , .
. Fortin D, Swift EJ, Jr, Denehy GE, et al: Bond strength and
microleakage of current adhesive systems. Dent Mater 10: – ,
.
. Sano H, Shono T, Sonoda H, et al: Relationship between surface
area for adhesion and tensile bond strength: evaluation of a microtensile bond test. Dent Mater 10: – , .
. Nakajima M, Sano H, Burrow MF , et al: Tensile bond strength and
SEM evaluation of caries-afected dentin using dentin adhesives. J
Dent Res 74: – , .
. Phrukkanon S, Burrow MF , Tyas MJ: he inluence of cross-sectional
shape and surface area on the microtensile bond test. Dent Mater
14: – , .
. Shono Y, Ogawa T, Terashita M, et al: Regional measurement of
resin-dentin bonding as an array. J Dent Res 78: – , .
. Reis A, Rocha de Oliveira Carrilho M, Schroeder M, et al: he
inluence of storage time and cutting speed on microtensile bond
strength. J Adhes Dent 6:7–11, .
. Poitevin A, De Munck J, Van Landuyt K, et al: Critical analysis of
the inluence of diferent parameters on the microtensile bond
strength of adhesives to dentin. J Adhes Dent 10:7–16, .
. Van Meerbeek B, Peumans M, Poitevin A, et al: Relationship
between bond-strength tests and clinical outcomes. Dent Mater
26:e100–e121, .
. Heintze SD, Bluck U, G ӧhring TN, et al: Marginal adaptation in
vitro and clinical outcome of Class V restorations. Dent Mater
25: – , .
. Armstrong SR, Boyer DB, Keller JC: Microtensile bond strength
testing and failure analysis of two dentin adhesives. Dent Mater
14:44–50, .
. Pashley DH: Dentin bonding: overview of the substrate with respect
to adhesive material. J Esthet Dent 3:46–50, .
. Pameijer CH, Louw NP: Signiicance of pulpal pressure during
clinical bonding procedures. Am J Dent 10: – , .
. Yoshiyama M, Carvaho RM, Sano H, et al: Regional bond strengths
of resins to human root dentine. J Dent 24: – , . . Selvig KA: Ultrastructural changes in human dentine exposed to a
weak acid. Arch Oral Biol 13: – , .
. Wang J-D, Hume WR: Difusion of hydrogen ion and hydroxyl
ion from various sources through dentine. Int Endod J 21:17–26,
.
. Uno S, Finger WJ: Efects of acidic conditioners on dentine
demineralization and dimension of hybrid layers. J Dent 24: – ,
.
. Macko DJ, Rutberg M, Langeland K: Pulpal response to the
application of phosphoric acid to dentin. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral
Pathol 6: – , .
. Cox CF , Suzuki S: Re-evaluating pulp protection: calcium hydroxide
liners vs. cohesive hybridization. J Am Dent Assoc : – ,
.
. Cox CF , Keall CL, Keall HJ, et al: Biocompatibility of surface-sealed
dental materials against exposed pulps. J Prosthet Dent 57:1–8,
.
. Fuks AB, Funnell B, Cleaton-Jones P: Pulp response to a composite
resin inserted in deep cavities with and without a surface seal. J
Prosthet Dent 63: – , .
. Inokoshi S, Iwaku M, Fusayama T: Pulpal response to a new adhesive
restorative resin. J Dent Res 61: – , .
. Qvist V, Stoltze K, Qvist J: Human pulp reactions to resin restorations
performed with diferent acid-etched restorative procedures. Acta
Odontol Scand 47: – , .
. Snuggs HM, Cox CF , Powell CS, et al: Pulpal healing an d dentinal
bridge formation in an acidic environment. Quintessence Int
24: – , .
. Tsuneda Y, Hayakawa T, Yamamoto H, et al: A histopathological
study of direct pulp capping with adhesive resins. Oper Dent
20: – , .
. White KS, Cox CF , Kanca J, 3rd, et al: Pulp response to adhesive
resin systems applied to acid-etched vital dentin: damp versus dry
primer application. Quintessence Int 25: – , .
. Kanca J, 3rd: Replacement of a fractured incisor fragment over
pulpal exposure: a long-term case report. Quintessence Int 27: – ,
.
. Heitman T, Unterbrink G: Direct pulp capping with a dentinal
adhesive resin system: a pilot study. Quintessence Int 11: – ,
.
. Cox CF , Hafez AA, Akimoto N, et al: Biocompatibility of primer,
adhesive and resin composite systems on non-exposed and exposed
pulps of non-human primate teeth. Am J Dent 11:S55–S63,
.
. Gwinnett AJ, Tay FR: Early and intermediate time response of the
dental pulp to an acid etch technique in vivo. Am J Dent 11:S35–S44,
.
. Hebling J, Giro EM, Costa CA: Biocompatibility of an adhesive
system applied to exposed human dental pulp. J Endod 25: – ,
.
. Pameijer CH, Stanley HR: he disastrous efects of the “total etch”
technique in vital pulp capping in primates. Am J Dent 11:S45–S54,
.
. Costa CA, Hebling J, Hanks CT: Current status of pulp capping
with dentin adhesive systems: a review. Dent Mater 16: – ,
.
. Bjørndal L, Darvann T: A light microscopic study of odontoblastic
and non-odontoblastic cells involved in tertiary dentinogenesis in
well-deined cavitated carious lesions. Caries Res 33:50–60,
.
. Bergenholtz G: Iatrogenic injury to the pulp in dental procedures:
aspects of pathogenesis, management and preventive measures. Int
Dent J 41:99– , .
. Brännström M: he efect of dentin desiccation and aspirated
odontoblasts on the pulp. J Prosthet Dent 20: – , .
. Stanley HR, Weisman MI, Michanowicz AE, et al: Ischemic infarction
of the pulp: sequential degenerative changes of the pulp after
traumatic injury. J Endod 4: – , .
CHAPTER 5 Fundamental Concept of Enamel and Dentin Adheion
. Kalavacharla VK, Lawson NC, Ramp LC, et al: I nluence of etching
protocol and silane treatment with a universal adhesive on lithium
disilicate bond strength. Oper Dent 40: – , .
. Perdigão J, Swift EJ, Jr: Universal adhesives. J Esthet Restor Dent
27: – , .
. Siqueira F , Cardenas AM, Gutierrez MF , et al: Laboratory performance
of universal adhesive systems for luting CAD/CAM restorative
materials. J Adhes Dent 18: – , .
. Pashley DH, Matthews WG, Zhang Y, et al: Fluid shifts across
human dentine in vitro in response to hydrodynamic stimuli. Arch
Oral Biol 41: – , .
. Markowitz K: Pretty painful: Why does tooth bleaching hurt? Med
Hypotheses 74: – , .
. Gray A, Ferguson MM, Wall JG: Wine tasting and dental erosion:
case report. Aust Dent J 43:32–34, .
. Grippo JO: Abfractions: a new classiication of hard tissue lesions
of teeth. J Esthet Dent 3:14–19, .
. Cuenin MF , Scheidt MJ, O’Neal RB, et al: An in vivo study of
dentin sensitivity: the relation of dentin sensitivity and the patency
of dentin tubules. J Periodontol 62: – , .
. Reinhardt JW, Stephens NH, Fortin D: Efect of Gluma desensitiza -
tion on dentin bond strength. Am J Dent 8: – , .
. Kerns DG, Scheidt MJ, Pashley DH, et al: Dentinal tubule occlusion
and root hypersensitivity. J Periodontol 62: – , .
. Nakabayashi N, Nakamura M, Yasuda N: Hybrid layer as a
dentin-bonding mechanism. J Esthet Dent 3: – , .
. Scherman A, Jacobsen PL: Managing dentin hypersensitivity: What
treatment to recommend to patients. J Am Dent Assoc :57–61,
.
. Nikaido T, Burrow MF , Tagami J, et al: Efect of pulpal pressure
on adhesion of resin composite to dentin: bovine serum versus
saline. Quintessence Int 26: – , .
. Swift EJ, Hammel SA, Perdigao J, et al: Prevention of root surface
caries using a dental adhesive. J Am Dent Assoc : – , .
. Felton DA, Bergenholtz G, Kanoy BE: Evaluation of the desensitizing
efect of Gluma dentin bond on teeth prepared for complete coverage
restorations. Int J Prosthodont 4: – , .
. Bowes JH, Cater CW: he reaction of glutaraldehyde with proteins
and other biological materials. J Royal Microsc Soc 85: – ,
.
. Schüpbach P , Lutz F , Finger WJ: Closing of dentinal tubules by
Gluma desensitizer. Eur J Oral Sci : – , .
. Duran I, Sengun A, Yildirim T, et al: In vitro dentine permeability
evaluation of HEMA-based (desensitizing) products using splitchamber model following in vivo application in the dog. J Oral
Rehabil 32:34–38, .
. Camps J, About I, Van Meerbeek B, et al: Eiciency and cytotoxicity
of resin-based desensitizing agents. Am J Dent 15: – , .
. Finger WJ, Balkenhol M: Rewetting strategies for bonding to dry
dentin with an acetone-based adhesive. J Adhes Dent 2:51–56, .
. Ritter AV, Heymann HO, Swift EJ, Jr, et al: Efects of diferent
re-wetting techniques on dentin shear bond strengths. J Esthet Dent
12:85–96, .
. Sobral MA, Garone-Netto N, Luz MA, et al: Prevention of postopera -
tive tooth sensitivity: a preliminary clinical trial. J Oral Rehabil
32: – , .
. Chermont AB, Carneiro KK, Lobato MF , et al: Clinical evaluation
of postoperative sensitivity using self-etching adhesives containing
glutaraldehyde. Braz Oral Res 24: – , .
. Cobb DS, Reinhardt JW, Vargas MA: Efect of HEMA-containing
dentin desensitizers on shear bond strength of a resin cement. Am
J Dent 10:62–65, .
. Swift EJ, Jr, Lloyd AH, Felton DA, et al: he efect of resin
desensitizing agents on crown retention. J Am Dent Assoc
: – , .
. Helfer AR, Melnick S, Schilder H: Determination of the moisture
content of vital and pulpless teeth. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol
34: – , . . Yoshiyama M, Sano H, Ebisu S, et al: Regional strengths of bonding
agents to cervical sclerotic root dentin. J Dent Res 75: – ,
.
. Perinka L, Sano H, Hosoda H: Dentin thickness, hardness and
Ca-concentration vs bond strength of dentin adhesives. Dent Mater
8: – , .
. Brännström M, Lindén LA, Aström A: he hydrodynamics of the
dental tubule and of pulp luid. A discussion of its signiicance in
relation to dentinal sensitivity. Caries Res 1: – , .
. Harnirattisai C, Inokoshi S, Shimada Y, et al: Adhesive interface
between resin and etched dentin of cervical erosion/abrasion lesions.
Oper Dent 18: – , .
. Kwong SM, Cheung GS, Kei LH, et al: Micro-tensile bond strengths
to sclerotic dentin using a self-etching and a total-etching technique.
Dent Mater 18: – , .
. Heymann HO, Sturdevant JR, Bayne S, et al: Examining tooth
lexure efects on cervical restorations: a two-year clinical study. J
Am Dent Assoc :41–47, .
. Van Meerbeek B, Braem M, Lambrechts P , et al: Morphological
characterization of the interface between resin and sclerotic dentine.
J Dent 22: – , .
. van Dijken JWV: Clinical evaluation of three adhesive systems in
Class V non-carious lesions. Dent Mater 16: – , .
. Braem M, Lambrechts P , Vanherle G, et al: Stifness increase during
the setting of dental composite resins. J Dent Res 66: – ,
.
. Heymann HO, Sturdevant JR, Brunson WD, et al: T welve-month
clinical study of dentinal adhesives in Class V cervical lesions. J Am
Dent Assoc : – , .
. Heintze SD, Rousson V: Clinical efectiveness of direct class II
restorations - a meta-analysis. J Adhes Dent 14: – , .
. Gladys S, Van Meerbeek B, Braem M, et al: Comparative physicomechanical characterization of new hybrid restorative materials with
conventional glass-ionomer and resin composite restorative materials.
J Dent Res 76: – , .
. Miyazaki M, Hinoura K, Onose H, et al: Efect of iller content of
light-cured composites on bond strength to bovine dentine. J Dent
19: – , .
. Browning WD, Brackett WW, Gilpatrick RO: T wo-year clinical
comparison of a microilled and a hybrid resin-based composite in
non-carious Class V lesions. Oper Dent 25:46–50, .
. Peumans M, De Munck J, Van Landuyt KL, et al: Restoring cervical
lesions with flexible composites. Dent Mater 23: – ,
.
. Peumans M, Kanumilli P , De Munck J, et al: Clinical efectiveness
of contemporary adhesives: a systematic review of current clinical
trials. Dent Mater 21: – , .
. Heintze SD, Ruieux C, Rousson V: Clinical performance of
cervical restorations–a meta-analysis. Dent Mater 26: – ,
.
. Loguercio AD, De Paula EA, Hass V, et al: A new universal simpliied
adhesive: 36-month randomized double-blind clinical trial. J Dent
43: – , .
. Lawson NC, Robles A, Fu CC, et al: T wo-year clinical trial of a
universal adhesive in total-etch and self-etch mode in non-carious
cervical lesions. J Dent 43: – , .
. Sanares AME, Itthagarun A, King NM, et al: Adverse surface
interactions between one-bottle light-cured adhesives and chemicalcured composites. Dent Mater 17: – , .
. Swift EJ, Jr, Perdigão J, Combe EC, et al: Efects of restorative and
adhesive curing methods on dentin bond strengths. Am J Dent
14: – , .
. Bömicke W, Schürz A, Krisam J, et al: Durability of resin-zirconia
bonds produced using methods available in dental practice. J Adhes
Dent 18:17–27, .
. Seabra B, Arantes-Oliveira S, Portugal J: Inluence of multimode
universal adhesives and zirconia primer application techniques on
zirconia repair. J Prosthet Dent : – , .
CHAPTER 5 Fundamental Concept of Enamel and Dentin Adheion
. Boone KJ, Murchison DF , Schindler WG, et al: P ost retention: the
efect of sequence of post-space preparation, cementation time, and
diferent sealers. J Endod 27: – , .
. Mesquita GC, Verissimo C, Raposo LH, et al: Can the cure time
of endodontic sealers afect bond strength to root dentin? Braz Dent
J 24: – , .
. Vano M, Cury AH, Goracci C, et al: he efect of immediate versus
delayed cementation on the retention of diferent ty pes of iber post
in canals obturated using a eugenol sealer. J Endod 32: – ,
.
. Tzanakakis EG, Tzoutzas IG, Koidis PT: Is there a potential for
durable adhesion to zirconia restorations? A systematic review. J
Prosthet Dent :9–19, .
. Morimoto S, Albanesi RB, Sesma N, et al: Main clinical outcomes
of feldspathic porcelain and glass-ceramic laminate veneers: a sys -
tematic review and meta-analysis of survival and complication rates.
Int J Prosthodont 29:38–49, .
. Sterzenbach G, Franke A, Naumann M: Rigid versus lexible
dentine-like endodontic posts–clinical testing of a biomechanical
concept: seven-year results of a randomized controlled clinical pilot
trial on endodontically treated abutment teeth with severe hard
tissue loss. J Endod 38: – , .
. Esquivel-Upshaw J, Rose W, Oliveira E, et al: Randomized, controlled
clinical trial of bilayer ceramic and metal-ceramic crown performance.
J Prosthodont 22: – , .
. Gracis S, hompson VP , Ferencz JL, et al: A new classiication
system for all-ceramic and ceramic-like restorative materials. Int J
Prosthodont 28: – , .
. Ozcan M, Vallittu PK: Efect of surface conditioning methods on
the bond strength of luting cement to ceramics. Dent Mater
19: – , .
. Addison O, Marquis PM, Fleming GJ: he impact of hydroluoric
acid surface treatments on the performance of a porcelain laminate
restorative material. Dent Mater 23: – , .
. Peumans M, Valjakova EB, De Munck J, et al: Bonding efectiveness
of luting composites to diferent CAD/CAM materials. J Adhes
Dent 18: – , .
. al Edris A, al Jabr A, Cooley RL, et al: SEM evaluation of etch
patterns by three etchants on three porcelains. J Prosthet Dent
64: – , .
. Calamia JR: Etched porcelain facial veneers: a new treatment
modality based on scientiic and clinical evidence. N Y J Dent
53: – , .
. Bjorksten J, Yaeger LL: Vinyl silane size for glass fabric. Mod Plast
29: , , .
. Bowen RL, Rodriguez MS: Tensile strength and modulus of elasticity
of tooth structure and several restorative materials. J Am Dent Assoc
64: – , .
. Diaz-Arnold AM, Schneider RL, Aquilino SA: Porcelain repairs:
an evaluation of the shear strength of three porcelain repair systems
(abstract ). J Dent Res 66: , .
. Newburg R, Pameijer CH: Composite resin bonded to porcelain
with a silane solution. J Am Dent Assoc 96: – , .
. Sheth J, Jensen M, Tolliver D: Efect of surface treatment on etched
porcelain and bond strength to enamel. Dent Mater 4: – ,
.
. Chen L, Shen H, Suh BI: Efect of incorporating BisGMA resin
on the bonding properties of silane and zirconia primers. J Prosthet
Dent : – , .
. Kim RJ, Woo JS, Lee IB, et al: Performance of universal adhesives
on bonding to leucite-reinforced ceramic. Biomater Res 19:11,
.
. Chen C, T rindade FZ, de Jager N, et al: he fracture resistance of
a CAD/CAM Resin NanoCeramic (RNC) and a CAD ceramic at
diferent thicknesses. Dent Mater 30: – , .
. Fleming GJ, Jandu HS, Nolan L, et al: he inluence of alumina
abrasion and cement lute on the strength of a porcelain laminate
veneering material. J Dent 32:67–74, . . Nalbandian J, Gonzales F , Sognnaes RF: Sclerotic age changes in
root dentin of human teeth as observed by optical, electron, and
X-ray microscopy. J Dent Res 39: – , .
. Kinney JH, Nalla RK, Pople JA, et al: Age-related transparent root
dentin: mineral concentration, crystallite size, and mechanical
properties. Biomaterials 26: – , .
. Mjör IA, Smith MR, Ferrari M, et al: he structure of dentine in
the apical region of human teeth. Int Endod J 34: – , .
. Violich DR, Chandler NP: he smear layer in endodontics - a
review. Int Endod J 43:2–15, .
. McComb D, Smith DC: A preliminary scanning electron microscopic
study of root canals after endodontic procedures. J Endod 1: – ,
.
. Mader CL, Baumgartner JC, Peters DD: Scanning electron microscopic investigation of the smeared layer on root canal walls. J Endod
10: – , .
. Reis A, Loguercio AD, Bitter K, et al: Adhesion to root dentin: A
challenging task. In Perdigão J, editor: Restoration of root canal-treated
teeth - an adhesive dentistry perspective , Switzerland, , Springer
International Publishing, pp – .
. Bouillaguet S, T roesch S, Wataha JC, et al: Microtensile bond
strength between adhesive cements and root canal dentin. Dent
Mater 19: – , .
. Alster D, Feilzer AJ, de Gee AJ, et al: Polymerization contraction
stress in thin resin composite layers as a function of layer thickness.
Dent Mater 13: – , .
. Santos-Filho PC, Veríssimo C, Raposo LH, et al: Inluence of
ferrule, post system, and length on stress distribution of weakened
root-illed teeth. J Endod 40: – , .
. Gomes GM, Gomes OM, Gomes JC, et al: Evaluation of diferent
restorative techniques for illing lared root canals: fracture resistance
and bond strength after mechanical fatigue. J Adhes Dent 16: – ,
.
. Farina AP , Chiela H, Carlini-Junior B, et al: Inluence of cement
type and relining procedure on push-out bond strength of iber
posts after cyclic loading. J Prosthodont 25:54–60, .
. Feilzer AJ, de Gee AJ, Davidson CL: Setting stresses in composites
for two diferent curing modes. Dent Mater 9:2–5, .
. Bitter K, Perdigão J, Hartwig C, et al: Nanoleakage of luting agents
for bonding iber posts after thermo-mechanical fatigue. J Adhes
Dent 13:61–69, .
. Bitter K, Perdigão J, Exner M, et al: Reliability of iber post bonding
to root canal dentin after simulated clinical function in vitro. Oper
Dent 37: – , .
. Sarkis-Onofre R, Skupien JA, Cenci MS, et al: he role of resin
cement on bond strength of glass-iber posts luted into root canals:
a systematic review and meta-analysis of in vitro studies. Oper Dent
39:E31–E44, .
. Skupien JA, Sarkis-Onofre R, Cenci MS, et al: A systematic review
of factors associated with the retention of glass iber posts. Braz
Oral Res 29:pii: S1806- , .
. Mayer T, Pioch T, Duschner H, et al: Dentinal adhesion and his -
tomorphology of two dentinal bonding agents under the inluence
of eugenol. Quintessence Int 28:57–62, .
. AlEisa K, Al-Dwairi ZN, Lynch E, et al: In vitro evaluation of the
efect of diferent endodontic sealers on retentive strength of iber
posts. Oper Dent 38: – , .
. Aleisa K, Alghabban R, Alwazzan K, et al: Efect of three endodontic
sealers on the bond strength of prefabricated iber posts luted with
three resin cements. J Prosthet Dent : – , .
. Demiryurek EO, Kulunk S, Yuksel G, et al: Efects of three canal
sealers on bond strength of a iber post. J Endod 36: – , .
. Hagge MS, Wong RD, Lindemuth JS: Efect of three root canal
sealers on the retentive strength of endodontic posts luted with a
resin cement. Int Endod J 35: – , .
. Kurtz JS, Perdigao J, Geraldeli S, et al: Bond strengths of toothcolored posts, efect of sealer, dentin adhesive, and root region. Am
J Dent 16 Spec No:31A–36A, .
CHAPTER 5 Fundamental Concept of Enamel and Dentin Adheion
. Studart AR, Filser F , Kocher P , et al: Fatigue of zirconia under cyclic
loading in water and its implications for the design of dental bridges.
Dent Mater 23: – , .
. Kohorst P , Dittmer MP , Borchers L, et al: I nluence of cyclic fatigue
in water on the loadbearing capacity of dental bridges made of
zirconia. Acta Biomater 4: – , .
. Kohorst P , Borchers L, Strempel J, et al: Low-temperature degradation
of diferent zirconia ceramics for dental applications. Acta Biomater
8: – , .
. Perdigão J, Pinto AM, Monteiro RC, et al: Degradation of dental
ZrO 2-based materials after hydrothermal fatigue. Part I: XRD, XRF ,
and FESEM analyses. Dent Mater J 31: – , .
. Bergamo E, da Silva WJ, Cesar PF , et al: Fracture load and phase
transformation of monolithic zirconia crowns submitted to diferent
aging protocols. Oper Dent 41:E118–E130, .
. Ângela Maziero Volpato C, Francisco Cesar P , Antônio Bottino M:
Inluence of accelerated aging on the color stability of dental zirconia.
J Esthet Restor Dent 28: – , .
. Frankenberger R, Hartmann VE, Krech M, et al: Adhesive luting
of new CAD/CAM materials. Int J Comput Dent 18:9–20, .
. Kassotakis EM, Stavridakis M, Bortolotto T, et al: Evaluation of
the efect of diferent surface treatments on luting CAD/CAM
composite resin overlay workpieces. J Adhes Dent 17: – ,
.
. Coldea A, Swain MV, hiel N: Mechanical properties of polymeriniltrated-ceramic-network materials. Dent Mater 29: – ,
.
. Özcan M, Volpato CÂ: Surface conditioning and bonding protocol
for polymer-iniltrated ceramic: How and why? J Adhes Dent
18: – , .
. Darr AH, Jacobson PH: Conversion of dual-cure luting cements.
J Oral Rehabil 22:43–47, .
. Lührs AK, De Munck J, Geurtsen W, et al: Composite cements
beneit from light-curing. Dent Mater 30: – , .
. D’Alpino PH, Silva MS, Vismara MV, et al: he efect of polymeriza -
tion mode on monomer conversion, free radical entrapment, and
interaction with hydroxyapatite of commercial self-adhesive cements.
J Mech Behav Biomed Mater 46:83–92, .
. Gerth HU, Dammaschke T, Züchner H, et al: Chemical analysis
and bonding reaction of RelyX Unicem and Biix composites–a
comparative study. Dent Mater 22: – , .
. Saskalauskaite E, Tam LE, McComb D: Flexural strength, elastic
modulus, and pH proile of self-etch resin luting cements. J
Prosthodont 17: – , .
. Vrochari AD, Eliades G, Hellwig E, et al: Curing eiciency of four
self-etching, self-adhesive resin cements. Dent Mater 25: – ,
.
Dicloure
Dr. Perdigão has received compensation for speaking at events
sponsored by 3M Oral Care and Coltene. his relationship has
been reviewed and managed by the University of Minnesota in
accordance with its conlict of interest policies. . Garvie RC, Hannink RH, Pascoe RT: Ceramic steel? Nature
: – , .
. Heuer AH: T ransformation toughening in ZrO 2-containing ceramics.
J Am Ceram Soc 70: – , .
. Hannink RHJ, Kelly PM, Muddle BC: T ransformation toughening
in zirconia-containing ceramics. J Am Ceram Soc 83: – , .
. Piconi C, Maccauro G: Zirconia as a ceramic bi omaterial. Biomaterials
20:1–25, .
. Tanaka K, Tamura J, Kawanabe K, et al: Phase stability after aging
and its inluence on pin-on-disk wear properties of Ce-TZP/Al 2O3
nanocomposite and conventional Y-TZP . J Biomed Mater Res A
67: – , .
. Benzaid R, Chevalier J, Saâdaoui M, et al: Fracture toughness,
strength and slow crack growth in a ceria stabilized zirconia-alumina
nanocomposite for medical applications. Biomaterials 29: – ,
.
. Kern M, Wegner SM: Bonding to zirconia ceramic: adhesion
methods and their durability. Dent Mater 14:64–71, .
. Borges GA, Spohr AM, de Goes MF , et al: Efect of etching and
airborne particle abrasion on the microstructure of diferent dental
ceramics. J Prosthet Dent 89: – , .
. Kern M, Barloi A, Yang B: Surface conditioning inluences zirconia
ceramic bonding. J Dent Res 88: – , .
. Inokoshi M, De Munck J, Minakuchi S, et al: Meta-analysis of
bonding efectiveness to zirconia ceramics. J Dent Res 93: – ,
.
. Özcan M, Bernasconi M: Adhesion to zirconia used for dental
restorations: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Adhes Dent
17:7–26, .
. Chen L, Suh BI, Brown D, et al: Bonding of primed zirconia
ceramics: evidence of chemical bonding and improved bond strengths.
Am J Dent 25: – , .
. Yoshida K, Tsuo T, Atsuta M: Bonding of dual-cured resin cement
to zirconia ceramic using phosphate acid ester monomer and zirconate
coupler. J Biomed Mater Res B Appl Biomater 77:28–33, .
. Maeda FA, Bello-Silva MS, de Paula Eduardo C, et al: Association
of diferent primers and resin cements for adhesive bonding to
zirconia ceramics. J Adhes Dent 16: – , .
. Amaral M, Belli R, Cesar PF , et al: he potential of novel primers
and universal adhesives to bond to zirconia. J Dent 42:90–98,
.
. Özcan M, Bock T: Protocol for removal of clinically relevant
contaminants from zirconium dioxide ixed dental prostheses. J
Adhes Dent 17: – , .
. Kobayashi K, Kuwajima H, Masaki T: Phase change and mechanical
properties of ZrO 2-Y2O3 solid electrolyte after ageing. Solid State
Ion 3/4: – , .
. Chevalier J, Cales B, Drouin JM: Low-temperature aging of Y-TZP
ceramics. J Am Ceram Soc 82: – , .
. Chevalier J, Olagnon C, Fantozzi G: Subcritical crack propagation
in 3Y-TZP ceramics: static and cyclic fatigue. J Am Ceram Soc
82: – , .
. Chevalier J, Gremillard L, Deville S: Low-temperat ure degradation
of zirconia and implications for biomedical implants. Annu Rev
Mater Res 37:1–32, .
CHAPTER 6 Light Curing of Retorative Material
Light Curing of Restorative Materials
RICHARD B. PRICE, FREDERICK A. RUEGGEBERG
The ability to light cure dental resins “on demand” has revo -
lutionized the practice of restorative dentistry and the dental
curing light has become an indispensable tool in almost
every dental oice.1-3 Despite their ubiquitous presence and routine
use, the interaction between curing lights and light-activated dental
resins or resin cements is poorly understood.4 At irst glance, it
appears that the process of light curing is simple and requires little
attention. his misconception is concerning. Although the surface
of the resin closest to the light polymerizes readily, giving the
appearance that all the resin has been fully “light cured,” this has
not always occurred in the deeper layers of the restoration. his
may result in bulk fracture of the restoration, increased wear,
increased release of chemicals, a low bond strength to the tooth,
and increased microleakage between the tooth and the resin.5-15
In most countries, dental curing lights are classiied as medical
devices that must pass stringent tests before they are approved for
use. his chapter will review the background and discuss the current
knowledge of dental curing light and its use in contem porary resin
photopolymerization. he International System of Units (SI)
terminology that should be used to describe the output from a
curing light will also be presented ( ).
Methacrylate-Baed, Free
Radical Polymerization
Virtually all resin-based restorative materials used to directly restore
teeth belong to the methacrylate family.1 hese methacrylate-based
monomers are linked to form polymers by a process called free
radical addition polymerization. Once the free radical species are
formed, the polymerization process is the same for all ty pes of
methacrylate-based restorative materials that are in use today. he
only diference is how the free radicals are generated, the rate at
which they are generated, and the number of free radicals that are
produced. his process consists of the following four step s: activa -
tion, initiation, propagation, and termination ( Fig. 6.1 ).
Activation and Initiation
he irst step involves activation of a free radical species. his is
a compound with an unpaired electron that aggressively seeks
another electron with which it can form a covalent bond. here
are many types of free radical species, but to become activated
they all require an external energy source such as heat, an amine
reducing agent (used in “self-curing” or “cold-curing”), or electro -
magnetic radiation (ultraviolet [UV] light, visible blue light, or microwave energy). In dental resins, the activated, free radical
species seek out the electron-rich carbon double bond that is present
in methacrylate groups of a monomer molecule. his double bond
gives up one electron to the newly initiated radical, and the other
electron acts as the free radical agent. This process is called
“initiation.”
Propagation
his monomer-radical species then seeks another carbon double
bond in an adjacent monomer molecule; it absconds one of the
double bond electrons and forms a new covalent bond between
the two monomer molecules. This newly attached monomer
possesses the unpaired electron, and it brings along the entire
polymer chain to ind yet more electron-rich carbon double bonds
with which it can react. With every additional methacrylate-based
monomer that is added to the end, the polymer chain grows longer.
his process is called “propagation.”
Termination
As the chain length increases, its molecular weight grows, thus
decreasing the ability of the polymer chain to move. Also, because
the surrounding resin changes from a liquid to a gel, the mobility
of the reacting molecules decreases. Further increases in the chain
length become difusion controlled and the inability of the growing
polymer chains to readily ind and join to additional unreacted
methacrylate monomers causes the rate of polymerization to
decrease. his phenomenon is termed auto-deceleration. Eventu ally
the polymerized resin becomes a solid, thus further inhibiting
linear chain growth. At this point, the probability increases that
two free radical ends from two diferent polymer chains will meet
and form a covalent bond. Once this occurs, further increase in
the linear chain length becomes impossible. his phase is called
“termination.” Most direct resin restorative materials used intraorally
also contain monomer units that have two or more carbon double
bonds that also allow cross-linking between adjacent polymer chains.
Cross-linking between chains is highly desirable because polymers
that have little cross-linking tend to be weak and lexible, whereas
those that are highly cross-linked have greater fracture resistance,
are harder, are less lexible, and are more heat resistant.16 Of note,
the use of diferent curing lights or light exposure modes can result
in polymers that have diferent amounts of cross-linking.1,16,18 his
phenomenon means that solvents, food substances, and enzymatic
attack can have diferent efects on the same dental resin, depending
on how it was light cured.16-18
CHAPTER 6 Light Curing of Retorative Material
react together to form free radicals19 (Fig. 6.2 ). he resin component
was improved over the years to include dimethacrylate-based
monomers and ground glass particles (to make a composite), but
the same basic components were used in this self-curing polymeriza -
tion reaction. Following mixing, the paste was packed into the
cavity and held in situ for several minutes as the resin polymerized.19
Additional material could be added to the original increment after
it became hard. he material could be used in bulk increments
because free radicals are produced throughout the resin as the
benzoyl peroxide and the aromatic amine interact. he relatively Development of Polymerization Strategie
for Dentitry
Self-Curing Direct Retorative Product
he irst dental resins were “self-curing” or “cold-c ure” acrylics.
his reaction combined the same benzoyl peroxide free radical
generator that is used in heat-cured resins with an aromatic amine.
hese components are packaged separately as a “catalyst” and a
“base” because when mixed together at room temperature, they Radiometric Terminology Used to Describe the Emission From Dental Curing Lights
Term Units Symbol Notes
Radiant energy Joule J Describes the energy emitted or received
Radiant exposure Joule per square centimeter J/cm2Describes the energy emitted or received
Radiant energy density Joule per cubic centimeter J/cm3The volumetric (cm3) energy density
Not to be confused with the energy density term that
has been used in dentistry
Radiant power, or
Radiant luxWatt W or J/s Radiant energy per unit time
Radiant exitance, or
Radiant emittanceWatt per square centimeter W/cm2Radiant power (lux) emitted from a deined area (e.g.,
the tip of a light-curing unit)
Irradiance (incident
irradiance)Watt per square centimeter W/cm2Radiant power (lux) incident on a known surface area
An averaged value over this surface area
Spectral radiant power Watt per nanometer W/nm Radiant power at each wavelength of light in nm
Spectral irradiance Watt per square centimeter per nanometer W/cm2/nm Irradiance per wavelength of light at each nm
Luminous eficacy Lumens per watt lm/W The ratio of luminous lux to power
A measure of how eficiently a light source can produce
light in terms of the human eye response to light
• Fig. 6.1 Stages of vinyl, free radical addition polymerization—the mechanism used in polymerization
of all methacrylate-based dental resins.
CHAPTER 6 Light Curing of Retorative Material
used in this ield is required. Commonly used terms to describe
the output from a curing light such as intensity, power density, or
energy density are not SI terms, they are confusing as to what they
mean, and ideally they should not be used. he appropriate SI
radiometric terms to better describe the output from a curing light
are provided in .3
When measured at zero distance, such as when the curing light
tip is in direct contact with the meter detector or the resin surface,
the SI term radiant exitance is efectively the same as the SI term
incident irradiance and is usually described in milliWatts per square
centimeter (mW/cm2). he radiant exitance ( irradiance at 0 mm
distance) is commonly used to describe the output from a curing
light; however, this parameter provides limited information about
how powerful (Watts) the curing light is, the efect of tip-to-target
distance on the irradiance received, the spectral radiant power, or
the beam uniformity. For example, if two curing lights deliver the
same radiant power, but one has a 7-mm and the other has a
10-mm tip diameter, the smaller diameter tip will be half the area
(0.38 cm2) of the larger one (0.79 cm2). his decrease in tip area
will double the radiant exitance (irradiance) at th e tip, even though
both lights deliver the same radiant power. Such small tip diameters
are often seen in budget curing lights that need only deliver a low
radiant power from a small tip to deliver what appears to be an
acceptably high irradiance.20,21 For this reason, both the radiant
power (watts) and the irradiance (mW/cm2) should be reported;
otherwise a curing light could deliver a high irradiance, but not
be very powerful.
Electromagnetic Energy / Electromagnetic
Spectrum
he radiant energy perceived by humans as “light” is electromagnetic
(EM) radiation. he visible spectrum ranges from red, which is
comprised of longer wavelengths of light ( to nm), through
various colors, until reaching violet (comprised of shorter wave -
lengths between and nm). Fig. 6.3 shows the portion of
EM spectrum associated with what humans perceive as visible
light, as well as the colors corresponding to those wavelength
ranges. EM radiation is delivered in packages of energy called
photons and the energy carried by each photon is expressed in the
following equation:
Ehc=λslow chemical reaction of these self-curing resin-based restorative
materials was a limitation and it was recommended to delay inal
polishing for 24 hours. Polymerization shrinkage still occurred
and was an undesirable outcome.
Light-Cured Polymerization Reaction
A few years later, a faster and less complicated method of free
radical polymerization was developed. his process used photons
of radiant electromagnetic energy (light) to penetrate a mixture
of polymerizable monomers that contained a photoinitiator to
generate the free radicals. Only a single component was needed,
but it had to be protected from excessive light exposure and inhibitors
were included in the system; otherwise the resin wo uld prematurely
self-polymerize. After placing this light-curable resin into a tooth,
the operator adjusted and contoured the material to achieve the
correct shape. he resin restoration was then exposed to light at
speciic wavelengths and for the speciied time to activate the
photoinitiator and produce the necessary free radicals. he same
sequence of free radical vinyl polymerization then occurred as in
the self-curing resins and polymerization shrinkage still occurred.
Radiometric Terminology
To understand the basics of photochemistry and to be able to
communicate with others, a background in the proper terminology
• Fig. 6.2 Example of a self-curing, paste-paste, resin-based composite.
(Courtesy Dental Technologies, Inc.)
• Fig. 6.3 Correlation between electromagnetic energy wavelength (in nanometers) and the human
perception of color.
CHAPTER 6 Light Curing of Retorative Material
Light Curing of Retorative Rein
The Photoinitiator Molecule and
Free Radical Generation
he interaction between EM radiation and matter is used in the
various curing mechanisms to create the free radicals that are
required to polymerize dental resins. For a photochemical reaction
to take place, the irst law of photochemistry, the Grotthuss-Draper
law, states that light must irst be absorbed by the chemical sub -
stance. he second law of photochemistry, the Stark-Einstein law,
states that, for each photon of light absorbed, only one molecule
within the chemical system can be activated. hese two laws,
together with the Planck-Einstein relationship, explain why two
curing lights that deliver the same radiant power, but at diferent
wavelengths, may produce diferent results.
he photoinitiator molecules used in light-curable r esin materials
contain speciic types of bonds that are only capable of absorbing
EM radiation within certain wavelength ranges. he interactions
of a photon with electrons present in the outermost orbital level
of a photoinitiator atom are diagrammatically described in Fig.
6.4. When the photoinitiator atom is struck by a photon at the
appropriate energy level (wavelength), an electron in the outermost
orbital level absorbs the energy, thus quenching the photon ( Fig.
6.5). his electron is then raised to the next higher orbital (quantum)
level (E 2) and the excited atom now contains potential energy that
can be transferred ( Fig. 6.6 ) because in this excited state the electron
is unstable and rapidly decays its ground state level. his causes
chemical reactions to occur that create free radicals that initiate
the free radical polymerization process. If no reaction occurs, the
electron falls back to its ground state and returns the absorbed where E is the photon energy, h is Planck’s constant, c is the speed
of light in vacuum, and λ is the photon’s wavelength. he energy
carried by each photon changes in direct relation to wavelength
λ because h and c are both constants and two photons of the same
wavelength will carry the same energy, even if one photon was
emitted from a dental curing light and the other from the Sun.
he relationship between the speed of light and wavelength is
expressed as the frequency (f ), where:
cfλ=
he photon energy equation can be simpliied to the PlanckEinstein relation as:
Eh f=
For simplicity, dental terminology utilizes wavelength (in
nanometers) rather than the frequency (Hz) to describe the proper -
ties of light, although both are directly related. Longer wavelength
electromagnetic energy (lower frequency) than what the human
eye can perceive as the color red is in the region of the EM spectrum
known as infrared (IR) radiation. Photonic energy delivered in
this region interacts with molecules of matter and increases their
vibrational amplitudes. his interaction increases the probability
that two molecules will collide with each other, producing friction
and ultimately heat. In contrast, photons of shorter wavelengths
(higher frequency) in the ultraviolet (UV) range contain more
energy than those in the longer wavelength range (red color).
Photons in the UV range are considered to be ionizing because
they deliver suicient energy to totally remove an electron from
the outer shell of an atom, creating a negatively charged species:
an ion.
• Fig. 6.4 Prior to absorbing a photon, an electron exists in an outer orbital shell at a speciic quantum
energy level—its “ground state” (red arrow). A discrete amount of energy exists between this orbital level
(E1) and the higher level (E 2, designated as ΔE).
• Fig. 6.5 When struck by a photon of light at the correct wavelength (frequency) and energy level ( ΔE),
the electron in the lower orbital shell absorbs this energy and is raised to a higher orbital level (red arrow)
that is dependent on the energy difference.
CHAPTER 6 Light Curing of Retorative Material
energy as heat as well as a longer wavelength photon. he ability
of a photoinitiator to interact with electromagnetic energy is
dependent on the frequency (wavelength) of the photon and the
very speciic electron coniguration of the photoinitiator molecule.
If these two needs do not match, then no radicals are formed.
hus in accordance with the irst and second laws of photochemistry
the critical parameter for efective photocuring is the number of
photons of the correct wavelength that are absorbed by the photoinitiator
system(s) within the resin composite.
Generally, two types of photoinitiators are used in dentistry:
Type I photoinitiators have a high quantum yield, meaning they
require fewer photons to generate a free radical than do Type II
initiators.22-24 Type II photoinitiators (e.g., camphorquinone [CQ]
and 1-phenyl-1,2-propanedione [PPD]) also require an additional
secondary electron transfer agent (this is typically an amine electron
accepting agent) to generate a free radical.22 hus Type II photoinitia -
tors are slower and less eicient than Type I initiators (e.g., Lucirin
TPO, and derivatives of dibenzoyl germanium such as Ivocerin).
hese Type I initiators do not require additional co-initiators and
break down directly into one or more free radicals when they
absorb light at the correct wavelengths.
Fig. 6.7 indicates the spectral absorption profiles of four
photoinitiators present at equivalent molar concentrations, and
the relative ability of each photoinitiator to absorb radiant energy
at each wavelength. It can be seen that CQ is best activated by
light in the blue region close to nm, whereas Lu cirin TPO
absorbs light only within the violet region below nm, with a
maximum absorption near nm.23,24 Initiators such as Ivocerin
and PPD are reactive to a broader-spectrum of light because they
are activated by EM radiation, both the violet and blue color
ranges. For example, Ivocerin is most reactive near nm but is
still very sensitive to wavelengths of light between and nm.24
Ultraviolet v .Blue Light
Initial attempts to light cure directly placed resin-based restorative
materials used UV light at wavelengths shorter than nm.
Although the polymerization reaction was under the direct control
of the clinician, the inability of these short UV wavelengths to
penetrate deeply into the resin composite meant that the incremental
layers of resin could be at most 1 mm thick. his limitation increased
the chairside treatment time required to restore a tooth and did
not save much time when compared to using a self-curing product.25
Although some of the UV-cured materials were successful when
placed by excellent clinicians,26 concerns that the UV light could
cause cataract formation or selective changes in the oral biolora
meant that the use of UV light was discontinued. Instead a diferent Excited State (occupied) E2
∆E = E 2 – E 1
E11. Transfer of energy to
formation of free radical
2. Heat
3. Release of low-energy, long
wavelength photonENERGY USE WHEN
RETURNING TO GROUND
STATEHIGHER ORBITAL LEVEL
OUTERMOST ORBITAL LEVEL
• Fig. 6.6 Upon its return to the original ground state orbital level, the stored energy is released from
the electron.
• Fig. 6.7 Spectral absorption proiles of the most commonly used
photoinitiators in dentistry, when all are at equivalent molar concentration.
As a reference, the bandwidths associated with “violet light” ( to
nm) and that of “blue light” ( to nm) are also provided to
present the potential for interaction between these photoinitiators and the
output from a dental curing light: For example, some LED units deliver no
light below nm.
light source and photoinitiator, camphorquinone (CQ), was used.
CQ is very reactive both to EM radiation shorter than nm
and to blue light, with an absorption peak near nm. he
initial curing lights developed to activate CQ used a quartz-tungstenhalogen (QTH) ilament-based light source, similar to a proj ector
bulb. his QTH light source emitted a broad spectrum of radiant
energy, from near UV through visible light and well into the
infrared region. Aggressive optical iltering was used to eliminate
IR wavelengths that might generate excessive heat, or UV wave -
lengths that deliver ionizing EM radiation. hus the curing light
delivered only blue light between approximately and nm.
his blue light can penetrate deeper into the resin than UV or
violet light, such that some “blue light–cured” restorations can
now be adequately light cured in increments that are up to 5-mm
thick. his enhancement reduced chairside treatment time and
provided a “set-on-command” restorative product. However,
polymerization shrinkage still occurred and remains a concern.
CHAPTER 6 Light Curing of Retorative Material
is increased) by following the instructions for use and increasing
the exposure time.
Efect of Thickne of the Retorative Material
he number of photons of light that reach the depths of the resin
depend on many factors, which include the thickness of the resin
increment, the wavelengths of the light delivered, the refractive
indices of the resin and iller components, the iller content and
size, and the overall opacity of the material.32,33 As the resin
composite thickness increases, exponentially fewer and fewer photons
reach to the bottom, thus potentially reducing the degree of conver -
sion of the resin at the bottom.34-37 Even small increases in resin
thickness can have a large efect on the amount of transmitted
light and resin polymerization such that doubling the exposure
time cannot compensate for a doubling of the increment thickness
(Fig. 6.8 ).
Interaction Between Wavelength of Light
and Filler Particle
he inluence of the Rayleigh scattering of light somewhat helps
to explain why the shorter “violet” wavelengths of light do not
penetrate as deeply as do longer wavelengths of “blue” light, into
dental resins,1,2 and it has been reported that light scattering is
greater when the iller particle size is equal to or smaller than the
wavelength of light (i.e., less than nm or 0.46 microns) ( Fig.
6.9).32,38 Although the Beer-Lambert law plays a role in the amount
of light penetrating through the resin, this law can only partly
predict the amount of light transmitted through the resin material
because there is a complex interaction between the iller particles
scattering the light, the colorants that absorb the light, the
photoinitiator(s) that use the light, and the diferences between
the refractive indices of the resin and the illers.38,39 Manufacturers
will often adjust the type and concentration of photoinitiators,
inhibitors, and illers for diferent shades of the same product to
compensate for this decreased light penetration and to optimize Factor Afecting the Ability to Polymerize
a Rein-Baed Compoite
Depth of Cure
Within a composite, the degree of conversion (the extent to which
resin monomer has been converted into polymer) and the depth
to which the resin is cured are related to the radiant exposure (the
number of photons) received by the resin (J/cm2) ( ).
Where insuicient light is delivered, the resin is inadequat ely
polymerized and the boundary between what is considered the
cured and uncured resin is called the depth of cure . Under optimum
light curing conditions, this point is reached at a depth of 1.5 to
2 mm from the surface for a conventional resin composite and
between 4 and 6 mm for a bulk-ill resin composite. In cases of
poor access to the restoration, or when using more opaque shades,
the depth of cure will be less.
Expoure Time
Under optimal conditions using a curing light that delivers
mW/cm2 from an 8to 10-mm-diameter tip, many resin
composites require a 20-second exposure time typically (delivering
20 J/cm2) to adequately cure a 2-mm-thick increment of resin.
Increasing the concentration of photoinitiator in the resin composite
system, reducing the inhibitor concentration, matching the refractive
indices of the resin and the iller, and, to a limited extent, increasing
the irradiance can shorten this time. However, true reciprocity
between the duration of exposure and the irradiance does not exist
and short exposure times are not recommended.14,27-31 If the
manufacturer recommends delivering mW/cm2 for 40 seconds
(delivering 20 J/cm2), this does not mean that the same extent or
type of resin polymerization would occur if mW/cm2 was
delivered for 5 seconds, even though both resins would receive an
identical radiant exposure, 20 J/cm2. However, it is possible to
somewhat compensate for a lower irradiance (e.g., if a weaker light
is used, or if the distance between the light tip and the top surface
• Fig. 6.8 Inluence of irradiance on the polymerization zone in a resin composite. A, Varying the irradi -
ance with width and depth affects the degree of monomer conversion, the shape of the cured material,
and its depth. B, The proximity of the curing light tip to the restoration surface affects the number of
photons reaching the top surface and thus the monomer conversion throughout the restoration.
CHAPTER 6 Light Curing of Retorative Material
polymerization occurs, the refractive index of the resin component
increases. Consequently, most, but not all, resin composites become
more translucent after light curing. For this reason, shade selection
of composite should not be performed using uncured resin
composite paste, but instead using the light-cured product.
Development of Dental Curing Light
here are four types of blue light sources that have been used to
activate the photoinitiators in dental resins: quartz-tungsten-halogen
(QTH), plasma-arc (PAC), argon-ion laser, and the light-emitting
diode (LED). hese sources produce light in diferent ways, and
guidelines for the selection and use of curing lights have been
proposed.1-3,40-42 Examples of PAC, QTH, and LED curing lights
are shown in Fig. 6.10 .
Quartz-Tungten-Halogen Light
The first visible curing lights used QTH low-voltage 35to
-watt projector bulbs (one water-cooled unit used a -watt
bulb).1,42 he QTH source consists of a tungsten ilament that is
surrounded by a clear, crystalline quartz bulb containing a chlorinebased halogen gas. When electrical current passes through the
ilament, the tungsten wire becomes incandescent and atoms are
vaporized from the ilament surface. his vaporization releases a
large amount of electromagnetic energy, most of which falls into
the infrared region. When the current is turned of, the ilament
cools and the vaporized tungsten atoms are redeposited from the
halogen gas back onto the ilament surface in a process termed “the
halogen cycle.”
To prevent the QTH light from delivering signiicant amounts
of unwanted EM radiation to the resin and tooth, the optical
radiation from the QTH bulb must be iltered. he light is irst
directed toward a silverized parabolic relector behind the bulb.
he relector acts as dichroic ilter that allows some of the longer
wavelengths of infrared light to pass through and not be relected
forward. he shorter wavelengths of visible light are relected forward
toward an infrared bandpass ilter (see Fig. 6.10A ) to block the
remaining infrared wavelengths. he light then passes through a
visible light bandpass ilter (see Fig. 6.10B ). hus only light at the exposure time. Consequently, the resin manufacturer instructions
should be followed because an opaque, but white, shade of composite
may require a longer exposure time than a yellow, but more
transparent, shade.
Matching Rein and Filler Refractive Indice
he closer the refractive indices of the resin and the iller are
matched, the better will be the light transmission through the
resin composite and the better the depth of cure.32,38,39 If they are
perfectly matched, the iller particles will optically disappear, but
the increased translucency will mean that the resin composite will
appear gray in the mouth. In the unpolymerized state, the refractive
index of the resin is often lower than that of the filler. As
• Fig. 6.9 Differences in the loss of ”blue” ( > nm) and ”violet”
(< nm) wavelengths of light when passing through a commercial resinbased composite. The light in both regions decreases exponentially with
increasing composite thickness, and almost no violet light penetrates
beyond 3.5 mm of resin composite.
• Fig. 6.10 Examples of a PAC (A), QTH (B), and LED (C) curing light.
CHAPTER 6 Light Curing of Retorative Material
its surface. If this occurs, the relector or the lamp unit should
ideally be replaced, but they can be carefully cleaned with alcohol
or methyl ethyl ketone solvents on cotton swabs. Under ideal
conditions, the QTH bulb should last for about 50 hours,1,2 but
the lifespan will be shortened if the operator immediately turns
the power supply of after use to stop the noise from the fan. his
action prevents the halogen cycle from occurring because if the
bulb does not cool down at a controlled rate, the v aporized tungsten
atoms are not properly deposited back onto the ilament surface.
his permanently darkens the inner surface of the quartz glass,
thins the tungsten ilament, and shortens the lifespan of the bulb.
All these changes can occur without any outward sign to the dentist
that the output from the curing light is decreasing.
The emission spectrum from a typical QTH light source
developed is shown in Fig. 6.12 .
Although QTH lights deliver a broad emission spectrum, most
of these units were mains powered. he cooling fan was noisy, and
the units delivered a relatively low radiant power and low irradiance.
Consequently, they required an exposure duration between 30 and
60 seconds to adequately polymerize a 2-mm-thick increment of
resin composite.
Plama-Arc Light
In an attempt to reduce light exposure times, high-power PAC
lights were introduced. hese lights were promoted to deliver a
very high irradiance and the initial units claimed that exposure
times between 3 and 5 seconds could successfully light cure a
2-mm-thick increment of resin composite. Instead of a ilament,
the PAC light source has two tungsten electrodes that are surrounded
by xenon gas. When a high voltage is applied, a spark is formed
that ionizes the gas.1 his spark then acts as both a light emitter
and an electrically conductive gaseous medium (a plasma) to
maintain the spark. he gap between the electrodes is parallel to
the long axis of a parabolic-shaped relector that di rects the emitted wavelengths between and nm reaches the proximal surface
of a multistranded, bundled, glass iberoptic light guide, where it
is transmitted through hundreds of small optical ibers to the tip
end. QTH curing lights are very ineicient; it has been estimated
that as much as 70% of the input power to the QTH bulb is
converted to heat, with only 10% producing visible light, and
only 0.5% to 2% of the total energy input is emitted as useful
blue light.42,43
hese QTH units were developed using a handheld, gun-style
form factor, with the QTH bulb located within the body of the
unit ( Fig. 6.11 ). Although an internal fan dissipates some of the
unwanted heat away from the bulb, ilters, and relector, the relector
surface and QTH bulb still become very hot when the light is on,
and then cool down between uses. Vapors from bonding systems,
solvents, cleaning agents, or even moisture in the operatory air
can become deposited onto the relector, thus dulling or clouding
• Fig. 6.11 Internal components of a quartz-tungsten-halogen (QTH)
curing light, using a gun-style form factor and pistol-like trigger activation.
A, Infrared light ilter; B, band pass ilter allowing only light between
and nm to pass through.
• Fig. 6.12 Emission spectrum from a typical QTH curing light (Demetron , Kerr Dental).
CHAPTER 6 Light Curing of Retorative Material
to their normal or “ground” state, they emit photons of light.
hese photons are all at the same wavelength, which is determined
by the amount of energy released when the electron drops back
to a lower orbit. he internally generated laser light is directed to
an emitting tip through a thin iberoptic cable, where the size of
the light beam is expanded before it is directed toward the target.
he argon-ion laser does not produce a broad spectrum of light light forward and through a sapphire window. Extreme optical
iltering is used to prevent both the emission of unwanted ionizing
radiation and infrared wavelengths of light that would overheat
the tooth.
he emission spectrum of a typical broad-spectrum PAC curing
light is shown in Fig. 6.13 . Most PAC lights deliver a broad emission
spectrum from to nm, a high radiant power, and a high
irradiance. However, an early brand of PAC light used multiple
light tips to provide diferent light outputs and outcomes: a bleach -
ing tip (full spectral output), a -nm tip for photoc uring materials
containing the alternative initiators, and a -nm tip for light
curing CQ-containing materials. his use of speciic light tips to
deliver diferent emission spectra for particular situations led to
confusion and clinicians were unsure which light guide they should
use to cure the speciic brand of resin they were placing. Initially,
this PAC light could only run for 3 s, but later generations of
PAC lights used more sophisticated electronics to control the voltage
to the bulb and could provide a high light output for 60 minutes
or more.1 However, PAC lights are expensive, noisy, large, not
portable, cannot be battery operated, and have become le ss popular
with the introduction of high-output LED curing lights. In addition,
the xenon bulb is expensive to replace when it fails.
Argon-Ion Laer
he term “laser” is an acronym for light ampliication by stimulated
emission of radiation. Argon-ion laser curing lights also claimed
short exposure times of 10 seconds or less compared with 40 to
60 seconds using a conventional QTH source.1 An example of a
laser curing light is shown in Fig. 6.14 .
hese curing lights work by delivering electrical energy to speciic
atoms present within the light emitter. hese electrons then become
excited and move from a low-energy orbit to a high-energy orbit
around the atom’s nucleus. When these excited electrons return
• Fig. 6.13 Example of the broad emission spectrum from a PAC curing light (ARC Light II, Air
Techniques).
• Fig. 6.14 Laser curing light (AccuCure , LaserMed, Inc).
CHAPTER 6 Light Curing of Retorative Material
QTH unit. Unfortunately, this procedure shortened the life
expectancy of the QTH bulb and the optical design of the turbo
tip increased the irradiance for only a few millimeters from the
tip end. he irradiance from these turbo tips then d eclined rapidly
as the distance from the tip increased and the light beam dis -
persed.44,45 his dispersion adversely afected the extent of resin
polymerization when the light tip was more than 5 mm away from
the resin46 and alerted researchers to the fact that it is not the light
output at the light tip that matters, but it is what is received by
the resin that is important.45
Stre Development During Polymerization
Fast polymerization of dental resin composites is thought to adversely
afect the mechanical properties of the polymer network.1,47,48 his
phenomenon occurs because, when the reaction rate is very fast,
the liquid monomer is quickly converted to a solid, and the
polymerization reaction rapidly becomes difusion limited.49 hus,
in some contemporary dental resins, rapid photopolymerization
produces undesirably short polymer chain lengths because there
is simply insuicient time to form many long chains before resin
solidification is reached.47 In addition, the formation of the
monomer-to-monomer bonds also causes the resin to shrink, thus
decreasing the overall net volume of the system. As long as the
system is in a liquid state, it can physically deform and no stress
develops; however, beyond the gel point, the resin becomes a solid
and further polymerization shrinkage creates strain both within
the resin network and at the interfaces between the tooth and the
resin. When the polymerization reaction occurs rapidly rather than
slowly, the gel point is reached sooner, the resin becomes hard
sooner, and these outcomes may result in increased stress,50 bond
failure, and increased gap formation between the tooth and
restorative material.51,52 Ultimately, these consequences can lead
to premature restoration failure, cusp fracture, or increased tooth
sensitivity.but instead produces several intense and well-deined emission
peaks in the blue spectral region. hus argon-ion lasers were
considered to be a viable option for a high irradiance curing light
that could rapidly cure dental resins. Fig. 6.15 shows the narrow
emission spectrum from a typical argon-ion laser curing light.
With the introduction of LED curing lights, lasers have become
less popular because they are expensive, not portable, have a narrow
emission spectrum, and cannot be battery operated.
“Turbo” Light Guide
To reclaim some of the market from the PAC and laser curing
lights, two features were added to QTH curing lights to boost
their irradiance and thus attempt to reduce exposure times. he
irst was the so-called “turbo-tip.” At that time, conventional
glass-ibered light guides came in a variety of diameters, but the
proximal entrance aperture and distal exit diameters of the light
guide were the same size. To increase the irradiance (the number
of photons emitted over the output area), the entrance to the turbo
light guide was made larger than the exit diameter.44,45 his enhance -
ment was accomplished by using hundreds of glass ibers that were
larger in diameter at the proximal end (nearest to the light source)
than the opposite (distal) end, nearest to the exit tip. hus many
photons could enter the large entrance to the light guide, and the
same number (assuming no loss) of photons were then emitted
over a smaller area at the exit tip. his arrangement delivered the
same radiant power (watts) as would come from a conventional
light guide placed on the same device, but over a smaller tip area.
his modiication increased the irradiance (mW/cm2) to a value
similar to that from PAC lights. Some QTH lights also included
a special boost mode, where the voltage to the bulb was raised for
a short time, thus increasing light output. By combining the
increased irradiance from the small diameter turbo tip with the
increased emission from a QTH bulb that was powered above its
maximum voltage rating, a higher output was obtained from the
• Fig. 6.15 Emission spectrum from an argon-ion laser curing light (AccuCure , LaserMed, Inc.).
CHAPTER 6 Light Curing of Retorative Material
on the n side, or cathode, has an excess of electrons and will rise
in potential when supplied with suicient electrical energy. Electrons
from the n substrate then pass through and “fall” into “holes” in
the electron-deicient p side, or anode. When an electron meets
a hole, it “falls” into a lower energy level and releases energy in
the form of a photon of light, as illustrated in Fig. 6.16 .
he color of the light emitted corresponds to the energy of the
photon that is in turn determined by the composition of the two
semiconductors and their resulting “band gap” potential.2 he
semiconductor material used in blue LEDs is composed of a mix
of gallium nitride (GaN) and indium nitride (InN). his combina -
tion produces light in the blue spectral range that has a relatively
narrow bandwidth with a full-width half maximum (FWHM)
range of only about 20 nm ( Fig. 6.17 ).
First-Generation LED Lights
he early versions of these energy-eicient, gallium nitride, blue
light–emitting LED curing lights emitted blue light from an array
of individual, but similar, low-power LED casings (cans). Although
these irst-generation blue LED curing lights ( Fig. 6.18 ) delivered
a low radiant power output, they generated great interest. hey
were portable, battery operated, and lightweight, and the blue
wavelength output from these early LED chips was in the range
of maximum absorption of CQ ( nm).1 his made these blue
LED lights very eicient at producing the free radicals required
to photocure CQ-containing dental resins.
When the irst-generation LED lights were marketed, they were
promoted as “cool” lights that produced less temperature rise in
the pulp than did QTH lights,65-67 and it was initially thought
that all LED units would generate little heat—something that was
becoming a concern. However, in retrospect, it is now recognized
that the claims of low heat generation from the early LED lights Soft-Start Expoure
With dentists and manufacturers trying to achieve ever shorter
exposure times by using lights that delivered a high irradiance,
concerns arose about the potential for damaging increases in
intrapulpal temperature as well as the potential for generating
excessive internal stresses when using fast-shrinking, high-modulus
resin composites.1 In an attempt to decrease these efects, a variety
of diferent curing modes were developed. An example is the
“soft-start” curing mode, where a low irradiance value is initially
applied to the restoration surface for a short time, and then either
immediately, or over a period of time, the light output increases
to its full operating level for the remainder of the exposure.52,53,54
heoretically this technique reduces the rate at which the photocur -
able material reacts, produces a more desirable polymer structure,
allows the partially cured resin composite to deform at its unbonded
surface, reduces the stresses developing at the bonded interface,
and reduces the polymerization contraction stress.50,55-58 Another
type of soft-start method (the “pulse delay”) deliv ered an initial
low irradiance, short-duration exposure. After waiting some 3 to
5 minutes, the final exposure was provided at the full light
output.52,53 his technique may work in vitro for certain resin
composites polymerized by speciic curing lights.52,57,59 However,
some evidence suggests that soft-start polymerization can result
in polymers that have diferent amounts of cross-linking and that
solvents, food substances, and enzymatic attack can have diferent
efects on the same dental resin, depending on how it was light
cured.16-18 It is thought that any potential correlation between
enhanced marginal adaptation, reduced shrinkage, and lowered
polymerization contraction stress using soft-start polymerization
is probably due to the resin receiving less total energy and conse -
quently reaching a lower degree of conversion.1,60 None of these
attempts to reduce the polymerization shrinkage rate and reduce
stress development have yet been found to provide better clinical
performance compared to continuous light exposure,1,61 possibly
because of the irradiance levels used or the diferent exposure times
used by commercial curing lights to ramp up to full power. Some
soft-start exposures in commercial curing lights can be as short as
2 s,62 whereas in the encouraging in vitro tests there was up to a
5-minute delay between the initial light and the final light
exposure.52
Light-Emitting Diode Technology
he next innovation in dental photocuring came in the 1990s,
with the development of blue light-emitting diodes, or LEDs.63,64
hese LED curing lights have many advantages over their predeces -
sors and they dominate the market.2,42 he LED emitters are solid
state, lightweight, battery driven, and more eicient; do not require
any bandpass ilters; and have emitting sources that can provide
an extremely long working life when compared to any ilament
or spark-based light source.1,2,63,64 LEDs are also very eicient at
converting electrical energy to electromagnetic radiation. heir
luminous eicacy (measured in lumens per watt) was initially at
least twice that of a QTH bulb, but, with continued improvements,
some are now 10 times more eicient.2
LEDs are semiconductor light sources that have been doped
with impurities to create a p-n junction. Light is produced by
interposing the electron-excessive (n) and electron-depleted (p)
surfaces of two diferent semiconductor materials in an electrical
circuit.2 When a current is applied, this p-n junction emits light
by a process called electroluminescence. he semiconductor substrate
B
A
• Fig. 6.16 Light is emitted from the p-n junction of a light-emitting diode
(LED) when electrons from the n substrate pass into the holes from the p
substrate, as electrical current lows through the circuit.
CHAPTER 6 Light Curing of Retorative Material
would overheat and destroy itself. Fig. 6.19 displays images of
such damaged arrays. For this reason, internal cooling fans as well
as large metal heat sinks were used within these units. Often the
metal cladding of these devices also acted as a large heat sink. Fig.
6.20 shows an example of a LED chip assembly, heat sink, and
cooling fan. he typical second-generation blue LED light still
has a relatively narrow emission spectrum with a full-width halfmaximum (FWHM) emission spectrum that is still only about
25 nm ( Fig. 6.21 ).
hese curing lights were more compact and more power ful
than the “irst generation” of LED lights and thus were termed
the “second generation” products. However, neither the irstnor
the second-generation LED curing lights delivered much light of
wavelengths below nm, and thus they were incompatible with
some of the “alternative” photoinitiators, such as Lucirin TPO.
Third-Generation LED Lights: Multiwave,
Multipeak, Polywave
As vital, intraoral tooth bleaching became popular, many dentists
discovered that the shades of composites available at that time
were too yellow and did not match the color of bleached teeth.
his efect occurred because the CQ photoinitiator used in most
dental resins is bright yellow. To overcome this problem, some
manufacturers incorporated co-initiators to boost the efectiveness
of CQ and thus reduce the amount of CQ required in the resin,
while others started using resin compositions that contained
alternative photoinitiators to reduce the CQ concentration.1 hese
alternative initiators imparted less of a yellow color in the resin
and allowed manufacturers to make translucent and bleaching
(lighter) shades of their restorative resins. hese photoinitiators
still function within the visible spectrum, but they are activated
by shorter wavelengths of light closer to violet ( < nm) light
and could be photocured using the broad emission spectrum from
QTH and PAC curing lights. Unfortunately, the irstand secondgeneration LEDs that emitted only blue light above nm could
only activate the CQ component within these resins and were
unable to activate the alternative initiators.were due to their low radiant power output rather than to any
property of the light they emitted.68
Second-Generation LED Lights
Advancements in LED chip design and increased radiant power
output provided small, integrated packages containing surface area
emitting LED pads instead of discrete LED casings. hese new
chips greatly increased the radiant power output of curing lights
to the level that the number of photons emitted within the absorp -
tion range of CQ increased, and sometimes exceeded, what was
delivered from high-output QTH or PAC lights.1 hus the recom -
mended exposure times from some curing lights using the new
high output blue LED chips became less than those for QTH
lights, a feature that further increased the marketability of LED
curing lights. However, with the increase in radiant power output,
the need to cool the LED chip became critical; otherwise the LED
• Fig. 6.17 Emission spectrum of a typical single-peak LED curing light showing a typical full-width half
maximum (FWHM) bandwidth of about 22 nm of blue light.
• Fig. 6.18 Example of the internal coniguration of a irst-generation
LED curing light that contained multiple, individual low-power LED “cans.”
CHAPTER 6 Light Curing of Retorative Material
AB C
• Fig. 6.19 Undamaged LED chip (A) compared to overheated and damaged LED chips (B, C).
• Fig. 6.20 Example of the internal layout of a second-generation LED
curing light having a single emitting LED chip. Note the heat sink and fan
that help dissipate heat away from the LED chip.
To solve the problem caused by the narrow emission spectrum
from the blue-only LED units, an additional color chip(s) was
added to the blue LED array ( Fig. 6.22 ). By incorporating diferent
LED color chips into the curing light, the lights now emitted both
the lower wavelengths of violet light, usually from to nm,
as well as light from to nm1,2 and could now activate all
the diferent photoinitiators used in a dental resin.
hese LED curing lights have been called the “third generation”
units, meaning that they emit light of more than one wavelength
range (or color). Curing lights of this generation have also been
described as “multiwave,” “multipeak,” or Polywave curing lights.
he term Polywave is a registered trademark of Ivoclar Vivadent,
and applies to their current line of “Bluephase” curing lights. he
emission spectrum from a typical third-generation LED light is
shown in Fig. 6.23 , where it can be seen that the emission spectrum
from these units includes wavelengths that activate not only CQ
but also the alternative initiators.1,2 However, including radiant
power in the lower wavelengths may not be ideal for photo-curing
bulk-illed resin-based composites because of the limited ability
of the shorter wavelengths of violet light to reach down to the
bottom of 4 or 5 mm of resin composite. Here the resin will
polymerize primarily due to the activation of the CQ photoinitiator
by the longer wavelengths of blue light. Additionally, although
these LED units produce a broader emission spectrum, in some
lights, the location of the various diferent wavelength LED emitters
in the LCU afects both the irradiance beam proile and the
wavelength distribution of light from these curing lights.69,70 his
inding is concerning because a strong positive correlation has
been reported between the irradiance beam proile values and localized microhardness values both across and through the resin
composite.69,71,72 For this reason, the internal optics of broadspectrum, multiple peak LED curing lights that include multiple
LED emitters must be carefully designed so that a homogeneous
light output is produced.
To appreciate differences in the spectral distribution of
photons emitted from diferent types of dental curing lights,
Fig. 6.24 shows examples of the emission spectra from QTH,
PAC, and LED curing lights. Note the relatively narrow emis -
sion spectrum from the LED units and the high spectral radiant
power emitted by LED units in the -nm region compared
to the broader range of wavelength emitted by QTH and
PAC lights.
Batterie
Originally, LED curing lights were powered by nickel-cadmium
(NiCad) batteries. hese batteries can be damaged if they are
discharged to below 75% of their rated voltage, or by being
overcharged. Smaller, high-capacity, nickel-metal hydride or lithiumpolymer batteries later replaced the NiCad sources, and these newer
types should last between 2 to 3 years from the date of manufacture
before needing to be replaced. Ultracapacitors are well-suited for
applications such as a curing light, where high bursts of power are
required for a short time. hey are used in one curing light to
deliver suicient power for approximately 25 ten-second exposures
before needing to be recharged. However, ultracapacitors can be
fully recharged in as little as 40 seconds and they may last up to
10 years before needing to be replaced.
Budget Curing Light
he dental profession can now purchase dental equipment, includi ng
curing lights, directly online and at low cost, without using an
approved distributor. hese “budget curing lights” may not have
been approved for sale in the country of use, and often use small
diameter (6 to 7 mm) light guides. As described previously in the
chapter, by decreasing light tip diameter, budget curing lights can
deliver the same irradiance values as more expensive lights from
major manufacturers that use wider diameter tips ( Fig. 6.25 ). he
light beam proiles from these budget lights can also be inferior
compared with those of the higher priced lights from major
manufacturers,20,21 and the electronics in these units may not
compensate for the decrease in the output from the battery during
use. hus, without any warning to the user, the light output from
battery-operated budget curing lights may not be stable during
operation.20 Dental curing lights are medical devices; thus it is
recommended that you do not use curing lights that have not
been approved for use in your country.
CHAPTER 6 Light Curing of Retorative Material
• Fig. 6.22 Multiple wavelength emitting LED chip set in a commercial
third-generation Polywave light (Bluephase G2, Ivoclar Vivadent) showing
an array of three blue chips and one violet LED chip in the body of the
light. Note the absence of any ilter within the unit.
• Fig. 6.21 Emission spectrum from a typical second-generation LED light (Bluephase 16i, Ivoclar
Vivadent). Note the single emission peak in the blue wavelength range.
Evaluation of Light Output From
a Curing Light
Radiant Power Meaurement
he ISO standard for measuring the output from
dental curing lights recommends using a laboratory-grade power
meter to measure radiant power output and dividing this power
by the tip area to produce an average irradiance value from the
curing light.73 An example of a laboratory-grade power sensor is
a thermopile that converts thermal energy delivered by photons into electrical energy. he sensor is composed of hundreds of
interconnected thermocouples that generate an output voltage that
is proportional to a local temperature diference. An alternative
power sensor also suggested in the ISO standard is the
PowerMax-Pro 150HD with a broadband detector (Coherent Inc.,
Santa Clara, CA). his detector difers from a thermopile ( Fig.
6.26) because the sensor contains a stack of thin ilms to generate
an electrical current when light hits the surface of the detector. In
contrast to thermopiles that can take several seconds to respond,
this type of sensor responds rapidly and can provide a radiant
power reading within microseconds.21,74
Spectral Radiant Power Meaurement
An optical spectrometer, or more accurately termed a spectropho -
tometer, measures the properties of a light source over a speciic
portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. Inside the spectropho -
tometer, light is broken down into its various wavelength compo -
nents, and the signal is digitized as a function of wavelength and
power (W/nm). he irst step in this process is to direct light from
a source being evaluated into a spectrophotometer through a narrow
aperture known as an entrance slit. his slit vignettes the light
and directs it onto a grating. he grating inside the spectropho -
tometer then disperses the various spectral components of the
light, much like a prism, at slightly varying angles, onto a detector.
hese gratings can be ruled or holographic difraction plates.
Holographic gratings produce less stray light, while ruled gratings
tend to be more relective. he groove density on a grating deter -
mines the extent of light dispersion, and the optimum spectral
range (bandwidth) is a function of the groove density. he greater
the groove density, the better is the optical resolution, but the
more truncated will be the spectral range. hus, to produce the
best response from the spectrophotometer, the correct slit dimensions
CHAPTER 6 Light Curing of Retorative Material
• Fig. 6.23 Emission spectrum of a typical third-generation Polywave LED curing lights (Bluephase Style,
Ivoclar Vivadent). Note the distinct emission peaks in the violet and blue wavelength ranges.
• Fig. 6.24 Emission spectra from a PAC ( black line, Sapphire DenMat),
QTH ( green line, Optilux , Kerr), and second-generation ( red line, Deep
Cure-S, 3M), and third-generation ( blue line, Valo Grand, Ultradent) LED
curing light.
and grating groove density must be carefully chosen to match the
radiant power, the wavelength being examined, and the resolution
required. A schematic of the internal components of a miniature
spectrophotometer is shown in Fig. 6.27 .
Integrating Sphere
he total radiant power (radiant lux) from a light source can be
collected, without any inluence of the directional characteristics
from the source, using an integrating sphere (also known as an Ulbricht sphere). his device is a hollow sphere that has a difuse,
white, relective inner coating. Light enters the sphere through a
port and strikes the sphere sides. he light is then scattered in a
difuse manner, called Lambertian relectance, that minimizes the
efects of the original direction of light. hus only light that has
been difused within the sphere reaches the detector. his is usually
via a iberoptic cable that is connected to the entrance port of a
spectrophotometer; however, the detector can also be attached
directly to the sphere. Integrating spheres can be small and portable
(Fig. 6.28 ) or they can be so large that a person can walk inside.
Light Beam Uniformity
Recognizing that the power and emission spectrum across the light
tip cannot be adequately described by a single value, laser beam
analyzers have been used to examine the homogeneity of power
and the wavelengths of light emitted from curing lights. he charge
couple detector (CCD) in a digital camera is used to record an
image of the light as the light strikes a difusing target screen.
Since the type of screen or the use of a bandpass ilter can afect
the image, these components must be chosen carefully.70 he radiant
power received by each camera pixel in the CCD array is recorded
and displayed as a color-coded, twoor three-dimensional image
of the light output across the light tip end. A typical arrangement
for using a beam analyzer to characterize the light distribution
across the emitting end of a light-curing tip is shown in Fig. 6.29 .
Several publications have shown that the irradiance from many
dental curing lights is not evenly distributed across the emitting
end of the light tip.20,21,69,70,71,72,75,76 In addition, because of how
the light is produced, the emission spectrum is not evenly distributed
across the emitting end of the light tip of some broad-spectrum
LED curing lights.70 In contrast, although the local irradiance
values may difer greatly, because of the light source used, the
emission spectra are distributed evenly across the tip for QTH,
CHAPTER 6 Light Curing of Retorative Material
A
B
• Fig. 6.26 Images of a conventional thermopile (A) and a PowerMax
Pro 150HD with a high-speed broadband sensor (B).
• Fig. 6.27 Schematic diagram of a spectrometer. 1. Fiberoptic connec -
tor. 2. Interchangeable entrance slit. 3. Long pass ilter. 4. Collimating
mirror. 5. Grating. 6. Focusing mirror. 7. Collection lens. 8. Detector. 9.
Variable long pass ilter. 10. UV detector window. (Image courtesy Ocean
Optics.)
• Fig. 6.28 A small integrating sphere attached to a miniature iberoptic
spectrometer (Ocean Optics).
AB
• Fig. 6.25 By decreasing the internal tip diameter from 9 mm to 7 mm, the output area decreases.
If the same radiant power is emitted, the irradiance will increase when using the 7 mm diameter light tip.
9 mm diameter = area of 63.6 mm2, 400mW radiant power: irradiance = mW/cm2; 7 mm diameter
= area of 38.5 mm2, 400mW radiant power: irradiance is now increased to mW/cm2.
CHAPTER 6 Light Curing of Retorative Material
the operator is careful, the irradiance and radiant exposure received
at the gingival margins of the proximal boxes from some curing
lights may be inadequate to ensure adequate polymerization of
the adhesive or the resin restoration in these regions.20,21,69 hese
regions are also the most diicult to reach and are the furthest
away from the light source.45,77 Consequently, the resin at these
locations may well be underpolymerized unless the operator pays
careful attention and ensures that all areas of the resin receive an
adequate amount of light.
Monitoring the Output From Curing Light
When using a curing light, the intense blue light and the hardness
of the topmost layer of resin provide a false sense of security that
the curing light has adequately polymerized all of the restorative
material that is underneath the top, exposed surface. Without
warning the user, the light source inside the unit can degrade over
AB CD
• Fig. 6.29 Typical arrangement for using a beam analyzer to examine a dental curing light: (A) the CCD
camera, and neutral density ilter (B) and the diffusing screen (C) upon which the output of the curing
light tip is directed (D). PAC, and single peak LED units.76 he localized inhomogeneity
in the irradiance results in “hot spots” of high-intensity light and
“cold spots” of lower values, where very little light, or diferent
wavelengths of light, may be present. Examples of homogeneous
and inhomogeneous distributions of light across the emitting tips
of diferent dental curing lights are shown in Fig. 6.30 .
he beam proile images illustrate that the irradiance across the
light tip is a range of values and the irradiance homogeneity depends
on the design of the curing light. hus using a single irradiance
value to describe the output from a curing light does not adequately
describe the irradiance that is delivered across the entire light tip.76
Instead, this commonly used value represents the average irradiance
value that is emitted across the tip.
Fig. 6.31 shows how scaled images of the irradiance beam proile
can be overlaid on an image of a tooth preparation to demonstrate
the local irradiance values that are delivered to diferent locations
of the preparation. hese beam proile images show that, unless
• Fig. 6.30 Images of beam proiles from ive contemporary curing lights. The upper set of images are
a scaled, two-dimensional representation of the irradiance distribution from 0 to 3, mW/cm2. The
lower view is a three-dimensional representation with all images scaled to their individual maximum irradi -
ance value. Note the differences in the beam diameters and the inhomogeneous irradiance distribution
across the light tips. Using a single irradiance value cannot fully describe the light output.
CHAPTER 6 Light Curing of Retorative Material
time20,78 and thus decrease the light output. he light output can
also be reduced due to the buildup of scale on the iberoptic light
probe after repeated autoclaving,79 after breakage or fracture at the
light tip,80,81 or due to the presence of cured composite resin or
debris on the light tip.80,82 All these factors can signiicantly decrease
the ability of the curing light to photocure the resin ( Fig. 6.32 ).
hus it is important to use a dental radiometer to routinely measure
the output from the curing light. he value should be recorded,
as well as the condition of the curing light. Ideally, the value of
the light/tip combination should be recorded when the unit is
new and subsequent readings can be used to indicate the relative
performance of the curing light as a function of time.
Handheld “Dental Radiometer”
Examples of seven handheld dental radiometers that can be used
to monitor the output from dental curing lights are displayed in
Fig. 6.33A . hese radiometers usually have a bandpass ilter in
front of a silicon photodiode detector that converts the photons
received from the curing light into electrical current and, when
calibrated, into units of irradiance. However, the light is rarely
emitted uniformly across the entire light tip, and because the
entrance apertures on some dental radiometers are smaller than
the light tip (see Fig. 6.33B ), most dental radiometers do not
• Fig. 6.31 Images of good (top) and poor (bottom) beam proiles, super -
imposed on images of premolar and molar tooth preparations. Each image
is normalized and scaled to % of its individual, maximum irradiance value.
(From Rueggeberg FA, Giannini M, Arrais CAG, Price RBT: Light curing in
dentistry and clinical implications: a literature review, Braz Oral Res 31(suppl
1): e61, . http://dx.doi.org/10. / -3107bor- .vol31. .
Licensed under CC BY 2.0, https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/ .)
A BC
• Fig. 6.32 Examples of damaged (A) and debris-contaminated light tips (B and C).
B
A
• Fig. 6.33 Image of seven commercial dental radiometers (A), and an example of the difference
between the 4.3-mm entrance aperture into the radiometer and the 10-mm tip of the curing light (B).
CHAPTER 6 Light Curing of Retorative Material
B
A
• Fig. 6.34 A large diameter light tip (A) can cover an entire molar tooth, whereas smaller diameter light
tips (B) require multiple exposures to cover an entire the surface of a molar MOD restoration.
capture all the light from the light emitting tip.83 hus, depending
on where the light tip is positioned over the detector area, a region
of high or low irradiance may be measured. his limitation helps
to explain why several studies have reported that most dental
radiometers are inaccurate.83-86 In addition, because QTH, PAC,
or LED dental curing lights all deliver diferent emission spectra,
the type of bandpass ilter used within many dental radiometers
will afect the accuracy of the irradiance value reported.83,85 hus
the radiometer manufactured by the maker of the curing light
being tested should be the most accurate.
Practical Conideration for Light Curing
Dental Rein in the Mouth
Factor Afecting Light Delivery to the Target
shows that when the irradiance delivered is multiplied
by the exposure time, the product describes the radiant exposure
(in J/cm2) delivered to the exposed surface of the resin. It has been
recommended that a QTH curing light should deliver a minimum
irradiance of mW/cm2 for 60 seconds to adequately polymerize
a 1.5to 2-mm-thick increment of resin.87 It has also been recom -
mended that most dental resins require a radiant exposure of
approximately 16 J/cm2 to adequately cure to a depth of 2 mm.88
hus this threshold could be reached in 40 seconds if the curing
light delivers an average irradiance of mW/cm2 to the resin.
However, diferent brands of resin require diferent exposure times,
and the minimum radiant exposure may range from 6 to at least
24 J/cm2 to achieve an adequate level of polymerization in the
various shades and colors.89,90
Light Guide Tip Deign
As discussed previously, the design of the light tip can have a
signiicant impact on the irradiance delivered to the restoration45,91
and can negatively afect the physical properties of the resin and
its bond strength to the tooth.7,92-94 T wenty years ago, most light
tips had a 10 to 13 mm tip diameter, but recently this has changed
and many light tips are now only 6 to 8 mm in diameter. Although
a smaller diameter tip can increase irradiance, small light tips may not cover the entire restoration area. Since there is increased interest
in bulk illing and bulk curing of large restorations, this decrease
in tip diameter is now of concern. With the dimensions of a
mandibular molar being approximately 11.0 mm mesiodistally
and 10.5 mm buccolingually at the crown,95 the clinician who
wishes to reduce time spent light curing restorations should use a
curing light with a tip that completely covers the entire restoration
surface. Otherwise, as seen in Fig. 6.34 , even when using a resin
intended for bulk illing, multiple, sequential, overlapping exposures
will be required to ensure that all areas of the restorative material
have received an adequate amount of light.21
Ditance to Target
Irradiance (radiant exitance) values stated by manufacturers are
usually measured at the light tip end. Because the resin is usually
2 to 8 mm away from the light tip, this value does not relect the
irradiance values that are received by the restoration. Fig. 6.35
displays how the efect of increasing the tip-to-target distance difers
• Fig. 6.35 Overlay graph indicating differences among three commer -
cial curing lights with respect to the power received using tip-to-target
distances from 0 to 10 mm.
CHAPTER 6 Light Curing of Retorative Material
seam of a barrier traverses across the light tip and disrupts the
light beam.
Unfortunately, the design of these preformed plastic sheaths
that it over a curing light is not standardized and they may not
be designed to optimize light transmission ( Fig. 6.39 ). Some barriers
can reduce the radiant exitance by up to 40%, and latex-based
barriers should be avoided as they have been reported to negatively
afect resin polymerization.75,99- For this reason, the output from
curing lights should be tested on the radiometer with the barrier
over the light tip. Clear, plastic food wrap stretched over the light
tip in a single layer can also be an efective and inexpensive infection
control barrier that has minimal efect on light output.81, ,101among various brands of dental curing lights. Depending on their
design, some curing lights deliver only 25% of the irradiance
measured at the tip when they are 8 mm away from the resin
surface.7,45,96-98 his decrease occurs because the design and the
optics of the light source and the light guide all afect the beam
divergence angle from the distal tip end of the light guide. Some
of the light from a curing light is delivered as a collimated beam,
some is focused to a point, and some is immediately dispersed
laterally from the tip. hus curing lights do not ac t as a point
source and depending on the unit’s optical design, which sometimes
includes a lens, the efect of changes in the tip to target distance
on the irradiance received does not obey the inverse square law.
Infection Control
Although some iberoptic light guides can be autoclaved, the body
of the curing light itself cannot. hus the use of infection control
barriers, such as the plastic barriers presented in Figs. 6.36 and
6.37, that ideally should cover the entire curing light and light
guides are recommended. he barrier should it snugly over the
light tip and the sleeve seam should not impede the light output.
Fig. 6.38 illustrates the detrimental efect that occurs when the
• Fig. 6.36 Examples of different types of plastic barriers placed over the curing light to
minimize contamination. Ideally, the plastic barrier should cover the entire unit instead of just
the light tip.
• Fig. 6.37 The barrier should it snugly over the light tip and the seam
should be positioned so that it does not impede light output.
• Fig. 6.38 If the seam of the barrier crosses the light tip, light output
will be reduced.
• Fig. 6.39 Example of a curing light with air vents that should not be
covered by the protective barrier.
CHAPTER 6 Light Curing of Retorative Material
with temporary restorative material. he intrapulpal temperature
rise in the teeth, when using a LED curing light, was then measured.
he radiant exposure was determined, and the resulting increase
in intrapulpal temperature is shown in Fig. 6.40 .
As the radiant exposure increased, there was a corresponding
increase in intrapulpal temperature. However, only when the radiant
exposure levels approached 72 J/cm2 did some in vivo temperature
values meet or exceed the 5.5°C increase threshold, and thus
potentially cause pulpal damage.
Time-based proiles of in vivo temperature values inside the
pulp of upper bicuspid teeth exposed using the same curing light,
but with one tooth having an intact buccal enamel surface and
another tooth having a Class V preparation with approximately
1-mm thickness of dentin remaining, are shown in Fig. 6.41 .
Although both conditions demonstrate similar pulpal temperature
prior to the 30-second exposure, the rate and extent of temperature
increase is much greater in the tooth with the Class V preparation
than in the intact tooth. In addition, it takes longer for the pulpal
temperature to return to baseline levels at the end of the exposure.
Such evidence supports the concept that the potential for causing
temperature increase in pulpal tissue greatly increases as more
tooth structure is removed and there is less dentin overlying the
pulpal tissues. ,
Where the pulp is at greater risk, such as in deep cavities with
little overlying dentin, consideration should be given to the choice
of LCU and light exposure program. It has been recommended
that the tooth should be air-cooled during light exposure112,
from the opposite side ( Fig. 6.42 ) of the exposure. Alternatively,
a high-volume suction device can be used to cool the tooth by
pulling air across the coronal portion of the tooth.
Fig. 6.43 illustrates the in vivo cooling efect of the air spray
when it was applied 3 seconds prior to light exposure, and stopped
when the light was turned of.
Although the pulpal temperature starts to rise shortly after light
exposure, when air-cooled, the pulp temperature decreases both
during and after light exposure. Consequently, it may be possible
to use irradiance levels greater than mW/cm2 for longer than
15 seconds if appropriate cooling measures are used.When using cold sterilizing techniques, only approved cleaning
solutions should be used. Disinfectant sprays can erode the O-rings
used to stabilize light guides, and the residual luid can bake onto
the lens or relectors inside the light housing, thus decreasing the
light output. herefore, if it can be detached, the light guide
should be removed from time to time and any lens, relector, and
ilter inside the curing light should be checked to ensure that they,
and both ends of the light guide, are clean and undamaged.
Health-Related Iue
Intrapulpal Temperature Conideration
An in vivo study involving the direct application of heat from a
soldering iron to the facial surfaces of intact rhesus monkey teeth
indicated that an increase in intrapulpal temperature of 5.5°C
resulted in pulpal necrosis in 15% of the teeth tested. his
temperature value has been extrapolated to predict that similar
pulpal temperature increases when light curing may cause pulpal
necrosis to an already afected human dental pulp.
As the radiant power output from curing lights has increased,
the potential for generating a damaging temperature increase in
the pulp and oral tissues has also risen.6,68, - his increase in
temperature is related to the amount of energy delivered (the
product of irradiance delivered and exposure time) and the thermal
properties (conductivity and difusivity) of the tooth. Based on in
vitro test results, it is suggested that curing lights that deliver an
irradiance greater than 1, mW/cm2 should be used for at most
15 seconds.
However, this guideline has been questioned because recent
human-based intrapulpal temperature studies have measured the
baseline temperature of anesthetized, healthy human pulp tissue.
In that work, patients requiring extraction of bicuspids for orth -
odontic reasons volunteered as participants. Class I preparations
were made, which intentionally exposed the most coronal portion
of the buccal pulp horn. A sterile temperature probe was inserted
directly into the pulp chamber and remained in place during
temperature measurements, while the access opening was illed
7
6
5
4PULP TEMPERATURE INCREASE (°C)3
2
1
0
01 02 03 04 0
APPLIED RADIANT EXPOSURE (J/cm2)y = 0.0622x + 0.
R2 = 0. .5°C TEMPERATURE INCREASE SUGGESTED TO CAUSE PULPAL INJURY
60-s HIGH10-s LOW
10-s HIGH5-s TURBO
50 60 70 80
• Fig. 6.40 Relationship between delivering known radiant exposures to the facial surfaces of intact,
upper bicuspid teeth and the resulting increase in human intrapulpal temperature rise when using a com -
mercial Polywave® LED-based curing light. Exposure duration and output mode selection noted vertically
for each group. N = 15 per test group. (Courtesy Dr. Cesar A.G. Arrais.)
CHAPTER 6 Light Curing of Retorative Material
Soft Tissue Damage
Current literature has reported several cases of soft tissue burns
that were caused by excessive heat either from a hot light curing
tip or from excessive amounts of light energy delivered to the oral
tissues. Soft tissue damage to oral tissues arising from photocuring
restorations can arise from two sources: heat developed by the
external housing of the curing light or from heat developed in
tissues that are exposed to the high-intensity light. Often the light
guide of the curing light is used to retract the cheek or tongue.
For LED-based lights that contain the chip sets at the tip, heat
generated by the chips is difused to the outer surface of the curing
light. In so doing, the surface temperature of areas on the curing
light body opposite to where the chips are emitting may become
hot and thus burn the soft tissues. Fig. 6.44 provides examples of
how the distal portions of light guides are used to retract the soft
tissue and illustrates the potential for causing soft tissue damage.
However, the maximum acceptable external curing light temperature
increases for curing lights is stipulated in the International Elec -
trotechnical Commission speciication, IEC , th at applies
to dental curing lights. hus, if the curing light has passed this
speciication, the heat from the external housing of the unit should
not be high enough to cause a burn.39.0
38.5
38.0
37.5
37.0
36.5
36.0
35.5
35.0INTRAPULPAL TEMPERATURE (°C)
05 01 00
TIME (seconds)30-s exposure, “HIGH” settingINTACT CLASS V
50 30 0
• Fig. 6.41 Comparison of real-time temperature proiles inside the pulp of an intact bicuspid, and one
having a Class V preparation with approximately 1-mm of dentin remaining when exposed to the same
output time and curing mode from an LED-based curing light. (Courtesy Dr. Cesar A.G. Arrais.)
• Fig. 6.42 Directing an air syringe at the opposite surface being lightexposed will help to lower the in vivo intrapulpal temperature. (Courtesy
Professor Marcelo Giannini.)When light-curing gingival areas, as in Class V situations, the
gingival portions of veneers, and the margins of crowns, a portion
of light output also reaches soft tissue that is often not protected
by a rubber dam. Because of the translucent properties of the
poorly keratinized oral epithelium, light easily penetrates and is
absorbed by these tissues. his may result in a signiicant tissue
burn if some protection is not provided. Even when using a rubber
dam, the potential for elevated tissue temperatures may occur.
Fig. 6.45 displays a tissue burn resulting from a 30-second direct
light exposure from a high-intensity LED curing lig ht on the
attached gingiva of a pig. hus, especially when using contemporary
high-power curing lights, clinicians must keep in mind the potential
for causing both direct heat and radiant thermal damage to the
soft tissues and the dental pulp. Clinicians should closely monitor
the position of the light tip and not arbitrarily increase the exposure
time in an attempt to ensure maximal polymerization without
using strategies to minimize thermal damage from the curing light.
One option is to place a small section of cotton gauze under the
dam to protect the gingiva ( Fig. 6.46 ). Another is to carefully
position the light tip just over the resin and watch what you are
doing when light curing so that the light tip does not wander over
the lips or gingiva.
The Optical “Blue Light Hazard”
Dentists have a duty to protect both their patients and employees
from harm. here has been concern that blue light from high-power
curing lights can place dental personnel at risk for ocular
damage. - Although this hazard can be prevented by using
appropriate eye protection, these items are not universally used.
his blue light hazard is related to the wavelength of light ( Fig.
6.47). he hazard mostly occurs between about nm and nm
and is greatest at nm. his wavelength range is well within
the emission spectra from all dental curing lights1 (Fig. 6.48 ). If
eye protection is not used to eliminate the blue light, and instead
the operator looks directly at the curing light, even for just 1
second during the curing cycle before averting his or her eyes, it
may only take as few as seven curing cycles to exceed the recom -
mended maximum daily exposure to blue light.
CHAPTER 6 Light Curing of Retorative Material
34. .5
33. . .0
37.5
37.0
36.5
36.0
35.5
35.0INTRAPULPAL TEMPERATURE (°C)
30-s exposure, “HIGH” settingAir spray started 3-s
prior to light exposureINTACT AIR SPRAY
05 01 00
TIME (seconds) 50 30 0
• Fig. 6.43 Comparison of real-time, human pulpal temperature values between an intact facial surface,
with no air-cooling during exposure (blue proile), and when the lingual surface was air-cooled prior to
and all throughout the light exposure (orange proile). Air-cooling resulted in a 2°C pulp temperature
decrease. (Courtesy Dr. Cesar A.G. Arrais.)
C
B
A
• Fig. 6.44 Curing light used to relect the tongue (A) and cheek
(B) to gain better access to the operative site, or resting on the lip
during light exposure (C).
Blue light is transmitted through the ocular media and absorbed
by the retina. Although high levels of blue light can cause immediate
and irreversible retinal burning, there are also concerns that repeated,
chronic exposure to low levels of blue light will cause accelerated
retinal degeneration and chronic photochemical injury to the
retinal-pigmented epithelium and choroid. his chronic exposure is thought to accelerate age-related macular degeneration
(ARMD). , Most countries follow international guidelines,
such as those from the International Commission on Non-Ionizing
Radiation Protection (ICNIRP) and the American Conference of
Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH), when determining
safe levels of exposure to blue light in all workplaces, not just
CHAPTER 6 Light Curing of Retorative Material
Blue Light Blocking Protection
Using appropriate ocular protection can completely prevent the blue
light hazard and all LCU manufacturers supply and recommend the
use of protective blue-blocking orange shields to protect the eyes
from the bright blue light. hese orange plastic shields are usually
attached to the light tip and can be adjusted to provide eye protection
to the operator. Other types of protective glasses and paddles are also
available in various sizes, thickness, and designs ( Fig. 6.49 ).
Most of the protective orange ilters used in dentistry are designed
to reduce the risks of exposure to wavelengths of blue light between
• Fig. 6.45 Erythema resulting from exposure of pig gingiva to a highintensity LED curing light. (Reprinted from Maucoski C, Zarpellon DC, Dos
Santos FA, et al: Analysis of temperature increase in swine gingiva after
exposure to a Polywave® LED light curing unit, Dent Mater 33(11): , . With permission from The Academy of Dental Materials.)
B
A
• Fig. 6.46 Conventional positioning of a curing tip when exposing a
Class V preparation (A). Such a position can cause a tissue burn even
under the rubber dam. A small section of cotton gauze can be placed
under the dam to protect the gingiva (B). (Courtesy Professor Marcelo
Giannini.)
• Fig. 6.47 Graphical depiction of the blue light hazard function related to
wavelength. The maximum hazard values occur between and nm.
(From Rueggeberg FA, Giannini M, Arrais CAG, Price RBT: Light curing in
dentistry and clinical implications: a literature review, Braz Oral Res 31(suppl
1): e61, . http://dx.doi.org/10. / -3107bor- .vol31. .
Licensed under CC BY 2.0, https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/ .)
• Fig. 6.48 Superimposition of the wavelengths of light that cause the
blue light hazard (light blue area) and that of the emission spectrum from
a multiwave LED dental curing light (violet area). The blue light component
from dental curing light is within the hazard range. (From Rueggeberg FA,
Giannini M, Arrais CAG, Price RBT: Light curing in dentistry and clinical
implications: a literature review, Braz Oral Res 31(suppl 1): e61,
. http://dx.doi.org/10. / -3107bor- .vol31. . Licensed
under CC BY 2.0, https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/ .)
dental oices. , It should also be noted that these maximum
recommended exposure times have been developed for individuals
with normal photosensitivity. Patients or dental personnel who
have had cataract surgery or who are taking photosensitizing
medications will have a greater susceptibility for retinal damage. ,
CHAPTER 6 Light Curing of Retorative Material
Teaching How to Light Cure
Much of the research on dental resins has been conducted in a
laboratory setting, using a curing light held in a ixed position
that is very close to the resin surface. Although this method makes
the results more consistent, this is not a clinicall y relevant condition.
When light curing a restoration in the mouth both the dentist
and the patient often move, and access to the posterior teeth is
often limited. Unless the operator is very careful, the position of
the light tip can drift away from the restoration, or unwanted
shadows may be produced that can have an adverse efect on the
amount of energy delivered to the restoration and the subsequent
level of resin polymerization ( Fig. 6.51 ). , and nm. A schematic representation of how blue-blocking
ilters block the damaging radiation from curing lights is seen in
Fig. 6.50 .
he best blue light iltering glasses (“orange blue-blockers”)
have been shown to reduce the transmission of light below nm
by 99%. When such blue light iltering glasses are used, instead
of looking away from the bright blue light, the operator can safely
watch what he or she is doing when light curing; thus they can
keep the light tip directly over the resin they are trying to light
cure. However, not all brands of protective ilters are equally efective
and some protective ilters have been reported to be inadequate
if they are used to protect the eye against a range of wavelengths
other than the intended range. hus it is important to use the
correct blue-blocking ilter for the curing light being used.
Electromagnetic Rik From Curing Light
here is some concern that the electrical circuitry in curing light
can interact with implanted pacemakers. Although there is a
theoretical risk, the initial laboratory tests were performed under
conditions where the investigators used physiologic saline baths
and benchtop settings. Major companies are required to test for
this hazard before selling their curing lights, and there should be
no risk if the curing light has been purchased from a reputable
manufacturer. , here may be a risk when using untested budget
curing lights.
B
A
• Fig. 6.49 Various forms of “blue-blocker” eye protection.
B
A
• Fig. 6.50 Depiction of spectral emission of a multiwave LED curing light (A) and how the blue-blocker
shield ilters harmful radiation while allowing light of longer wavelengths to pass (B).
• Fig. 6.51 The position of the light tip can produce unwanted shadows
and under-cured resin.
CHAPTER 6 Light Curing of Retorative Material
• Fig. 6.52 Light curing a simulated restoration using the MARC-Patient
Simulator (BlueLight Analytics, Halifax, Canada).
• Fig. 6.53 Before and after images of irradiance
levels delivered by several operators to a speciic
intraoral location during a 10-second light expo -
sure, as monitored using the MARC-PS patient
simulator. The after image shows great improve -
ment in how consistently the light was delivered
throughout the exposures. The operators also
delivered more total energy after instruction. It is known that the light-delivery technique used by the operator
can have a signiicant efect on the radiant exposure delivered to
the restorative material, especially when it is common practice not
to watch the position of the curing light tip over the restoration
when light curing. Not only can this practice negatively afect the
amount of energy delivered to the restoration, it can also result in
a tissue burn.6, , - he operator variability in how much light
is delivered can be reduced and the radiant exposure delivered to
restorations increased if the operator has been trained using a
device that shows, in real time, his or her ability to efectively
deliver light energy to a simulated restoration. Such a clinical
training simulator (MARC-Patient Simulator, BlueLight Analytics,
Halifax, Canada) is seen in Fig. 6.52 .
Individualized hands-on training on how to perform light curing
of a restoration includes learning how to correctly position the
patient to improve access and how to position the light guide
throughout the light curing process. , , - By providing
immediate feedback to the operator on how much irradiance and
energy is being delivered, together with instructor coaching on
how to avoid mistakes, the MARC-Patient Simulator has been
shown to be an efective method to teach how to light cure a restora -
tion. Examples of the real-time irradiance delivered to a speciic
restorative location by several operators during a 10-second exposure
CHAPTER 6 Light Curing of Retorative Material
12. Bhalla M, Patel D, Shashikiran ND, et al: Efect of light-emitting
diode and halogen light curing on the micro-hardness of dental
composite and resin-modiied glass ionomer cement: an in vitro
study. J Indian Soc Pedod Prev Dent 30: – , .
13. Sigusch BW, Plaum T, Volpel A, et al: Resin-composite cytotoxic -
ity varies with shade and irradiance. Dent Mater 28: – ,
.
14. Durner J, Obermaier J, Draenert M, et al: Correlation of the degree
of conversion with the amount of elutable substances in nano-hybrid
dental composites. Dent Mater 28: – , .
15. Salehi S, Gwinner F , Mitchell JC, et al: Cytotoxicity of resin
composites containing bioactive glass illers. Dent Mater 31: – ,
.
16. Soh MS, Yap AU: Inluence of curing modes on crosslink density
in polymer structures. J Dent 32: – , .
17. Asmussen E, Peutzfeldt A: Inluence of pulse-delay curing on softening
of polymer structures. J Dent Res 80: – , .
18. Benetti AR, Peutzfeldt A, Asmussen E, et al: Inluence of curing
rate on softening in ethanol, degree of conversion, and wear of resin
composite. Am J Dent 24: – , .
19. Craig RG: Chemistry, composition, and properties of composite
resins. Dent Clin North Am 25: – , .
20. AlShaai MM, Harlow JE, Price HL, et al: Emission characteristics
and efect of battery drain in “budget” curing lights. Oper Dent
41: – , .
21. Shimokawa CA, T urbino ML, Harlow JE, et al: Light output from
six battery operated dental curing lights. Mater Sci Eng C Mater
Biol Appl 69: – , .
22. Stansbury JW: Curing dental resins and composites by photopoly -
merization. J Esthet Dent 12: – , .
23. Neumann MG, Miranda WG, Jr, Schmitt CC, et al: Molar extinction
coeicients and the photon absorption eiciency of dental photoinitia -
tors and light curing units. J Dent 33: – , .
24. Burtscher P: Ivocerin in comparison to camphorquinone. Ivoclar
Vivadent Report, No. 19, July, : .
25. Tirtha R, Fan PL, Dennison JB, et al: In vitro depth of cure of
photo-activated composites. J Dent Res 61: – , .
26. Wilder AD, Jr, May KN, Jr, Bayne SC, et al: Seventeen-year clinical
study of ultraviolet-cured posterior composite Class I and II restora -
tions. J Esthet Dent 11: – , .
27. Musanje L, Darvell BW: Polymerization of resin composite restorative
materials: exposure reciprocity. Dent Mater 19: – , .
28. Selig D, Haenel T, Hausnerova B, et al: Examining exposure reciproc -
ity in a resin based composite using high irradiance levels and
real-time degree of conversion values. Dent Mater 31: – ,
.
29. Leprince JG, Hadis M, Shortall AC, et al: Photoinitiator type and
applicability of exposure reciprocity law in illed and unilled photoac -
tive resins. Dent Mater 27: – , .
30. Hadis M, Leprince JG, Shortall AC, et al: High irradiance curing
and anomalies of exposure reciprocity law in resin-based materials.
J Dent 39: – , .
31. Wydra JW, Cramer NB, Stansbury JW, et al: he reciprocity law
concerning light dose relationships applied to BisGMA/TEGDMA
photopolymers: theoretical analysis and experimental characterization.
Dent Mater 30: – , .
32. Ruyter IE, Øysæd H: Conversion in diferent depths of ultraviolet
and visible light activated composite materials. Acta Odontol Scand
40: – , .
33. Harlow JE, Rueggeberg FA, Labrie D, et al: T ransmission of violet
and blue light through conventional (layered) and bulk cured
resin-based composites. J Dent 53:44–50, .
34. Cook WD, Standish PM: Cure of resin based restorative materials.
II. White light photopolymerized resins. Aust Dent J 28: – ,
.
35. Chen YC, Ferracane JL, Prahl SA: A pilot study of a simple photon
migration model for predicting depth of cure in dental composite.
Dent Mater 21: – , .and monitored using the MARC-PS patient simulator are seen in
Fig. 6.53 . he after-image shows a great improvement in the
consistency in the irradiance that was delivered throughout the
exposure. he operators also delivered a greater radiant exposure
(amount of energy in J/cm2) after instruction, thereby increasing
the potential for achieving the intended properties and the promising
in vitro results for the restorative material they are using.
General Recommendation When Uing
a Curing Light
As a general recommendation, users should be aware of the radiant
power output, active emitting tip dimensions, irradiance, efect of
distance on irradiance, and emission spectrum from the curing
light they are using. heir light should be tested regularly to ensure
that it is functioning according to the manufacturer’s speciications
and that the output has not changed signiicantly since purchase.
When light curing, clinicians should deliver suicient radiant
exposure at the correct wavelengths of light required by the
photoinitiator used in the resin composite they are using. To
maximize the radiant exposure delivered, the light tip should be
held both close to and perpendicular to the surface of the restoration.
Operators should directly observe what they are doing throughout
the entire light exposure, and to do so safely, they must also use
appropriate eye protection. Precautions should be taken to avoid
causing an unacceptable temperature increase in the tooth and the
adjacent soft tissues.41, ,
Reference
1. Rueggeberg FA: State-of-the-art: dental photocuring–a review. Dent
Mater 27:39–52, .
2. Jandt KD, Mills RW: A brief history of LED photopolymerization.
Dent Mater 29: – , .
3. Price RB, Ferracane JL, Shortall AC: Light-curing units: A review
of what we need to know. J Dent Res 94: – , .
4. Santini A, T urner S: General dental practitioners’ knowledge of
polymerisation of resin-based composite restorations and light curing
unit technology. Br Dent J :E13, .
5. Ferracane JL, Mitchem JC, Condon JR, et al: Wear and marginal
breakdown of composites with various degrees of cure. J Dent Res
76: – , .
6. Shortall A, El-Mahy W, Stewardson D, et al: Initial fracture re sistance
and curing temperature rise of ten contemporary resin-based
composites with increasing radiant exposure. J Dent 41: – ,
.
7. Xu X, Sandras DA, Burgess JO: Shear bond strength with increasing
light-guide distance from dentin. J Esthet Restor Dent 18:19–27,
discussion 28, .
8. Vandewalle KS, Ferracane JL, Hilton TJ, et al: Efect of energy
density on properties and marginal integrity of posterior resin
composite restorations. Dent Mater 20:96– , .
9. Purushothaman D, Kailasam V, Chitharanjan AB: Bisphenol A
release from orthodontic adhesives and its correlation with the
degree of conversion. Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop :29–36,
.
10. Nocca G, Iori A, Rossini C, et al: Efects of barriers on chemical
and biological properties of two dual resin cements. Eur J Oral Sci
: – , .
11. El-Damanhoury HM, Gaintantzopoulou M: Efect of th ermocycling,
degree of conversion, and cavity coniguration on the bonding
efectiveness of all-in-one adhesives. Oper Dent 40: – ,
.
CHAPTER 6 Light Curing of Retorative Material
58. Ilie N, Jelen E, Hickel R: Is the soft-start polymerisation concept
still relevant for modern curing units? Clin Oral Investig 15:21–29,
.
59. Dall’Magro E, Correr AB, Costa AR, et al: Efect of diferent
photoactivation techniques on the bond strength of a dental
composite. Braz Dent J 21: – , .
60. Inoue K, Howashi G, Kanetou T, et al: Efect of light intensity on
linear shrinkage of photo-activated composite resins during setting.
J Oral Rehabil 32:22–27, .
61. van Dijken JW, Pallesen U: A 7-year randomized prospective study
of a one-step self-etching adhesive in non-carious cervical lesions.
he efect of curing modes and restorative material. J Dent 40:
– , .
62. Harlow JE, Sullivan B, Shortall AC, et al: Characterizing the output
settings of dental curing lights. J Dent 44:20–26, .
63. Fujibayashi K, Shimaru K, Takahashi N, et al: Newly developed
curing unit using blue light-emitting diodes. Dent Jpn (Tokyo)
34:49–53, .
64. Mills RW, Jandt KD, Ashworth SH: Dental composite depth of
cure with halogen and blue light emitting diode technology. Br
Dent J : – , .
65. Hofmann N, Hugo B, Klaiber B: Efect of irradiation type (LED
or QTH) on photo-activated composite shrinkage strain kinetics,
temperature rise, and hardness. Eur J Oral Sci : – , .
66. Weerakoon AT, Meyers IA, Symons AL, et al: Pulpal heat changes
with newly developed resin photopolymerisation systems. Aust
Endod J 28: – , .
67. Ozturk AN, Usumez A: Inluence of diferent light sources on
microtensile bond strength and gap formation of resin cement under
porcelain inlay restorations. J Oral Rehabil 31: – , .
68. Andreatta LM, Furuse AY, Prakki A, et al: Pulp chamber heating:
An in vitro study evaluating diferent light sources and resin composite
layers. Braz Dent J 27: – , .
69. Price RB, Labrie D, Rueggeberg FA, et al: Correlation between the
beam proile from a curing light and the microhardness of four
resins. Dent Mater 30: – , .
70. Price RB, Labrie D, Rueggeberg FA, et al: Irradiance diferences in
the violet ( nm) and blue ( nm) spectral ranges among
dental light-curing units. J Esthet Restor Dent 22: – , .
71. Issa Y, Watts DC, Boyd D, et al: Efect of curing light emission
spectrum on the nanohardness and elastic modulus of two bulk-ill
resin composites. Dent Mater 32: – , .
72. Magalhaes Filho TR, Weig KM, Costa MF , et al: Efect of LED-LCU
light irradiance distribution on mechanical properties of resin based
materials. Mater Sci Eng C Mater Biol Appl 63: – , .
73. ISO Dentistry-Powered polymerization activators. Geneva,
Switzerland: International Standards Organization: International
Standards Organization; . p. 14.
74. Coherent. White Paper: Novel Laser Power Sensor Improves Process
Control. https://http://www.coherent.com/?fuseaction =form.requi
red&download = &title =PowerMax-Pro-White-Paper-NovelLaser-Power-Sensor-Improves-Process-Control : Coherent; (Cited
12 August ). 1-7.
75. Vandewalle KS, Roberts HW, Rueggeberg FA: Power distribution
across the face of diferent light guides and its efect on composite
surface microhardness. J Esthet Restor Dent 20: – , discussion
, .
76. Michaud PL, Price RB, Labrie D, et al: Localise d irradiance distribu -
tion found in dental light curing units. J Dent 42: – , .
77. Yearn JA: Factors afecting cure of visible light activated composites.
Int Dent J 35: – , .
78. Friedman J: Variability of lamp characteristics in dental curing
lights. J Esthet Dent 1: – , .
79. Rueggeberg FA, Caughman WF , Comer RW: he efect of autoclaving
on energy transmission through light-curing tips. J Am Dent Assoc
: – , .
80. Poulos JG, Styner DL: Curing lights: changes in intensity output
with use over time. Gen Dent 45:70–73, .36. dos Santos GB, Alto RV, Filho HR, et al: Light transmission on
dental resin composites. Dent Mater 24: – , .
37. Price RB, Murphy DG, Dérand T: Light energy transmission through
cured resin composite and human dentin. Quintessence Int 31:
– , .
38. Taira M, Suzuki H, Toyooka H, et al: Refractive index of inorganic
illers in seven visible-light-cured dental composite resins. J Mater
Sci Lett 13:68–70, .
39. Shortall AC, Palin WM, Burtscher P: Refractive index mismatch
and monomer reactivity inluence composite curing depth. J Dent
Res 87:84–88, .
40. Price RB, Shortall AC, Palin WM: Contemporary issues in light
curing. Oper Dent 39:4–14, .
41. Shortall AC, Price RB, MacKenzie L, et al: Guidelines for the
selection, use, and maintenance of LED light-curing units - Part
II. Br Dent J : – , .
42. Shortall AC, Price RB, MacKenzie L, et al: Guidelines for the
selection, use, and maintenance of LED light-curing units - Part
1. Br Dent J : – , .
43. Yaman BC, Efes BG, Dorter C, et al: he efects of halogen and
light-emitting diode light curing on the depth of cure and surface
microhardness of composite resins. J Conserv Dent 14: – ,
.
44. Curtis JW, Jr, Rueggeberg FA, Lee AJ: Curing eiciency of the
T urbo Tip. Gen Dent 43: – , .
45. Price RB, Derand T, Sedarous M, et al: Efect of distance on the
power density from two light guides. J Esthet Dent 12: – ,
.
46. Busemann I, Lipke C, Schattenberg A, et al: Shortest exposure time
possible with LED curing lights. Am J Dent 24:37–44, .
47. Burdick JA, Lovestead TM, Anseth KS: Kinetic chain lengths
in highly cross-linked networks formed by the photoiniti -
ated polymerization of divinyl monomers: A gel permeation
chromatography investigation. Biomacromolecules 4: – ,
.
48. Feng L, Carvalho R, Suh BI: Insuicient cure under the condition
of high irradiance and short irradiation time. Dent Mater 25: – ,
.
49. Lovell LG, Newman SM, Bowman CN: he efects of light intensity,
temperature, and comonomer composition on the polymerization
behavior of dimethacrylate dental resins. J Dent Res 78: – ,
.
50. Taubock TT, Feilzer AJ, Buchalla W, et al: Efect of modulated
photo-activation on polymerization shrinkage behavior of
dental restorative resin composites. Eur J Oral Sci : – ,
.
51. Randolph LD, Palin WM, Watts DC, et al: he efect of ultra-fast
photopolymerisation of experimental composites on shrinkage stress,
network formation and pulpal temperature rise. Dent Mater
30: – , .
52. Kanca J, 3rd, Suh BI: Pulse activation: reducing resin-based composite
contraction stresses at the enamel cavosurface margins. Am J Dent
12: – , .
53. Suh BI, Feng L, Wang Y, et al: he efect of the pulse-delay cure
technique on residual strain in composites. Compendium 20:4–12,
.
54. Feng L, Suh BI: A mechanism on why slower polymerization of a
dental composite produces lower contraction stress. J Biomed Mater
Res B Appl Biomater 78:63–69, .
55. Bouschlicher MR, Rueggeberg FA: Efect of ramped light intensity
on polymerization force and conversion in a photoactivated com -
posite. J Esthet Dent 12: – , .
56. Chye CH, Yap AU, Laim YC, et al: Post-gel polymerization shrinkage
associated with diferent light curing regimens. Oper Dent
30: – , .
57. Lopes LG, Franco EB, Pereira JC, et al: Efect of light-curing units
and activation mode on polymerization shrinkage and shrinkage
stress of composite resins. J Appl Oral Sci 16:35–42, .
CHAPTER 6 Light Curing of Retorative Material
. Atai M, Motevasselian F: Temperature rise and degree of photopo -
lymerization conversion of nanocomposites and conventional dental
composites. Clin Oral Investig 13: – , .
. Gomes M, DeVito-Moraes A, Francci C, et al: Temperature increase
at the light guide tip of 15 contemporary LED units and thermal
variation at the pulpal loor of cavities: an infrared thermographic
analysis. Oper Dent 38: – , .
. Mouhat M, Mercer J, Stangvaltaite L, et al: Light-curing units used
in dentistry: factors associated with heat development—potential
risk for patients. Clin Oral Investig 1–10, .
. Park SH, Roulet JF , Heintze SD: Parameters inluencing increase
in pulp chamber temperature with light-curing devices: curing lights
and pulpal low rates. Oper Dent 35: – , .
. Runnacles P , Arrais CA, Pochapski MT, et al: Direct measurement
of time-dependent anesthetized in vivo human pulp temperature.
Dent Mater 31:53–59, .
. Kodonas K, Gogos C, Tziafas D: Efect of simulated pulpal
microcirculation on intrapulpal temperature changes following
application of heat on tooth surfaces. Int Endod J 42: – ,
.
. Flávio Henrique Baggio A, Gisele Kanda Peres B, Débora Alves
Nunes Leite L, et al: Efect of composite resin polymerization modes
on temperature rise in human dentin of diferent thicknesses: an
in vitro study. Biomed Mater 1: , .
. Onisor I, Asmussen E, Krejci I: Temperature rise during photopolymerization for onlay luting. Am J Dent 24: – , .
. Strassler HE: Successful light curingnot as easy as it looks. Oral
Health :18–26, .
. Spranley TJ, Winkler M, Dagate J, et al: Curing light burns. Gen
Dent 60:e210–e214, .
. International Electrotechnical Commission: IEC -1:
SER Series. Medical electrical equipment. Geneva, Switzerland.
.
. Labrie D, Moe J, Price RB, et al: Evaluation of ocular hazards from
4 types of curing lights. J Can Dent Assoc 77:b116, .
. McCusker N, Lee SM, Robinson S, et al: Light curing in orthodontics;
should we be concerned? Dent Mater 29:e85–e90, .
. Bruzell Roll EM, Jacobsen N, Hensten-Pettersen A: Health hazards
associated with curing light in the dental clinic. Clin Oral Investig
8: – , .
. Price RB, Labrie D, Bruzell EM, et al: he dental curing light: A
potential health risk. J Occup Environ Hyg 13: – , .
. Stamatacos C, Harrison JL: he possible ocular hazards of LED
dental illumination applications. J T enn Dent Assoc 93:25–29, quiz
30-21, .
. Hill EE: Eye safety practices in U.S. dental school restorative clinics,
. J Dent Educ 70: – , .
. American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists
(ACGIH): TLVs and BEIs Based on the Documentation for
hreshold Limit Values for Chemical Substances and Physical
Agents and Biological Exposure Indices. ACGIH Cincinnati, Ohio,
.
. International Commission on non-ionizing radiation protection:
Guidelines on limits of exposure to broad-band incoherent optical
radiation (0.38 to 3 μm). Health Phys 73: – , .
. Ham WT, Jr, Rufolo JJ, Jr, Mueller HA, et al: Histologic analysis
of photochemical lesions produced in rhesus retina by short-wavelength light. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 17: – , .
. Bruzell EM, Johnsen B, Aalerud TN, et al: Evaluation of eye protec -
tion ilters for use with dental curing and bleaching lamps. J Occup
Environ Hyg 4: – , .
. Miller CS, Leonelli FM, Latham E: Selective interference with
pacemaker activity by electrical dental devices. Oral Surg Oral Med
Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 85:33–36, .
. Elayi CS, Lusher S, Meeks Nyquist JL, et al: Interference between
dental electrical devices and pacemakers or deibrillators: results
from a prospective clinical study. J Am Dent Assoc : – ,
.81. McAndrew R, Lynch CD, Pavli M, et al: he efect of disposable
infection control barriers and physical damage on the power output
of light curing units and light curing tips. Br Dent J :E12,
.
82. Strydom C: Dental curing lights–maintenance of v isible light curing
units. SADJ 57: – , .
83. Price RB, Labrie D, Kazmi S, et al: Intraand inter-brand accuracy
of four dental radiometers. Clin Oral Investig 16: – , .
84. Leonard DL, Charlton DG, Hilton TJ: Efect of curing-tip diameter
on the accuracy of dental radiometers. Oper Dent 24:31–37, .
85. Roberts HW, Vandewalle KS, Berzins DW, et al: Accuracy of LED
and halogen radiometers using diferent light sources. J Esthet Restor
Dent 18: – , discussion - , .
86. Marovic D, Matic S, Kelic K, et al: Time dependent accuracy of
dental radiometers. Acta Clin Croat 52: – , .
87. Rueggeberg FA, Caughman WF , Curtis JW, Jr: Efect of light
intensity and exposure duration on cure of resin composite. Oper
Dent 19:26–32, .
88. Anusavice KJ, Phillips RW, Shen C, et al: Phillips’ science of dental
materials , ed 12, St. Louis, Mo., , Elsevier/Saunders, p ,
xiii. p.
89. Calheiros FC, Daronch M, Rueggeberg FA, et al: Degree of conver -
sion and mechanical properties of a BisGMA:TEGDMA composite
as a function of the applied radiant exposure. J Biomed Mater Res
B Appl Biomater 84: – , .
90. Fan PL, Schumacher RM, Azzolin K, et al: Curing-light intensity
and depth of cure of resin-based composites tested according to
international standards. J Am Dent Assoc : – , .
91. Nitta K: Efect of light guide tip diameter of LED-light curing unit
on polymerization of light-cured composites. Dent Mater 21: – ,
.
92. Leprince JG, Palin WM, Hadis MA, et al: Progress in dimethacrylatebased dental composite technology and curing eiciency. Dent Mater
29: – , .
93. Shortall AC, Felix CJ, Watts DC: Robust spectrometer-based
methods for characterizing radiant exitance of dental LED light
curing units. Dent Mater 31: – , .
94. D’Alpino PH, Wang L, Rueggeberg FA, et al: Bond strength of
resin-based restorations polymerized with diferent light-curing
sources. J Adhes Dent 8: – , .
95. Ash MM, Nelson SJ, Ash MM: Dental anatomy, physiology, and
occlusion , ed 8, Philadelphia, , W.B. Saunders, p xiv. p.,
p. of col. plates p.
96. Price RB, Labrie D, Whalen JM, et al: Efect of distance on irradiance
and beam homogeneity from 4 light-emitting diode curing units.
J Can Dent Assoc 77:b9, .
97. Corciolani G, Vichi A, Davidson CL, et al: he inluence of tip
geometry and distance on light-curing eicacy. Oper Dent 33: – ,
.
98. Vandewalle KS, Roberts HW, Andrus JL, et al: Efect of light disper -
sion of LED curing lights on resin composite polymerization.
J Esthet Restor Dent 17: – , discussion - , .
99. Coutinho M, T revizam NC, Takayassu RN, et al: Distance and
protective barrier efects on the composite resin degree of conversion.
Contemp Clin Dent 4: – , .
. Scott BA, Felix CA, Price RB: Efect of disposa ble infection control
barriers on light output from dental curing lights. J Can Dent Assoc
70: – , .
. Sword RJ, Do UN, Chang JH, et al: Efect of curing light barriers
and light types on radiant exposure and composite conversion.
J Esthet Restor Dent 28:29–42, .
. Strassler HE, Price RB: Understanding light curing, Part II. Delivering
predictable and successful restorations. Dent Today 1–8, quiz 9, .
. Zach L, Cohen G: Pulp response to externally applied heat. Oral
Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 19: – , .
. Baroudi K, Silikas N, Watts DC: In vitro pulp chamber temperature
rise from irradiation and exotherm of lowable composites. Int J
Paediatr Dent 19:48–54, .
CHAPTER 6 Light Curing of Retorative Material
. Federlin M, Price R: Improving light-curing instruction in dental
school. J Dent Educ 77: – , .
. Mutluay MM, Rueggeberg FA, Price RB: Efect of using proper
light-curing techniques on energy delivered to a Class 1 restoration.
Quintessence Int 45: – , .
. Price RB, Strassler HE, Price HL, et al: he efectiveness of using
a patient simulator to teach light-curing skills. J Am Dent Assoc
:32–43, .
. Price RB: Light curing in dentistry. Dent Clin North Am 61: – ,
. . Roedig JJ, Shah J, Elayi CS, et al: Interference of cardiac pacemaker
and implantable cardioverter-deibrillator activity during electronic
dental device use. J Am Dent Assoc : – , .
. Price RB, McLeod ME, Felix CM: Quantifying light energy delivered
to a Class I restoration. J Can Dent Assoc 76:a23, .
. Konerding KL, Heyder M, Kranz S, et al: Study of energy transfer
by diferent light curing units into a class III restoratio n as a function
of tilt angle and distance, using a MARC Patient Simulator (PS).
Dent Mater 32: – , .
. Seth S, Lee CJ, Ayer CD: Efect of instruction on dental students’
ability to light-cure a simulated restoration. J Can Dent Assoc
78:c123, .
. Price RB, Felix CM, Whalen JM: Factors afecting the energy
delivered to simulated class I and class v preparations. J Can Dent
Assoc 76:a94, .
CHAPTER 7 Color and Shade Matching in Operative Dentitry
Color and Shade Matching in
Operative Dentistry
JOE C. ONTIVEROS, RADE D. PARAVINA
Color plays a critical role in the success or failure of esthetic
dental restorations. Shade matching is as much an art as
it is a science, and requires knowledge of color science
principles and the implementation of adequate shade matching
techniques. his chapter provides a working knowledge of the
principles of color and perception relative to understanding the
complex nature of tooth color and appearance. Shade matching
methods and tools for achieving predictable esthetic outcomes will
be discussed along with resources available for continued
improvement.
Color and Perception
The Color Triplet (Oberver Situation)
he human perception of color results from the interaction of
three elements: light source, object, and observer ( Fig. 7.1 ).
Because all three of these elements can be modiied, any change
in one element will afect the inal perception of color. he light
source is a visible form of electromagnetic (EM) radiation that
illuminates the object. When light strikes the object (tooth), a
proportion of the energy is absorbed, transmitted, or relected. Color
perception is dependent upon the subjective ability of the human
visual system to combine and interpret the physical interactions
of light and object. he quantity of relected light reaching the
observer’s eyes stimulates a subjective sensation in the brain that
we experience as color. In other words, the perception of color
ultimately resides in the brain and not merely in the property of
the object. For this reason, color can be deined as a psychophysical
sensation provoked in the eye by the visible light and interpreted by
the brain.
Color Viion
Rods and Cones
he human eye and brain, which enable color vision, form an
amazing and complex system. he visual system of a person with
normal color vision can identify millions of diferent colors.1,2 At
the innermost retinal layer of the eye are two types of specialized
neurons that function as photoreceptors, called rods and cones. he more numerous of the two photoreceptors are the rods, which
are sensitive to low levels of light. he rods are primarily responsible
for our peripheral vision and are unable to detect color. In low
levels of light, rods help us see objects in gray scale; as the light
becomes brighter, the rods become inactive. On the other hand,
the cones operate in bright light and provide high acuity color
vision. Both photoreceptors transform light into chemical energies
that stimulate millions of nerve endings. he neural signals are
transported by the optic nerve to the brain, where color is inter -
preted. here are three types of cones in the retina that are sensitive
to diferent wavelengths of light: blue, green, and red. he blue
cones are most responsive to short wavelengths. he green and
red cones are most responsive to medium and longer wavelengths,
respectively, with some overlap.
Color Deiciency
Color vision deiciency is a weakness or absence in one or more
of the three types of cones. he most common color deiciency
in the population is an individual with a partial green defect known
as deuteranomaly . Other deiciencies are protanomaly, which is caused
by a reduced sensitivity to red light, and tritanomaly, which is
someone lacking blue vision. Individuals with these color deiciencies
still see color; however, their color vision is distorted ( Fig. 7.2 ).
Color blind individuals lack all three types of cones; this condition
is called monochromacy or achromatopsia . Color deiciency poses a
challenge for the clinician when performing visual shade matching.
Popular general tests to check color vision are the Ishihara T est
(Fig. 7.3 ) and the Farnsworth-Munsell T est .
Color Dimenion
here are numerous systems and theories for arranging color in
some orderly fashion (i.e., color spaces). he most popular system
for visual color matching in dentistry is based on the threedimensional model devised by American artist Alfred H. Munsell
in .2 Munsell’s color system forms the basis for the classiication
of colored objects in the three dimensions: hue, value, and chroma.
It is important to grasp the concepts of hue, value, and chroma
to fully understand dental shade matching as described in this
chapter.
CHAPTER 7 Color and Shade Matching in Operative Dentitry
of gray. It is usually communicated in terms of lighter or darker.
A tooth that appears lighter, or “brighter,” as a result of bleaching
would display an increase in value.
Chroma
While hue enables the distinction and diferentiation among
diferent colors, chroma is related to variation in strength of the
same color. he further away from the achromatic vertical axis,
the higher the chroma (stronger, more intense). he closer the
color is to the achromatic (value) axis, the lower the chroma (paler,
weaker). Chroma is often described as more chromatic or less
chromatic. A tooth with a redder and/or yellower appearance at Hue
his color dimension is the attribute by which an object is judged
to appear red, orange, yellow, green, blue, purple, etc. hese are
the “pure” colors found on a basic color wheel or a simple box of
crayons. hese hues, which appear on the visual spectrum, are
placed on a continuous, circular scale as seen in Fig. 7.4 . Compared
to a standard, the hue of an object would be communicated in
terms such as redder, yellower, greener, or bluer.
Value
he dimension of value refers to the lightness of a color. It is the
achromatic vertical scale from black to white representing all shades
Light source Object Observer
• Fig. 7.1 The color triplet (observer situation).
D
C
B
A
• Fig 7.2 A, Unaltered digital image, corresponding to normal color vision and after color deiciency
simulations. B, Protanomaly. C, Deuteranomaly. D, Tritanomaly. (The original image processed at http://
www.color-blindness.com/coblis-color-blindness-simulator/ .)
CHAPTER 7 Color and Shade Matching in Operative Dentitry
the cervical region, as commonly seen on a canine, can be described
as more chromatic at that region. As the chroma increases, the
hue becomes more speciic.
Other Optical Propertie
When light waves strike the surface of an object, the change in
refractive index can cause waves to be r elected, absorbed, or
transmitted by the material. he combination of light speed and
directional changes of the waves results in particular optical appear -
ances of teeth as described later in the chapter.
Translucency
T ranslucency is the degree to which an object scatters light upon
transmission, resulting in an appearance between complete opacity
and complete transparency. Complete opacity will obscure the
substrate beneath it by blocking the passage of light, while a
completely transparent object will transmit light without scattering
and will clearly show the substrate beneath it.
Iridescence
Iridescence is a rainbowlike efect caused by the difraction of light
that changes according to the angle from which it is viewed or
the angle of incidence of the light source. Iridescence occurs when
light is difracted from a thin layer that lies between two mediums
of diferent refractive index (e.g., air and water), as in a soap bubble
or a thin ilm of oil on water. Teeth do not display the property
of iridescence, which is often confused with opalescence.
Opalescence
Opalescence is a milky iridescence that resembles the internal play
of colors of an opal. In a natural tooth, opalescence is caused by
light scattering between two phases of enamel that have diferent
indexes of refraction. Short wavelengths of light are relected display -
ing a blue hue, whereas longer light wavelengths, such as the
orange and red, are transmitted through the tooth.
A B
• Fig. 7.3 Ishihara Test. Observer should see number 74 (A) and number 42 (B). (Reproduced from
Ishihara’s Tests for Colour Blindness. Tokyo: Kanehara & Co., but tests for color blindness cannot be
conducted with this material. For accurate testing, the original plates should be used.)
ChromaHueValue
Munsell
• Fig 7.4 Munsell color system, with achromatic vertical value axis. Hues
(different colors) are arranged in a -degree circle. Chroma is repre -
sented as the distance from the value axis—that is, the strength of the
same color increases as it departs from the value axis.
CHAPTER 7 Color and Shade Matching in Operative Dentitry
color-e fect-designers-should-see/ ). When the opposite occurs, that
is, the perceived diference between the object’s color and its
surrounding is reduced, this is known as chromatic assimilation .
Blending Efect
Clinically, the perceptual phenomenon of assimilation occurs when
a restorative material (object) takes on the color of the tooth
(background/surround) and appears more similar combined than
when viewed in isolation. In the dental literature, this visual blending
of tooth and material is known as blending efect (BE).5,6 he
blending effect is commonly (and incorrectly) referred to as
“chameleon efect.”
Complementary Afterimage
Similar to contrast and assimilation efects, our eyes can adapt to
a recent visual experience and provoke illusionary perceptions of
color. When we stare at a solid color for approximately 30 seconds
or more, our photoreceptors become sensitized (retinal fatigue)
and can create illusionary images of the complementary color; this
is known as complementary afterimage . If one concentrates on a
solid color red target, for example, the red cones gradually respond
less strongly to that relected red signal. If one switches his or her
gaze to a solid white target, now all colors are relected to the
retina and cones will send a strong green signal and a strong blue
signal, but a weak red signal. One will see a cyan color afterimage,
cyan being the complementary color of red (see Fig. 7.5B ).
Color and Appearance of Teeth and
Dental Material
Tooth Color and Appearance
How various relections and transmissions of light integrate to
generate perceived colors in human teeth is a complex process that
is not entirely understood. he polychromatic appearance of the
tooth originates from the relative interactions of light signals and
perceptions ( Fig. 7.6 ).
he quantiication of tooth color has been reported in the past
by measuring the three regions of the tooth: cervical, middle, and
incisal.7-9 Describing tooth regions can help understand how they
are related to overall tooth color and appearance. However, this
approach is not necessarily suicient to capture the polychromatic
and complex tooth appearance ( Fig. 7.7 ).
Dentin
In general, the color of the tooth is not uniform. Dentin contributes
signiicantly to tooth color. his is particularly noticeable in the
cervical region, where only a thin layer of enamel exist s. his
region is typically the most chromatic ( Fig. 7.8 ), with the chroma
progressively decreasing through the middle to the incisal third,
displaying hues ranging from yellow to red.7 Dentin is also the
primary source of tooth luorescence.10
Enamel
In a healthy unworn tooth, the incisal third is typically all enamel.
If the enamel were isolated from the dentin, it would appear primar -
ily achromatic like transparent or white frosted glass ( Fig. 7.9 ).
he translucency and value of the enamel can vary depending on
many factors such as its thickness and age. hick enamel generally
appears higher in value relative to thin enamel. High-value white
patterns, or white spots, also may demonstrate hypomineralized Gloss
Gloss is an attribute of visual appearance that originates from the
geometrical distribution of light relected by surfaces.3 Particularly,
gloss is a term used to describe the relative amount of mirrorlike
(specular) relection from the surface of an object. Metals are usually
distinguished by stronger specular relection than that from other
materials, and smooth surfaces will appear glossier than rough ones.
Fluorescence
Fluorescence is a form of luminescence, that is, a form of light
emission by a substance as the result of some external stimuli.
Following the excitation by light, usually ultraviolet (UV), a luorescent substance will reemit some of the absorbed energy in the
form of longer wavelengths. When the luminescence continu es
after the source of excitation has been removed, the “after-glow”
is referred to as phosphorescence .
Surround Efect and Blending
Color not only is deined by its color dimensions and optical
properties, but also depends on the surroundings in which the
object appears, the adaptation of our eyes, and our recent visual
experience.3,4
Chromatic Induction
When two objects of the same color are surrounded by diferent
colored backgrounds, an illusory sensation of color can be created
without direct stimulation of the corresponding cones. he two
objects can be the same color when viewed in isolation, but when
each is combined with diferent surroundings, the objects can have
a perceived color diference in relation to each other. his is what
color scientists call chromatic induction.
Contrast and Assimilation
Chromatic induction can generate either a contrast efect or an
assimilation efect. When the object’s color shifts toward the
complementary color of its surroundings, this is known as simultane -
ous color contrast (Fig. 7.5A ) (http://www.andrewkelsall.com/
Simultaneous Color Contrast Complementary Afterimage
A
B
• Fig. 7.5 A, Simultaneous color contrast. The two Xs appear to be of
different colors due to different backgrounds; however, when observed at
their intersection at the middle base of the image it becomes obvious they
are of the same color. B, Complementary afterimage. Stare for 30 seconds
at the point where the four colors intersect; then switch gaze to the white
target below the color images. Retinal fatigue results in the illusionary
appearance of the complementary colors.
CHAPTER 7 Color and Shade Matching in Operative Dentitry
Color-Related Propertie of
Retorative Material
Restorative materials should display color and optical properties
similar to those of dentin and enamel. In this sect ion, we will
primarily focus on composite resin and ceramic dental materials
as they relate to color compatibility, stability, and interactions.regions within the enamel. For anterior teeth, the enamel gets
thinner toward the incisal and can appear gray to bluish against
the dark background of the oral cavity. Depending on the transmis -
sion or r election of light at the incisal edge, the incisal third may
display an opalescent pattern with a distinct line of relection
described as the incisal halo ( Fig. 7.10 ).
Incident White LightSpecular & Diffuse
Reflection
Red Gingival HueDiffuse
Transmission
Direct Regular
TransmissionMaximum
Transmission
(Translucency)
• Fig. 7.6 Complex interactions of light and tooth appearance.
• Fig. 7.7 Polychromatic appearance of natural teeth. Notice the pro -
gression of color from cervical to incisal on teeth #8 and #9—from chro -
matic to translucent, changes in hue and incisal opalescence.
• Fig. 7.8 The exposed dentin showing accentuated chroma.
• Fig. 7.9 Translucency of isolated enamel. (Courtesy Adam J. Mieleszko,
CDT.)
• Fig. 7.10 The incisal halo: distinct line of opalescent relection at incisal
edge.
CHAPTER 7 Color and Shade Matching in Operative Dentitry
Color Matching Tool—Dental Shade Guide
Dental Shade Guide
he standard color matching tool used in dentistry for visual shade
matching is the dental shade guide. Dental shade guides are tabbased tools fabricated from ceramic, resin, or some other form of
plastic or acrylic material. he shade tabs are typically arranged
according to some dimension of color, but because of the complex
polychromatic nature of natural teeth, a given shade guide system
will only serve as a guide and not as an exact color matcher. While
dental shade guides exist for oral soft tissues and facial skin, the
focus of this section will be on guides designed for shade matching
a tooth during the dental restorative procedure.
Commercial Shade Guide
Ceramic Based
For direct restorative procedures, there are many shortcomings
associated with the use of a ceramic-based tooth shade guide for
dental shade matching, but it is the most logical starting point for
shade matching as most composite resins are keyed to a commercially
available ceramic-based system. he most popular of the ceramicbased commercial guides is the Vita classical A1-D4 shade guide
(VITA Zahnfabrik). his 16-tab shade guide can be arranged
according to the hue order (“A-D arrangement” [ Fig. 7.12A ]) or
according to an apparent light to dark arrangement (“Value S cale”
[see Fig. 7.12B ]).
Each tab has a number and a letter. According to the manu -
facturer, the letters represent one of the following hue groups:
A = Reddish-brown
B = Reddish-yellow
C = Grey
D = Reddish-grey
he number next to the letter on the tab label represents the
chroma and value within each of the A to D groups: 1 = lowest
chroma, lightest, 4 = highest chroma, darkest. Within this system,
shade B1 is the least chromatic and lightest of the reddish-yellow
shades, whereas B4 is the most chromatic and darkest of the
reddish-yellow shades. One way to use this shade guide is to observe
the most chromatic portion of the patient’s tooth, usually the
cervical region of the canine and select the best hue group. Next,
the best shade within that hue group should be selected based on
the closest chroma number. A second way to use this shade guide Compatibility
When choosing dental materials such as composite resins or dental
ceramics for restorative procedures, the shade selection of the
material will be dependent on the brand or system in use. Most
commonly a material is keyed to a commercially available shade
guide. Shade guides will be further discussed under Color Matching
Tools. At other times, a restorative material may be labeled with
a shade descriptor, such as “universal dentin” or names like “milky
white” or “pearl frost,” without any reference to a shade guide. In
either case, a material will be most compatible with a tooth when
it has shades that mimic both dentin and enamel.
Stability
he color stability of dental materials is a signiicant concern for
color and appearance in restorative dentistry. When comparing
composite resins and dental ceramics, resins are less color stable
after aging.11 Over time, resins are susceptible to extrinsic staining
from dietary exposures and intrinsic degradation of the inherent
chemical components.12 Resins also can shift color upon curing.
Generally, microill composite resins become lighter and less
translucent upon curing while microhybrid composite resins become
darker and more translucent.13 Ceramic materials, while more
stable in service, can vary by batch and still undergo color shifts
upon iring and glazing.14
Interactions
An existing color diference between the restorative material and
the tooth can be lessened with favorable color interaction properties,
such as layering and blending.
Layering is the essence of tooth anatomy as layers of enamel
and dentin of diferent thicknesses interact creating a polychromatic
appearance. Color of both enamel and dentin can change over
time due to dietary habits or aging, respectively. Given that the
task is to mimic nature, layering is equally essential for creation
of tooth colored restorations.
A blending efect or color shift of a dental material, such as
composite resin or dental ceramic, toward the surrounding tooth
color is a desirable property. his blending efect decreases the
color diference between the tooth-material interface giving the
restoration a more lifelike and natural appearance. he blending
efect is predominantly related to smaller restorations, surrounded
by hard dental tissues, such as composite restorations. It can reduce
suboptimal shade matches due to operational error or lack of satisfac -
tory match in the shade guide or restorative material. he veneers
designed with “contact lens effect” margins before and after
cementation are another example of blending efect ( Fig. 7.11 ).15
B
A
• Fig. 7.11 A, Laminate veneers designed with “contact lens effect” margins. B, The blending effect of
indistinguishable translucent margins of laminate veneers.
CHAPTER 7 Color and Shade Matching in Operative Dentitry
that enable monitoring of whitening e icacy of initially light teeth
(e.g., shade B1 before bleaching).16,17 his scale includes 29 shades
(15 tabs with 14 interpolations) with color evenly distributed
between tabs.
Other ceramic shade guides of the 3D-Master system include
the Vita Toothguide 3D-Master and Vita Linearguide 3D-Master
(Fig. 7.14 ). he latter one is user friendly, simplifying the shade
matching method. Tabs are marked using a number-letter-number
code that correspond to value-hue-chroma, respectively. here are
ive light gray holders, containing tabs from groups 0 to 5 (created
based on decreasing lightness), with groups 0 and 1 on the same is to arrange the shade tabs from light to dark according to the
so-called “Value Scale.” With the most contrasted e nd of the shade
guide against the teeth, one would slide down or up the scale and
stop on the best match. he “Value Scale” is helpful when monitor -
ing changes in color after bleaching. However, the change from
one tab to the next varies and with inconsistent value shift. For
this reason, the same company released a shade guide in
speciically designed for bleach monitoring—Vita Bleachedguide
3D-Master ( Fig. 7.13 ). It has many advantages over the “Value
Scale,” from much wider range and more uniform colo r diferences
between the adjacent tabs, to the inclusion of very light shades
B
A
• Fig. 7.12 A, Vita classical shade guide: A–D arrangement. B, “Value Scale” arrangement of same
shade guide.
• Fig. 7.13 Vita Bleachedguide 3D-Master. Shade tabs are getting lighter and less chromatic (right to
left), matching the changes that occur of natural teeth when exposed to whitening agents.
CHAPTER 7 Color and Shade Matching in Operative Dentitry
Cutom Shade Guide
Using the shade guide supplied with the restorative system in
many cases would be advantageous over using a ceramic-based
system. Yet, depending on the accuracy of the shade guide sup -
plied with the system, it may be more accurate to use the actual
composite cured on the tooth. It is important to fully cure the
composite material when performing this evaluation as it has
been shown that a shift in color will occur. In general, restorative
composites will shift upon curing to become less saturated. A more
advanced alternative would be to periodically fabricate custom
shade tabs from the actual restorative material using proprietary
composite shade guides supplied by manufacturers ( Fig. 7.15 ), holder. Group selection is facilitated by having the middle tab of
each group (M2) in a dark gray holder for initial shade matching.
No more than 7 tabs, arranged in linear order, are viewed at once
with the Linearguide. Furthermore, the 3D-Master system has the
smallest “coverage error” (it covers the color of natural teeth the
best).18 Consequently, it has been reported that this shade guide
was preferred and outperformed others.19
A major concern with using the ceramic-based shade guides
such as the Vita classical A1-D4 for selecting a composite resin
shade keyed to this system is that the actual composite shade may
or may not match the original classical tabs. It should be noted
that large color diferences exist among the composite materials
of the same shade designations.20 If a restorative system is not
supplied with a shade guide, then a ceramic shade guide may be
used as a starting reference.
Polymer Resin Based
Proprietary shade guides supplied with a restorative composite
resin system are often fabricated using the same restorative material.
In other words, they are resin-based tooth shade guides. Initially,
this is a good option because they will have the same optical
properties as the restorative material. However, color stability of
the tabs may become problematic over time as the tabs are disin -
fected and get darker.
Other Materials (Plastics/Acrylics)
Shade guides are sometimes supplied with a restorative system
fabricated from materials other than ceramics or resin-based
materials, such as plastics or acrylics. hese shade guides are generally
inferior in comparison and are not good tools for shade matching
teeth.
• Fig. 7.14 Vita Linearguide 3D-Master. Primary division into groups is
made according to value (0–5); within the groups the chroma (1 = least;
3 = most) and hue (M = “neutral” middle hue; L = less red; R = more red)
vary.
AB
• Fig. 7.15 Proprietary composite shade guides supplied by manufac -
turers and made of monochromatic single-layered composites. A, Kuraray
shade guide. B, SDI shade guide.
CHAPTER 7 Color and Shade Matching in Operative Dentitry
we say a shade is too bright or too yellow? Digital instruments
can be used to numerically quantify color diferences and to help
arrive at an objective standard color. Color matching instruments
are designed to replicate how the human eye receives color, yet
without the subjectivity of the human visual system. Various
devices have been used in dentistry, including digital cameras,
scanners, spectrophotometers, and colorimeters. Regardless of the
device, the basis for all instrumental color measurement is the
hypothetical standard observer. Colorimeters, for example, receive
and reduce light to its RGB (red-green-blue) components similar
to that of the three color receptors (cones) in the retina. he
colorimeter expresses this information in terms of three values, molds for fabrication of custom shade tabs ( Fig. 7.16 ), a silicone
index of a standard shade guide ( Fig. 7.17 ), or cured pieces of
composite placed onto respective areas of the tooth to be restored
(Fig. 7.18 ).
Color Matching Intrument
Color diferences can be diicult to verbally communicate between
a tooth and a dental material. For example, what do we mean when
C
B
A1
32
• Fig. 7.16 A, Molds for fabrication of custom composite resin shade
tabs: (1) Tokuyama dentin and enamel molds, tab holders, and custom
made tabs; (2) Style Italiano mold for layered enamel and dentin, the
enamel shell, and a layered tab; (3) Ultradent molds for dentin, enamel,
or layered enamel-dentin, with respective tabs. B, Dentin custom
shade tab—clinical application. C, Enamel custom shade tab—clinical
application.
B
A
• Fig. 7.17 A, Custom shade tabs from the actual restorative material
made using a silicone index impression of a tab from a commercially
available shade guide. B, Clinical application: enamel shades UE1, UE2,
and UE3 (left to right).
• Fig. 7.18 Cured pieces of composite placed on respective areas of
the tooth to be restored can be helpful in shade matching.
CHAPTER 7 Color and Shade Matching in Operative Dentitry
A
• Fig. 7.19 A, Vita Easyshade V clinical spectrophotometer (top), and the instrument display (bottom).
First, to measure color of natural teeth, the tooth symbol (the upper icon) should be selected; then best
matches in Vita 3D-Master (left) and Vita classical A1–D4 shade guide (right); next, color difference ( ΔE*)
and value, chroma, and hue differences compared to selected shade; and last, best matching tabs from
Vita 3D-Master (left) and Vita classical A1–D4 (right) shade guides in cervical, middle, and incisal third.converting the numeric information to a standard target color.
Similarly, spectrophotometers measure light re lected from the
target relative to the total light. he amount of relected light
at each wavelength along the visible spectrum is calculated and
translated into shade terminology that makes sense to the dental
professional. Historically, dentistry has not been a large market for
color measuring devices. Many devices have come and gone without
widespread adoption. he one instrument that has remained on the
market over many generations is the Easyshade device manufactured
by VITA. he latest generation of this spectrophotometer is the
Vita Easyshade V ( Fig. 7.19A ). his instrument provides shade
information correlated to the Vita classical A1-D4 and Vita System
3D-Master shade guides. Its proprietary software, Vita Assist,
and smartphone application, Vita mobileAssist, allow Bluetooth
transfer of the color information and digital images to a computer
for patient and laboratory communication (see Fig. 7.19B ). An
advanced method used in research where repeatable measurements
are necessary to monitor color changes involves using a custom jig
to avoid angulation of the probe and ensure precise measurements
(Fig. 7.20 ).21
While color measuring instruments continue to improve, they
still do not replace the operator. Instead, color matching instruments
provide the dental professional with an objective tool to conirm
a “best match” among various shade guides. Ultimately, the best
color matching tool would be the one whose results correspond
to a clinician’s normal color vision.
Dental Photography
he use of photography is integral to a complete analysis of
tooth color and appearance. Digital single-lens relex (DSLR, recommended) cameras, portable cameras, and cell phones are
used for digital photography. A DSLR camera can be used
with a general-purpose lens or dedicated macro lens, and a
variety of lashes: single-point, ring, dual-point, and twin tube
flash. Digital images can be captured and saved, probably
most frequently in JPG format (with an adjustable degree
of compression and consequently image quality), while
advanced users typically prefer RAW format (with minimally
processed data). Recommendations for basic settings of DSLR
cameras for dental photography are provided in .20
Mirrors and retractors are important accessories for dig ital
photography.
Photography enables the use of a color monitor to both magnify
a tooth image and discriminate subtle transitions of color and use
black-and-white contrast adjustments to study translucency patterns,
and is an essential tool for communicating color to the dental
laboratory technician for indirect restorations. Today, a photo can
be taken of a tooth with a shade tab held on the same plane, along
with a standard black/white/gray standard card, and software can
provide a “Color Map” of the target tooth. One example of this
type of dental shade matching software is Shade Wave (Issaquah,
WA). An attachment arm (Shade Arm) is available for ixing the
distance, angle, and position of the color reference in the photo.
he software will mathematically normalize, or color correct, the
image to compensate for color imbalances that occur when the
image is taken and will cross-reference the standard card to generate
a “Shade Map,” “Value Map,” and “T ranslucency Map.” he value
of this type of system is that it does not rely on any speciic camera
or camera settings, nor is it inluenced by surrounding colors or
light. Digital photography is frequently used in conjunction with
general software programs (such as Adobe Photoshop and Corel
CHAPTER 7 Color and Shade Matching in Operative Dentitry
B
B, Vita Assist is software for Easyshade V that enables recording, storage, editing,
and commenting of patient data and images. It facilitates communication on tooth shade and translucency
between dentist and patient and between dentist and dental technician, including the communication via
smartphone (Vita mobileAssist app). • Fig. 7.19, cont’d
C
B
A
• Fig. 7.20 Fabrication of clear silicone individual positioning jig for repeated spectrophotometer mea -
surements. A, Acrylic rod cured to the tooth. B, Injection of clear silicone material. C, Measurement
through the cylindrical tunnel created upon the removal of the acrylic rod.
CHAPTER 7 Color and Shade Matching in Operative Dentitry
“black body” whose spectral color changes with temperatur e. he
perfect black body emits the exact amount of electromagnetic
radiation (light) as is absorbed. As the temperature increases, the
object begins to glow a particular color, turning “red hot” near
°K. As the object gets hotter, it changes to a reddish-yellow
around °K (household incandescent lamp) and becomes “white
hot” near °K as it moves throughout the visible spectrum,
eventually turning blue-white. For shade matching, light sources
with a CCT of °K and °K are recommended; the colors
are correlated to standard phases of natural daylight.
he CCT of a light source alone is not the only speciication
important for correct lighting for shade matching. he color rendering
index (CRI) and intensity of the light source should be considered.
he CRI is an average performance rating score for a light source
based on comparisons to reference colors. he maximum score is
representing a full-spectrum light source (like the sun) that
afects our color judgment as natural daylight. For best color
rendering results, light sources with CRI of 90 or higher are recom -
mended. he intensity of the light source, or illuminance , is
measured in lux (lx) and should be between and lx. If
the illuminance is too low, colors cannot be discerned; if the
illuminance is too high, colors will be washed out. Despite using
quality light sources with the correct CRI, CCT, and intensity,
some dental materials may have spectral properties that appear to
match under a given set of viewing conditions and not match
under another. his phenomenon known as illuminant metamerism
at times is unavoidable due to the inherent properties of the dental
material relative to the complex nature of natural teeth. It is advisable
to use lights with diferent CCT to verify the existence of metamer -
ism ( Fig. 7.21 ).
here are a variety of lights that exhibit the recommended color
characteristics either as ceiling light, loor and table lamps, or
handheld lights. Handheld lights, such as Rite-Lite 2 HI CRI
(http://www.addent.com/rite-lite-2/ ) and Smile Lite ( http://
www.smileline-by-styleitaliano.com/en/shade-taking-dentalphotography/5-smile-lite-style-lense.html ), are becoming increasingly
popular for visual shade matching. hey can be used with or
without (standard) polarizing ilters ( Fig. 7.22 ). Polarizing ilters
are intended to reduce glare, thus enabling better comparison of
“pure color” and better visualization of color transitions. However,
no one normally observes a restoration and/or teeth through a
polarizing ilter, and the ilters were not found advantageous in
terms of improving shade matching quality.24 In addition, the Photo-Paint). Mobile apps are becoming increasingly popular for
color management.
Viual Shade Matching Method
Color matching is dependent on controlling subjective variables
such as color vision deiciencies and eye fatigue, while at the same
time controlling the proper viewing conditions and selecting the
correct light sources. he following order of three pre–shade
matching steps and ive shade matching steps will provide a predict -
able method for visual shade matching.
Three Pre–Shade Matching Step
1. Check Color Vision
Prior to performing a shade matching trial, it is imperative to
screen the vision of the clinician for any color deiciencies. A
common myth about shade matching is that females are better
color matchers than males. While statistics show that up to 8%
of males and 0.5% of women have a color deiciency,3 this does
not equate to a gender superiority if both are trichromats, that is,
have normal color vision.22
Test for color discrimination competency in dentistry consists
of creating pairs of shade tabs from two identical shade guides (at
least one set should not have original markings, such as A1 to D4
of classical, visible).23 Under controlled conditions, this test is an
accepted standard for dental color research but also could be
implemented for everyday practice.
2. Use Color Corrected Lighting
he way we perceive color is greatly inluenced by the light source
used to illuminate the object. In shade matching, we want to use
an illuminant that best matches the white light of natural daylight.
White light is a creation of our minds as a result of interpreting
the spectral colors present in a particular illuminate; there is no
“color white” on the visible light spectrum. White light is actually
a mixture of all the colors of light. To understand correct lighting
for shade matching we irst should consider the issue of correlated
color temperature (CCT). It is based on early 20th-century German
Nobel Laureate Max Planck’s experiments in quantum physics.
He developed a mathematical standard that correlates to a theoretical Basic Setting of DSLR Camera for Dental
Photography20
Manual mode M (Manual)
Focusing Manual
Aperture f22
Shutter speed 1. s
ISO
Image size Maximum
Image format JPG ine
White balance Flash or °K
Image optimization Set to neutral
Flash output One-half or one-quarter power (non-TTL lash)
Gridlines On (for easier orientation)
AB CD
• Fig. 7.21 Inluence of lights of different color temperature on color
perception of the same object. A, °K. B, °K. C, °K. D,
°K.
CHAPTER 7 Color and Shade Matching in Operative Dentitry
dehydration occurs during restorative ield isolation and alters the
tooth color.25 As teeth dehydrate, they will appear lighter, less
chromatic, and more opaque. Performing shade matching at the
start of the appointment will also help prevent eye fatigue and
strain on the visual system as time progresses.Rite-Lite 2 HI CRI has three light options for shade matching:
with CCT of °K, °K, and their combination, which
enables better visualization of metamerism.
3. Control Surround/Viewing Conditions
As discussed earlier in this chapter (see Color and Perception ) the
surrounding conditions can change the overall color perception
of an object. Any surr ound conditions that may inluence color
perception should be addressed prior to shade match ing. Distracting
color should be eliminated from the trial room with walls preferably
painted a neutral gray color. Any bold colors on the patient should
be eliminated. Start by placing a neutral color patient napkin over
sparkling jewelry or bright clothes and having the patient remove
relective glasses and colored lipstick ( Fig. 7.23 ).
Five Shade Matching Step
Once the pre–shade matching steps have been addressed, the
following shade matching steps can be implemented to further
improve visual shade matching performance.
1. Perform at the Beginning
he issue of timing is important to visual shade matching and
should be performed at the beginning of the appointment. Tooth
D
C
B
A
• Fig. 7.22 Handheld shade matching lights. A, Rite-Lite 2 HI CRI without polarizing ilter. B, Rite-Lite
2 HI CRI with polarizing ilter. C, Smile Lite without polarizing ilter. D, Smile lite with polarizing ilter. (Photos
from Clary JA, Ontiveros JC, Cron SG, et al: Inluence of light source, polarization, education, and training
on shade matching quality. J Prosthet Dent :91-97, .)
• Fig. 7.23 Patient is asked to remove intense lipstick prior to shade
matching (note the lipstick on canine and premolar).
CHAPTER 7 Color and Shade Matching in Operative Dentitry
perpendicular to tooth sur face) or difuse/0 degrees is typically
used for clinical evaluation. he viewer’s eyes should be on the
same level as the shade tab.
3. Use Appropriate Technique
he shade matching technique includes selection of the appropriate
shade guide for the task (see Color Matching Tools—Dental Shade
Guides earlier in the chapter ), appropriate shade tab positioning,
technique, and duration.
Shade Tab Poitioning
After the position of the clinician is set, attention should be focused
on the positioning of the shade tab. he tab should be placed in
accordance with the clinical situation and the goal (overall tooth
color or color in diferent regions). he ideal position of the tab
is on the same plane and the same vertical (cervical to incisal)
orientation ( Fig. 7.25 ). his is easy to achieve if the adjacent tooth
is missing. However, this is most often not the case, so the shade
tab can be placed in between upper and lower teeth, vertically or
horizontally (see Fig. 7.25 ) to the longitudinal axes of the natural
teeth. Shade tabs should not be positioned in front or behind the
natural teeth ( Fig. 7.26 ).
he shade tab is sometimes placed in front of the adjacent
tooth, but the shade tab will appear lighter solely for being physically
closer to the eye of the clinician. One way to avoid this is to incline
the shade tab to approximately degrees relative to the natural
tooth and observe both from a symmetrical angle (see Fig. 7.25B ).
Attention should be given that the tab carrier is opposite the incisal
edge as not to inluence the evaluation of translucency.
As the middle portion of shade tabs, both cervical to incisal
and mesial to distal, is the most accurate representation of the tab
color, tabs can be modiied by reducing the cervical third or keeping 2. Set Light and Observer
his step involves using the correct viewing distance and position
(Fig. 7.24 ). he correct viewing distance for shade matching will
vary based on the clinician’s visual acuity. Generally, the ideal
distance should correspond to the best reading distance and visual
angle of subtense (>2 degrees). For most, this distance will fall in
the range of 25 to 35 cm (10–14 in). he angle of illumination
and person performing shade matching relative to the shade tab
is also an important factor, known as the optical geometry. he
optical geometry of 45/0 degrees (light at 45 degrees, unidirectional,
bidirectional, or circumferential; observing at 0 degrees,
• Fig. 7.24 Shade matching should be performed at the distance of 25
to 35 cm (10–14 in), with tooth being observed perpendicularly to its labial
surface and with the 45-degree angle of illumination.
AB C
DE F
• Fig. 7.25 Suggested shade tab positions. Vertical positioning: A, When the adjacent tooth is missing,
the ideal position of the tab is on the same plane and the same vertical orientation (cervical to incisal);
B, When the adjacent tooth is present, the ideal position of the tab is inclined at approximately
degrees relative to the tooth, with both observed from the angle symmetrical and with the same vertical
orientation (cervical to incisal); C, On the same plane, incisal to incisal orientation. Horizontal positioning
on the same plane, but at 90 degrees to tooth cervical to incisal orientation: D, Tooth shade matching;
E, Stump shade matching with tooth shade tab; F, Stump shade matching with stump shade tab.
CHAPTER 7 Color and Shade Matching in Operative Dentitry
for visual shade matching. his will help avoid illusory sensations
of color (chromatic induction, complementary afterimage) due to
saturation of the rods and cones. It is not advisable to stare at any
color during shade matching. Staring at blue for example will create
the illusion that the teeth are more yellow than they actually are in
reality. It is preferable to see the true color, not a complementary
afterimage. To avoid staring at the target, it is b est to gaze at a neutral
gray card in between shade matching trials ( Fig. 7.29 ). Ideally the
glances at the target shade should last only between 5 and 7 seconds.
4. Communicate
he next step in the shade matching process is to capture, record,
and communicate the selected tooth shades. he shades observed
for direct restorations should be mapped out to assist in material
selection during the restorative procedure. A simple sketch of the
tooth illustrating the cervical, middle, and incisal shades can help
document the selected shades even through color shifts after ield
isolation.3 he aid of digital photography, software, or data from
a shade matching instrument can nicely supplement visual shade
matching in color documentation and communication.
5. Verify
he inal step is to verify the color of restoration (direct/indirect)
visually, using several diferent lights, shade matching distances, only the middle third, as shown on Fig. 7.27 . he tab ledges enable
tab positioning at the same anterior-posterior plane with the tooth.
Macro-Mini-Micro Shade Matching Technique
Macro Phase. Shade matching typically begins with a quick
glance and selection of potentially adequate tabs. he entire shade
guide is used, positioned close to the tooth whose color is being
matched, and moved laterally to facilitate this selection ( Fig. 7.28A ).
Mini Phase. After this, the potentially adequate tabs are clustered
together (in or outside the shade guide holder), and the best matches
for incisal, middle, and cervical third are identiied (see Fig. 7.28B ).
Micro Phase. Once the best match or matches have been selected
in the inal micro phase, one needs to determine and describe
diferences in hue, value, and chroma between the regions of natural
tooth and selected shades. Local color characteristics such as white
spots, amber stains, striation patterns, and any other appearance
attributes or details, including translucency, enam el cracks, and
craze lines, should be documented and described (see Fig. 7.28C ).
he same process is followed when using the Vita classical shade
guide (see Fig. 7.28D-F )
Shade Matching Duration
A key to discerning the diference in shade between two colors,
especially if the color diference is small, is to use very short glances
D
C
B
A
• Fig. 7.26 Suboptimal shade tab positioning and/or image capturing. A, Tab in front of tooth appears
lighter. B, Tab behind tooth appears darker. C, Shade designation not captured in image. D, Light relec -
tion of tab washes out shade.
CHAPTER 7 Color and Shade Matching in Operative Dentitry
AB C
DE F
• Fig. 7.27 As the middle portion of shade tabs, both cervical to incisal and mesial to distal, is the most
accurate representation of the tab color, tabs can be modiied as follows: First, by reducing the cervical
third: A, Shade tabs; B, Modiied shade tab positioned on the same plane, cervical (tab) to incisal (tooth);
C, Modiied shade tab positioned on the same plane, incisal (tab) to incisal (tooth). Second, by keeping
only the middle third: D, Shade tabs; E, Tab on the same plane, underneath the natural tooth; F, Tab at
degrees relative to the natural tooth, observed/photographed from a symmetrical angle.
AB C
DE F
• Fig. 7.28 Macro-mini-micro shade matching technique. With Linearguide 3D-Master: A, Macro phase .
Start with the entire shade guide and a quick glance and selection of potentially adequate tabs (in this
case, the group selection, 0–5); B , Mini phase . The potentially adequate tabs are clustered together (in
this case into groups) and the best matches for incisal, middle, and cervical third are identiied; C, Micro
phase . In the inal phase, determine and describe differences in hue, value, and chroma between the
regions of natural tooth and selected shades. Local color characteristics and other appearance attributes
or details should be documented and described. The same also applies with Vita classical A1–D4,
arranged according to “Value Scale”; D, Macro phase . Selection of potentially adequate tabs; E, Mini
phase . These tabs are clustered and the best matches by thirds are identiied; F, Micro phase . Determin -
ing and describing differences in hue, value, and chroma between the regions of natural tooth and selected
tabs.
CHAPTER 7 Color and Shade Matching in Operative Dentitry
worth mastering, it will require consistent and intentional practice
of the methods covered in this chapter. he amount of time devoted
to color education and training in dental curriculums has been
lacking in the past.26 While up-to-date content is still lacking
among educational institutions, signiicant advances have been
made and greater resources are currently available for further study
on the topic ( ).
he Color Matching Curriculum (CMC) is the newest and
most comprehensive color education and training program for
dental professionals and dental students.27 his half-day continuing
education program consists of didactic (color concepts and resources,
color matching conditions, methods, tools, and communication)
and hands-on (visual and instrumental color matching)
portions.
Appendix
The Curiou Cae of a “Bleaching Mihap”
A 22-year-old woman with “Hollywood White” expectations
presented with a chief complaint of “two dark front crowns”
(Fig. 7.30A ). Her dental history reveals gingival recession and
overbleaching of her natural teeth with at-home whitening
products resulting in a mismatch of all-ceramic crowns on the
upper right central incisor and upper left lateral incisor (see Fig.
7.30B ). he patient declined treatment for gingival recession
while accepting treatment to replace mismatched crowns. A
ceramic-based shade tab (Vita Linearguide, 0M3) is used with
a black-and-white standard card held on the same plane as the
teeth to be restored. In conjunction with digital photography and
the standard reference card, digital shade mapping with computer
software can be performed for efective laboratory communica -
tion (see Fig. 7.30C ). he mismatched crowns were removed to
reveal the natural high chromaticity of the dentinal preparations.
he color of the preparations, “stump shade,” is photographed
for further laboratory communication with a reference shade tab
(Vita Linearguide 3D-Master, 2M2) held in a horizontal position
with the most chromatic portion of the tab (cervical) in contact
with the tooth reference (see Fig. 7.30D ). All-ceramic crowns were
delivered with improved color matching to bleached natural teeth
(see Fig. 7.30E ).observation angles, and/or observers. he same is true for veriication
using shade matching instruments. he indings before the restora -
tion is fabricated can supplement communication and case docu -
mentation. For direct composite resin restorations, the veriication
step can be made with a mockup restoration or by simply applying
(and light-curing) a small increment of the selected composite
material to the area(s) of the tooth corresponding to the selected
shade. he selection can then be ine-tuned accordingly. If this
approach is used, the operator should consider variables such as
viewing angle, proximity, and others that may inluence the results.
Improving Shade Matching Skill
Shade matching is a skill that can be learned and improved upon
with implementation of sound color principles. Like any skill
• Fig. 7.29 The clinician glances at a neutral gray card to rest his eyes
in between shade matching trials (lasting 5–7 seconds). Available Color Education and Training Programs
Name Type Publisher Available at
Color Matching Curriculum (CMC) Didactic and hands-on CE program Society for Color and Appearance in
Dentistry (SCAD)www.scadent.org
Dental Color Matcher (DCM) Color education and training software SCAD www.scadent.org
A Contemporary Guide to Color and
Shade Selection for ProsthodonticsEducational DVD American College of Prosthodontists http://dentistry.llu.edu/
continuing-education/
Toothguide Trainer (TT) Color training software VITA Zahnfabrik www.toothguide.com
CHAPTER 7 Color and Shade Matching in Operative Dentitry
6. Paravina RD, Westland S, Imai FH, et al: Evaluation of blending
efect of composites related to restoration size. Dent Mater 22: – ,
.
7. O’Brien WJ, Hemmendinger H, Boenke KM, et al: Color distribution
of three regions of extracted human teeth. Dent Mater 13: – ,
.
8. Goodkind RJ, Schwabacher WB: Use of a iberoptic colorimeter for
in vivo color measurements of anterior teeth. J Prosthet Dent
58: – , .
9. Ishikawa T, Ishiyama T, Ohsone M, et al: T rial manufacture of
photoelectric colorimeter using optical ibers. Bull Tokyo Dent Coll
10: – , .Reference
1. Hunter RS, Harold RW: Measurement of appearance , ed 2, New York,
, Wiley-Interscience.
2. Berns RS: Billmeyer and Saltzman’s principles of color technology , ed
3, New York, , John Wiley.
3. Paravina RD, Powers JM: Esthetic color training in dentistry , St. Louis,
, Elsevier Mosby.
4. Brown RO, MacLeod DI: Color appearance depends on the variance
of surround colors. Curr Biol 7: – , .
5. Paravina RD, Westland S, Johnston WM, et al: Color adjustment
potential of resin composites. J Dent Res 87: – , .
E
D
C
B
A
• Fig. 7.30 A patient with “Hollywood White” expectations. The crowns matched natural dentition before
at-home whitening, which appeared “dark” upon whitening. A, Preoperative smile. B, Preoperative smile,
retracted. C, Shade tab 0M3 with black-and-white standardized card. D, Shade tab 2M2 (stump shade)
of prepared teeth. E, Postoperative smile with all ceramic crowns on the upper right central incisor and
upper left lateral incisor.
CHAPTER 7 Color and Shade Matching in Operative Dentitry
19. Paravina RD: Performance assessment of dental shade guides. J Dent
37 Suppl 1:e15–e20, .
20. Paravina RD, Kimura M, Powers JM: Color compatibility of resin
composites of identical shade designation. Quintessence Int 37: – ,
.
21. Ontiveros JC, Paravina RD: Color change of vital teeth exposed to
bleaching performed with and without supplementary light. J Dent
37: – , .
22. Chu SJ, Devigus A, Paravina RD, et al: Fundamentals of color: shade
matching and communication in esthetic dentistry , ed 2, Hanover Park,
, Quintessence.
23. International Organization for Standardization: ISO/TR
dentistry—guidance on color measurement. Geneva: International
Organization for Standardization, .
24. Clary JA, Ontiveros JC, Cron SG, et al: I nluence of light source,
polarization, education, and training on shade matching quality. J
Prosthet Dent :91–97, .
25. Sneed WD, Nuckles DB: Shade determination prior to ield isolation.
Dent Surv 54:32, .
26. Paravina RD, O’Neill PN, Swift EJ, Jr, et al: Teaching of color in
predoctoral and postdoctoral dental education in . J Dent 38
Suppl 2:e34–e40, .
27. SCAD: Color matching curriculum. www.scadent.org . Society for
Color and Appearance in Dentistry. (Assessed 1 March ).10. Meller C, Klein C: Fluorescence properties of commercial composite
resin restorative materials in dentistry. Dent Mater J 31: – ,
.
11. Paravina RD, Ontiveros JC, Powers JM: Accelerated aging efects on
color and translucency of bleaching-shade composites. J Esthet Restor
Dent 16: – , .
12. Dede DÖ, Şahin O, Koroglu A, et al: Efect of sealant agents on
the color stability and surface roughness of nanohybrid composite
resins. J Prosthet Dent : – , .
13. Paravina RD, Ontiveros JC, Powers JM: Curing-dependent changes
in color and translucency parameter of composite bleach shades. J
Esthet Restor Dent 14: – , .
14. Barghi N, Pedrero JA, Bosch RR: Efects of batch variation on shade
of dental porcelain. J Prosthet Dent 54: – , .
15. Paravina RD, Westland S, Johnston WM, et al: Color adjustment
potential of resin composites. J Dent Res 87: – , .
16. Paravina RD: New shade guide for tooth whitening monitoring:
visual assessment. J Prosthet Dent 99: – , .
17. Paravina RD, Johnston WM, Powers JM: New shade guide for
evaluation of tooth whitening–colorimetric study. J Esthet Restor Dent
19: – , .
18. Li Q, Yu H, Wang YN: In vivo spectroradiometric evaluation of
color matching errors among ive shade guides. J Oral Rehabil
36:65–70, .
Clinical Technique for Direct Composite
Resin and Glass Ionomer Restorations
ANDRÉ V. RITTER, RICARDO WALTER, LEE W. BOUSHELL, SUMITHA N. AHMED
The search for an ideal esthetic material for restoring teeth
has r esulted in signiicant improvements in resin-based
composite materials.1-4 Although these materials are referred
to as resin-based composites, composite resins, and other terms,
this book refers to most direct esthetic restorations as composites.
Chapter 13 presents information about composite development,
types, classiication, material properties, and so for th. his chapter
presents many of the speciic clinical applications of these materials
in both anterior and posterior teeth ( Fig. 8.1 ). his chapter also
presents the clinical technique for glass ionomer restorations.
he choice of a material to restore caries lesions and other
defects in teeth is not always simple. Tooth-colored materials, such
as composite, are used in almost all types and sizes of restorations.
Such restorations are accomplished with minimal loss of tooth
structure, little or no discomfort, relatively short operating time,
and modest expense to the patient compared with indirect restora -
tions. When a tooth is signiicantly weakened by extensive defects,
however, and esthetics is of primary concern, the best treatment
may involve the use of a ceramic onlay or crown.
he lifespan of a direct esthetic restoration depends on many
factors, including the nature and extent of the initial caries lesion
or defect; the treatment procedure; the restorative material and
technique used; operator skill; and patient factors such as oral
hygiene, occlusion, caries risk, and adverse habits.5-9 Because all
direct esthetic restorations are bonded to tooth structure, the
efectiveness of generating the bond is paramount for the success
and longevity of such restorations. Failures can result from numerous
causes, including trauma, improper tooth preparation, inferior
materials, poor material selection, and patient-related risk factors.
Composites can be used in almost any tooth surface. Naturally,
factors must be consider ed for each speciic application. he reasons
for such expanded usage of these materials relate to improvements
in their ability to bond to tooth structure (enamel and dentin) and
in their physical and mechanical properties. he ability to bond a
relatively strong material to tooth structure results in a restored
tooth that is well sealed and regains a portion of its strength.10,11
General Conideration for
Compoite Retoration
his section summarizes general considerations about all composite
restorations. A successful composite restoration requires careful attention to technique detail, so as to gain the maximum beneit
of the material’s properties. In selecting a direct restorative material,
clinicians usually choose between composite and amalgam. Con -
sequently, some of the following information provides comparative
analyses between those two materials.
Indication and Contraindication
he indications for direct composites are:
1. Class I, II, III, IV, V, and VI restorations
2. Foundations and core buildups
3. Sealants and preventive resin restorations (conservative composite
restorations)
4. Esthetic enhancement procedures:
Partial veneers
Full veneers
Tooth contour modiications
Diastema closures
5. Temporary or provisional restorations
6. Periodontal splinting
7. Luting of indirect esthetic r estorations (when used in lowable
form, or when heated to increase low)
he primary contraindications for use of direct composites relate
to:
1. Inability to obtain adequate isolation
2. Occlusal considerations related to wear and fracture of the
composite material
3. Extension of the restoration on root surface
4. Operator factors
If the operating site cannot be isolated from contamination by
oral luids, composite (or any other bonded material) should not
be used. If all of the occlusion is on the restorative material,
composite may not be the choice for use particularly in patients
with heavy occlusal function; however, the need to strengthen
remaining weakened unprepared tooth structure with an eco -
nomical composite restoration procedure (compared with an
indirect restoration) and the commitment to recall the patient
routinely and in a timely manner may override any concern
about excessive wear potential. Any restoration that extends
onto the root surface may result in less than ideal marginal
integrity. Lastly, the operator must be committed to pursuing
procedures, such as tooth isolation, that make bonded restora -
tions successful. hese additional procedures may make successful
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
4. Are more technique sensitive because the operating site must
be appropriately isolated, incremental placement te chnique must
be used for most materials, and proper adhesive technique is
absolutely mandatory
5. May exhibit greater occlusal wear in areas of high occlusal stress
or when all of the tooth’s occlusal contacts are on the composite
material
Clinical Technique for
Pit-and-Fiure Sealant
Pits and issures typically result from an incomplete coalescence
of enamel and are particularly pr one to caries. hese areas can be
sealed with a low-viscosity luid resin after acid etching. Long-term
clinical studies indicate that pit-and-issure sealants provide a safe
and efective method of preventing caries.12-14 In children, sealants
are most efective when applied to the pits and issures of permanent
posterior teeth immediately on eruption of the clinical crowns,
provided proper isolation can be achieved. Adults also can beneit
from the use of sealants if the individual experiences an increase
in caries susceptibility because of a change in diet, lack of adequate
saliva, or a particular medical condition.
Sealants are indicated, regardless of the patient’s age, for either
preventive or therapeutic uses, depending on the patient’s caries
risk, tooth morphology, or presence of incipient enamel caries. In
assessing the occlusal surfaces of posterior teeth as potential can -
didates for a sealant procedure, the primary decision is based on bonded restorations more difficult and time consuming to
achieve.
Advantage and Diadvantage
he following are advantages of composite restorations:
1. Esthetics
2. Conservative tooth preparation (less extension, minimum
depth not necessary, mechanical retention usually not
necessary)
3. Low thermal conductivity
4. Universal use
5. Adhesion to the tooth
6. Repairability
he primary disadvantages of composite restorations relate to their
dependence on adequate adhesion and polymerization protocols
and procedural diiculties. Composite restorations:
1. May have poor marginal and internal cavity adaptation, usually
occurring on root surfaces as a result of polymerization shrinkage
stresses or improper insertion of the composite
2. May exhibit marginal deterioration over time in areas where
no marginal enamel is available for bonding
3. Are more diicult and time consuming to place, and more
costly (compared with amalgam restorations) because bonding
usually requires multiple steps; insertion is more diicult;
establishing proximal contacts, axial contours, embrasures, and
occlusal contacts may be mor e diicult; and inishing and
polishing procedures are more diicult
A B
C D
• Fig. 8.1 Composite restorations. A and B, Class II composite restoration, before and after. C and D,
Class IV composite restoration, before and after.
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
sealant placement to ensure that no dentinal or proximal caries
lesion is evident. Only caries-fr ee pits and issures or incipient
lesions in enamel not extending to the dentinoenamel junction
(DEJ) currently are recommended for treatment with pit-and-issure
sealants.17
Because materials and techniques vary, it is import ant to follow
the manufacturer’s instructions for the sealant material being used.
A standard method for applying sealants to posterior teeth is
presented here. Each quadrant is treated separately and one or
more teeth may be sealed, as indicated. he following presentation
relates to an occlusal sur face of a mandibular irst permanent molar
(Fig. 8.2A ). he tooth is isolated with a rubber dam (or another
efective isolation method such as cotton rolls or Isolite). If proper
isolation cannot be obtained, the bond of the sealant material to
the tooth surface will be compromised, resulting in either loss of
the sealant or caries under the inadequately bonded sealant. he
area is cleaned with a slurry of pumice on a bristle brush and the
tooth is rinsed thoroughly, while the explorer tip is used carefully
to remove residual pumice or additional debris. he tooth surface
is dried, and etched with 35% to 40% phosphoric acid for 15 to
30 seconds. Airborne particle abrasion techniques have been
advocated for preparing pits and grooves before sealant placement,
but their efectiveness has not been fully investigated.18whether a cavitated lesion exists. his decision is based primarily
on radiographic and clinical examinations, although other adjunctive
technologies for occlusal caries detection are available. Explorers
must be used judiciously in the detection of caries, as a sharp
explorer tine may cause a cavitation. he clinical examination
should be primarily focused on visual assessments of a clean, dry
tooth surface pr eferably under adequate light and magniication.
he patient’s caries risk also should be a factor when considering
treatment options. See Chapter 2 for a discussion of emerging
technologies for occlusal caries detection and monitoring.
When no cavitated caries lesion is diagnosed, the t reatment
decision is either to pursue no treatment or to pla ce a pit-andissure
sealant, particularly if the surface is at high risk for future caries.
If a small caries lesion is detected, and the adjacent grooves and
pits, although sound at the present time, are at risk for caries in
the future, a preventive resin restoration or conservative composite
restoration of the active cavitated lesion and placement of a sealant
to include any radiating noncarious issure or pits is recommended.
Although studies show that sealants can be applied over small,
cavitated lesions, with no subsequent progression of the caries
lesion, sealants should be used primarily for the prevention of
caries rather than for the treatment of existing caries lesions.15,16
A bitewing radiograph should be obtained and evaluated before
B
A
C
• Fig. 8.2 Steps in application of pit-and-issure sealant. A, After isolation and thorough cleaning of the
occlusal surface to be sealed. B, After acid etching, rinsing, and drying. C, With sealant applied.
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
now termed conservative composite restoration at the University of
North Carolina.
An accurate diagnosis is essential before restoring the occlusal
surface of a posterior tooth. he crucial factor in this clinical
assessment is whether the suspicious pit or issure has active caries
that requires restorative intervention. Usually, a conservative
composite restoration is the treatment of choice for the primary
occlusal caries lesion as the tooth preparation can be minimally
invasive.
If a deinitive diagnosis of caries cannot be made for the entire
occlusal surface, a conservative preparation of the suspicious area
is performed with a small bur or diamond to determine the extent
of the suspected fault without extending onto noncompromised
issures ( Fig. 8.4 ). his approach is particularly indicated in patients
with high caries activity and/or risk. As the tooth preparation is
deepened, an assessment is made in the suspicious areas to determine
whether to continue the preparation toward the DEJ (see Fig.
8.4C ). If the suspicious fault is removed or found to be sound at
a shallow preparation depth (minimal dentin caries), the conservative
preparation and adjacent pits and issures are etched with 35% to
40% phosphoric acid for 15 to 30 seconds, rinsed thoroughly,
and lightly dried. he etched surfaces then are treated with an
adhesive and restored with a lowable composite, which is placed
and light cured according to manufacturer’s instructions. he
adjacent etched pits and issures, if judged to be at risk, can be Properly acid-etched enamel surface has a lightly frosted (matte)
appearance (see Fig. 8.2B ). Any brown stains that originally may
have been in the pits and issures still may be present and should
be allowed to r emain. he sealant material is then applied and
gently teased into place, to avoid entrapping air, and it should
overill slightly all pits and issures, not extending onto unetched
surfaces (see Fig. 8.2C ). If too much sealant is applied, excess may
be removed with a dry microbrush prior to light curing. After
light curing and removal of the rubber dam, if used, the occlusion
is evaluated by using articulating paper. If necessary, a round carbide
inishing bur or white stone is used to remove any excess sealant.
he surface usually does not require further polishing.
Clinical Technique for Preventive Rein and
Conervative Compoite Retoration
When r estoring minimally carious pits and issures on a previously
unrestored tooth, an ultraconservative preparation design is recom -
mended. his design allows for restoration of the caries lesion or
defect with minimal removal of the tooth structure and often may
be combined with the use of lowable composite or sealant to seal
radiating noncarious issures or pits that are at high risk for sub -
sequent caries activity ( Fig. 8.3 ). Originally referred to as a preventive
resin restoration,19-21 this type of ultraconservative restoration is
B
A
C
• Fig. 8.3 Conservative composite restoration. A, Occlusal view of the maxillary irst and second molars.
The irst molar has caries on the distal occlusal pit and the second molar has suspicious pit on the distoocclusal aspect. B, Caries was excavated from the irst molar, and the second molar was minimally
prepared. C, The irst molar was restored with composite and the second molar received a conservative
composite restoration with lowable composite.
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
Clinical Technique for Cla I Direct
Compoite Retoration
Initial Clinical Procedure
A complete examination, diagnosis (including caries risk assessment),
treatment plan, and informed consent should be inalized and
obtained before the patient is scheduled for operative appointments
(emergencies excepted). A brief review of the patient’s record sealed using a pit-and-issure sealant or the same lowable composite
following the technique described previously.
If the suspicious area is found to be carious, the preparation
depth is extended until all of the soft carious dentin is removed
(see Chapter 2 for a description of dentin caries zones), the prepared
area is then restored with composite as described later in this
chapter (Class I direct composite restoration), and unprepared pits
and issures are sealed. In the example presented in Fig. 8.4 , the
preparation was restored with composite.
E
F
A
B
C
D
• Fig. 8.4 Class I direct composite restoration and conservative composite restoration. A, Mandibular
second molar with suspicious occlusal pits; mandibular irst molar with questionable sealant. B, After
rubber dam isolation. C, Initial exploratory preparation reveals caries extending toward the dentinoenamel
junction (DEJ). D, Conservative preparation on the second molar; the irst molar was minimally prepared.
E, Complete Class I direct composite restoration on the second molar; the irst molar received a conser -
vative composite restoration with lowable composite. F, Final restorations after the rubber dam was
removed and the occlusion was checked.
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
Small to moderate Class I direct composite restorations may use
minimally invasive tooth preparations and do not require typical
resistance and retention form features. Instead, these conservative
preparations typically result in mor e lared cavosurface forms without
uniform or lat pulpal or axial walls. he initial pulpal depth is
determined only by the selective removal of carious toot h structure,
and there is no minimal thickness of restorative material requirement
to limit bulk fracture.
hese conservative preparations are prepared with a sma ll round
or elongated pear-shaped diamond or bur with round features, in
an attempt to be as conservative as possible in the removal of the
tooth structure. he size and shape of the instrument generally
are dictated by the size of the lesion or other defect or by the type
of defective restoration being replaced. If a round instrument is
used, the resulting cavosurface margin angle may be more lared
(obtuse) than if an elongated pear-shaped instrument is used ( Fig.
8.5). Both carbide and diamond instr uments can be used efectively.
Although diamond instruments have been shown to create a thicker
smear layer, thus raising concerns about the ability of self-etch
adhesive systems to adequately reach and etch the underlying tooth
structure, clinical trials have revealed excellent performance of
mild self-etch adhesive systems suggesting this may not be a clinically
relevant concern.22-25
Moderate to large Class I direct composite restorations , especially
when used for larger caries lesions or to replace amalgam restorations,
will typically feature lat walls that are perpendicular to occlusal
forces, as well as strong tooth and r estoration marginal conigura -
tions. All of these features help resist potential fracture in less
conservative tooth preparations. However, the preparation shou ld
never be excessively extended beyond removal of faulty structures
to justify resistance and retention forms, as this will further weaken
the tooth structure and can ultimately lead to failure of the toothrestoration unit. If the occlusal portion of the restoration is expected
to be extensive, elongated pear-shaped cutting instruments with
round features are preferred because they result in strong, 90-degree
cavosurface margins without creating sharp internal line angles.
However, this boxlike preparation form may increase the negative
efects of the cavity coniguration factor, or C-factor (see discussion
in the next section). he objective of the tooth preparation is to
remove all of the carious tissues or fault as conservatively as possible.
Because the composite is bonded to the tooth structure, other less
involved or at-risk areas can be sealed as part of the conservative (including medical factors), treatment plan, radiographs, and current
caries risk should precede each restorative procedure.
Local Anesthesia
Local anesthesia is required for many operative procedures. Profound
anesthesia contributes to a more comfortable and uninterrupted
procedure and may result in reduction in salivation. hese efects
of local anesthesia contribute to better operative dentistry, especially
when placing bonded restorations.
Preparation of the Operating Site
Prior to beginning any composite restoration, it may be necessary
to clean the operating site with a slurry of pumice to remove
plaque biofilm and superficial stains. Calculus removal with
appropriate instruments also may be needed, although it would
be preferable to see the patient after a thorough hygiene visit has
been completed in this case. Prophy pastes containing lavoring
agents, glycerin, or luorides act as contaminants and must not be
used as they will compromise the adhesive procedure.
Shade Selection
Although not as important for posterior when compared to anterior,
more visible restorations, proper shade selection should be accom -
plished for all direct composite restorations. he shade of the tooth
should be determined before teeth are subjected to any prolonged
drying. Dehydrated teeth become lighter in shade as a result of a
decrease in translucency secondary to water loss from the naturally
porous tooth structure. A more comprehensive review of factors
afecting shade selection is presented in Chapter 7 , while esthetic
considerations of tooth restoration are presented in Chapter 9 .
Isolation of the Operating Site
Isolation for tooth-colored restorations is critical and can be
accomplished with a rubber dam, an isolation device (e.g., Isolite),
or cotton rolls/dry angles. Regardless of the method, isolation of
the area is imperative if a successful bond is to be obtained.
Contamination of etched enamel or dentin by saliva results in a
significantly decreased bond; likewise, contamination of the
composite material during insertion results in degradation of physical
and mechanical properties.
Other Preoperative Considerations
When restoring posterior occlusal surfaces, a preoperative assessment
of the occlusion should be made. his assessment should identify
not only the occlusal contacts of the tooth or teeth to be restored
but also the occlusal contacts on adjacent teeth. Knowing the
preoperative location of occlusal contacts is important in planning
the restoration outline form (so as to prevent an area of occlusal
contact directly at a cavosurface/restoration interface) and establish -
ing the proper occlusal contact on the restoration. Remembering
where the contacts are located on adjacent teeth provides guidance
in knowing when the restoration contacts are correctly adjusted.
Tooth Preparation
As a general rule, the tooth preparation for direct posterior
composites involves (1) creating access to the faulty structure, (2)
removal of faulty structures (caries lesion, defect ive restoration,
and base material, if present), and (3) creating convenience form
for the restoration. When placing most posterior composites, it is
not necessary to incorporate mechanical retention features in the
tooth preparation.
AB
• Fig. 8.5 Faciolingual cross section of small Class I tooth preparation
using round diamond.
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
preparation techniques. Sealants may be combined with the Class
I composite restoration, as described previously.
In moderate to large composite restorations, the tooth is entered
in the area most afected by the caries lesion, with the elongated
pear-shaped diamond or bur positioned parallel to the long axis
of the tooth crown. When it is anticipated that the entire mesiodistal
length of a central groove will be prepared, it is easier to enter the
distal portion irst and then transverse mesially to permit better
operator visibility during the pr eparation. he pulpal loor is
prepared to an initial depth that is approximately 0.2 mm internal
to the carious DEJ ( Fig. 8.6 ). Ideally the instrument is moved
mesially, along the central groove in a controlled manner, to follow
the rise and fall of the DEJ. he preparation is then carefully
extended facially, lingually, mesially, and distally as indicated at
BC1.5 mm1. mm
1.5 mm
A
• Fig. 8.6 A, Entry cut. Diamond or bur held parallel to the long axis of
the crown. Initial pulpal depth is 1.5 mm from the central groove. When
the central groove is removed, facial and lingual wall measurements
usually are greater than 1.5 mm. (The steeper the wall, the greater is the
height.) B, 1.5-mm depth from the central groove. C, Approximately 1.75to 2-mm facial or lingual wall heights.
AB2 mm 1.5 mm
• Fig. 8.7 Mesiodistal extension. Preserve dentin support of marginal
ridge enamel. A, Molar. B, Premolar.
AB
• Fig. 8.8 A, After initial entry cut at correct initial depth (1.5 mm), caries
remains facially and lingually. B, Orientation of diamond or bur must be
tilted as the instrument is extended facially or lingually to maintain a
1.5-mm depth. the depth of the carious DEJ until a caries-fr ee DEJ is identiied
around the whole periphery of the preparation. However, a lat
pulpal loor with an initial preparation depth of 1.5 to 2 mm may
also be acceptable (see Fig. 8.6B ). Mesial, distal, facial, and lingual
extensions are dictated by the caries lesion, old restorative material,
or defect, always using the DEJ as a reference for both extensions
and pulpal depth. Unnecessary extension into cuspal and marginal
ridge areas should be avoided as much as possible as this compro -
mises the strength of the tooth. Although the inal bonded composite
restoration may help restore some of the strength of weakened,
unprepared tooth structure, the outline form should be as conserva -
tive as possible. Extensions into marginal ridges should result in
at least 1.5 mm of remaining tooth structure (measured from the
internal extension to the proximal height of contour) for premolars
and approximately 2 mm for molars ( Fig. 8.7 ). hese limited
extensions help preserve the dentinal support of the marginal ridge
enamel and cusp tips and thus the overall ability of the tooth to
resist occlusal forces.
As the instrument is moved along the central groove , the resulting
pulpal loor is usually moderately lat and follows the rise and fall
of the DEJ ( Fig. 8.8A ). If extension is required toward the cusp
tips, the same depth that is approximately 0.2 mm inside the DEJ
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA) can be used as a direct pulpcapping material.26-28 If used, the calcium hydroxide or MTA liners
should always be covered with a RMGI base, sealing the area and
preventing the etchant (applied later) from dissolving the liner.26,29
Insertion and Light Curing of the Composite
A matrix is usually not necessary for Class I direc t composite restora -
tions, even when facial and lingual surface grooves are included.
Composite insertion hand instruments or a compule may be used
to place the composite material incrementally ( Fig. 8.10 ). It is
important to place (and light cure) the composite incrementally
to ensure maximum polymerization and possibly to reduce the
negativ e efects of polymerization shrinkage. Large increments or
attempts at illing a preparation in bulk may compromise polym -
erization of the restoration secondary to inadequate depth of cure.
As mentioned, the term “C-factor” has been used to describe
the ratio of bonded to unbonded surfaces in a tooth preparation
and restoration. A typical Class I tooth preparation will have a
high C-factor of 5/1 (i.e., ive bonded surfaces—pulpal, facial,
lingual, mesial, and distal—versus one unbonded surface—occlusal).
he higher the C-factor of a tooth preparation, the high er the
potential for composite polymerization shrinkage stress, as the
composite shrinkage deformation is restricted by the bonded
surfaces. he interface most likely to be adv ersely afected by high
C-factor stresses is at the pulpal wall as the anatomy of dentin in
this area makes establishment of a durable interface more diicult.
Incremental insertion and light curing of the composite may reduce
the negative C-factor efects for Class I composite restorations.30-33
he use of an RMGI liner or a lowable composite liner were
thought to r educe the efects of polymerization shrinkage stress
because of their favorable elastic modulus (a more elastic material
would more efectively absorb polymerization stresses),34,35 but
those claims are not supported by current clinical evidence.36 When
composite is placed over an RMGI material, this technique is
often referred to as a “sandwich ” technique. he potential advantages
of this technique are (1) the RMGI material bonds to the dentin
without the need for a dental adhesive37; (2) the RMGI material,
because of its bond to dentin and potential for luoride release
(potential anticariogenicity), may provide a better seal when used
in cases where the preparation extends gingivally onto root struc -
ture38; and (3) the favorable elastic modulus of the RMGI may
reduce the efects of polymerization shrinkage str esses. hese
suggested advantages are considered controversial, as no conclusive is maintained, usually resulting in the pulpal loor rising occlusally
(see Fig. 8.8B ). he same uniform depth concept also is appropriate
when extending a facial or lingual groove radiating from the occlusal
surface. When a groove extension is through the cusp ridge, the
instrument prepares the facial (or lingual) portion of the faulty
groove at an axial depth of 0.2 mm inside the DEJ and gingivally
to include all caries and other defects ( Fig. 8.9 ).
After extending the outline form to sound tooth structure, if
any caries or old restorative material remains on the pulpal loor,
it should be removed with the appropriately sized round bur or
hand instrument. he occlusal margin is left as prepared. No attempt
is made to bevel the occlusal margin because it may result in
enlarging the occlusal isthmus of the preparation. Because of the
occlusal surface enamel rod direction, the ends of the enamel rods
already are exposed by the preparation, which further reduces the
need for occlusal bevels.
Although large, extensive posterior composite restorations may
have some potential disadvantages when used routinely, “real world”
dentistry sometimes necessitates esthetic treatment alternatives
that may provide a needed service to the patient. Often, patients
simply cannot aford a more expensive esthetic restoration, or they
may have dental or medical conditions that preclude their placement.
In such instances, large posterior composite restorations sometimes
may be used as a reasonable alternative when mor e deinitive indirect
options are not possible or realistic.
Retorative Technique
Placement of the Adhesive
See Chapter 5 for a more extensive discussion on adhesiv es. he
dental adhesive is applied to the entire preparation with a micro -
brush, in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. After
application, the adhesive is polymerized with a light-curing unit,
as recommended by the manufacturer.
When the inal tooth preparation is judged to be near the pul p
in vital teeth, the operator may elect to use a base material prior
to placing the adhesive and the composite. If the remaining dentin
thickness (RDT) is clinically judged to be between 0.5 and 1.5 mm,
a resin-modiied glass ionomer (RMGI) base is used; if the RDT
is judged to be less than 0.5 mm, a calcium hydroxide liner should
be applied to the deepest aspect of the preparation, then protected
with an RMGI base prior to adhesive placement.26 In cases of
mechanical pulp exposure, calcium hydroxide or, increasingly,
AB C
• Fig. 8.9 Groove extension. A, Cross section through the faciolingual groove area. B, Extension through
cusp ridge at 1.5-mm initial pulpal depth; the facial wall depth is 0.2 mm inside the dentinoenamel junc -
tion (DEJ). C, Facial view.
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
F E
G
H
B A
C
D
• Fig. 8.10 Class I composite incremental insertion. A, Tooth preparation for Class I direct composite
restoration. B, After a resin-modiied glass ionomer base is placed, the irst composite increment is
inserted and light cured. C–F, Composite is inserted and light cured incrementally, using cusp inclines as
anatomic references to sculpt the composite before light curing. G, Completed restorations. H, At 5-year
follow-up.
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
composite spatulas and the tine of an explorer can be used to further
develop or r eine the anatomy of uncured composite increments.
Microbrushes also can be used to smooth uncured com posite
against the preparation margin, but these should ne ver be saturated
with adhesives. Once the composite is fully cured, if additional
contouring is needed, the restoration can be inished immedi -
ately after the last increment is cured using appropriate inishing
instruments.
“Bulk-ill composites” have gained increased interest in recent
years. hese materials are available as lowable base bulk-ill composites
and full-body bulk-ill composites .40 Flowable base bulk-ill composites
require a conventional composite as the occlusal increment and
therefore are used for dentin replacement only, whereas full-body
bulk-ill composites can replace dentin and enamel in a single
increment. heir use can expedite the restorative procedure as
increments of up to 4 mm in thickness are often suggested.41
However, in vitro studies have raised concerns about a possible
compromised internal adaptation and increased wear when these
techniques are used.42,43 Although this technique may present
advantages, namely more expediency during composite placement,
bulk-ill composites should be used with caution due to the lack
of long-term clinical performance information at this time.44 Bulk
illing may also limit the operator’s ability to carve the occlusal
anatomy of the restoration before light curing.
Finishing and Polishing of the Composite
If the composite is carefully placed and shaped before light curing,
as described in the previous section, additional inishing with burs
is substantially minimized. However, in many cases, reined inishing published research based on longitudinal clinical trials evaluating
the technique is available.
Regar dless of the efect of incremental placement on shrinkage
stress, posterior composites should be placed incrementally to
facilitate proper light curing and development of correct anatomy.
Especially in Class I direct composite restorations, the anatomic
references of the occlusal unprepared tooth structure should guide
the placement and shaping of the composite increments ( Fig.
8.11; see Figs. 8.10G and 8.12I ). If needed, very deep portions
of the tooth preparation are restor ed irst, with increments of
no more than 2 mm in thickness (see Fig. 8.10B ). he “enamel
layer” of the restoration, that is, the occlusal increment(s), should
be placed using an anatomic layering technique.39 he operator
places and shapes the composite before it is light cured so that the
composite restores the occlusal anatomy of the tooth. Typically,
the operator places and light cures one increment per cusp at
a time and continues to place subsequent increments until the
preparation is illed and the occlusal anatomy is fully developed
(see Fig. 8.10C–F ). he uncured composite can be shaped against
the unprepared cusp inclines as visual guides, which will result in a
very natural anatomic contour. Sculpture of the occlusal ele ments
of the restoration following the anatomic references of the tooth
respects the tooth’s anatomy and occlusion and minimizes the need
for contouring and inishing after the composite is polymerized.
Furthermore, this technique prevents potential damage to the
enamel adjacent to the restoration margins because it minimizes
the need to use rotary instruments to remove excess composite
extending beyond those margins. Any suitable composite hand
instruments can be used with the anatomic layering technique. Fine
B
A
C
D
• Fig. 8.11 Composite restorations. A and B, Class I composite, before and after. C and D, Class II
composite, before and after.
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
root surface may be a contraindication for using composite resin
as a posterior teeth restorative material.
he preoperative occlusal relationship of the tooth to be restored
must also be assessed. he presence of heavy occlusal contacts may
indicate that wear may be more of a consideration. Also, preoperative
wedging in the gingival embrasure of the proximal surfaces to be
restored should occur. Placing wedges, bitine rings, or both before
tooth preparation begins the separation of teeth, which may be
beneicial in reestablishing the proximal contact with the composite
restoration.
Tooth Preparation
Similar to the tooth preparation for Class I direct composite restora -
tions, the tooth preparation for Class II direct composites involves
(1) creating access to the faulty structure, (2) removal of faulty
structures (the caries lesion, defective restoration, and base material,
if present), and (3) creating the convenience form for the restoration.
Retention, as with Class I restorations, is primarily obtained by
bonding, so it is not necessary to use mechanical retention features
in the tooth preparation for Class II composite restorations.
Obtaining access to the defect may include removal of sound
enamel to access the caries lesion. he extension of the preparation
is therefore ultimately dictated by the extension of the fault or
defect. It is usually not necessary to reduce sound tooth structure
to provide “bulk for strength” or to provide conventional retention
and resistance forms.may be needed, especially when occlusion adjustments are necessary.
he occlusal surface is shaped with a round or ov al carbide inishing
bur or similarly shaped inishing diamond. Polishing is accomplished
with appropriate polishing cups, points, or both after the occlusion
is adjusted as necessary ( Fig. 8.12 ).
Clinical Technique for Cla II Direct
Compoite Retoration
Initial Clinical Procedure
he same general procedures as described previously are necessary
before beginning a Class II composite restoration. Several aspects
of those activities, however, need emphasis. First, an assessment
of the expected tooth preparation extensions (outline form) should
be made and a decision rendered on whether or not an enamel
periphery will exist on the tooth preparation, especially at the
gingival margin. he expected presence of an enamel periphery
strengthens the choice of composite as the restorative material
because bonding to enamel is more predictable than bonding to
dentin, especially along the gingival wall of the proximal preparation.
If the preparation is expected to extend onto the root surface,
potential problems with isolation of the operating area, adequate
adhesion to the root dentin, and adequate composite polymerization
exist. Good technique and proper use of the material may reduce
these potential problems, but deep subgingival extension onto the
B
A
C
D
• Fig. 8.12 Contouring and polishing of Class I composite. A, Mandibular molar with old amalgam
restoration. B, Rubber dam isolation; old restoration is carefully removed to minimize increasing prepara -
tion size. C, Final tooth preparation. D, Incremental placement of composite. Coutinued
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
instrument with straight sides to prepare walls that are 90 degrees
or greater ( Fig. 8.13 ). he objective is to remove the caries lesion
or defect conservatively, as well as any friable tooth structure.
Another conservative design for small Class II composites is the
box-only tooth preparation ( Fig. 8.14 ). his design is indicated
when only the proximal surface is defective, with no lesions on
the occlusal surface. A proximal box is prepared with a small,
elongated pear-shaped or round instrument, held parallel to the
long axis of the tooth crown. he instrument is extended through
the marginal ridge in a gingival direction aiming a t the center
of the proximal caries lesion or defect. he axial depth is dictated
by the extent of the caries lesion or fault. he form of the box
depends on which instrument shape is used. he facial, lingual, Small Class II direct composite restorations are often used for
primary caries lesions, that is, initial restorations. A small round
or elongated pear-shaped diamond or bur with round features may
be used for this preparation to remove the carious tissue or faulty
material from the occlusal and proximal surfaces. To help prevent
damage to the adjacent teeth and promote initial interproximal
separation, wedges with or without stainless steel barriers may be
utilized. he initial separation provided by wooden wedges will
facilitate matrix placement in conservative preparations as well as
result in tighter interproximal contacts. he pulpal and axial depths
are dictated only by the depth of the lesion and ar e not necessarily
uniform. he proximal extensions likewise are dictated only by
the extent of the lesion but may require the use of another
F
E
G
H
I
E, Incremental placement of composite. F, Rubber dam is removed and occlusion
checked. G, Buccal view, a inishing luted bur is used to selectively adjust the occlusion. H, Polishing
with brush and diamond paste. I, Completed restoration. • Fig. 8.12, cont’d
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
diferences are related to technique of incorporating the faulty
proximal surface. Preoperatively, the proposed facial and lingual
proximal extensions should be visualized (see Fig. 8.13A ). Initial
occlusal extension toward the involved proximal surface should
go through the marginal ridge area at initial pulpal loor depth,
exposing the DEJ. he DEJ serves as a guide for preparing the
proximal box portion of the preparation.
A No. or No. shaped diamond or bur is used to enter
the pit next to the carious proximal surface. he instrument is
positioned parallel with the long axis of the tooth crown. If only
one proximal surface is being restored, the opposite marginal ridge
dentinal support should be maintained ( Fig. 8.16 ).
he pulpal loor is initially prepared with the instrument to a
depth that is approximately 0.2 mm inside the DEJ. he instrument
is moved to include the caries lesion and all defects facially or
lingually, or both, as it transverses the central groove. Ever y efort
should be made, however, to keep the faciolingual width of the
preparation as narrow as possible. he initial depth is maintained
during the mesiodistal movement, but follows the rise and fall of
the underlying DEJ. he pulpal loor is relatively lat in a faciolingual
plane but may rise and fall slightly in a mesiodistal plane ( Fig.
8.17). If more of the caries lesion remains in dentin, it is removed
after the preparation outline, including the proximal box extensions,
has been established.
Because the facial and lingual proximal extensions of the faulty
proximal surface were visualized preoperatively, the occlusal exten -
sion toward that proximal surface begins to widen facially and
lingually to begin to outline those extensions as conservatively as
possible. Care is taken to preserve cuspal areas as much as possible
during these extensions. At the same time, the instrument extends
through the marginal ridge to within 0.5 mm of the outer contour
of the marginal ridge. his extension exposes the proximal DEJ
and protects the adjacent tooth (see Fig. 8.17 ). At this time, the
occlusal portion of the preparation is complete except for possible
additional pulpal loor caries lesion excavation. he occlusal walls
generally converge occlusally because of the inverted shape of the
instrument.
Typically, caries develops on a proximal surface immediately
gingival to the proximal contact. he extent of the caries lesion
and amount of old restorative material dictate the facial, lingual, and gingival extensions are dictated by the extension of the caries
lesion or defect. No beveling or secondary retention is indicated.
A third conservative design for restoring proximal lesions on
posterior teeth is the facial or lingual slot preparation ( Fig. 8.15 ).
Here, a lesion is detected on the proximal surface, but the operator
believes that access to the lesion can be obtained from either a
facial direction or a lingual direction, rather than throug h the
marginal ridge in a gingival direction. Usually, a small round
diamond or bur is used to gain access to the lesion. he instrument
is oriented at the correct occlusogingival position, and the entry
is made with the instrument as close to the adjacent tooth as
possible, preserving as much of the facial or lingual surface as
possible. he preparation is extended occlusally, facially, and
gingivally enough to remove the lesion. he axial depth is determined
by the extent of the lesion. he occlusal, facial, and gingival
cavosurface margins are 90 degrees or greater. Care should be taken
not to undermine the marginal ridge during the preparation. If
the defect extends occlusally to the point of undermining the
marginal ridge, a more conventional Class II preparation, with an
occlusal access component, should be used.
he tooth preparation for moderate to large Class II direct composite
restorations has features that resemble a more traditional Class II
amalgam tooth preparation and may include an occlusal step and
a proximal box depending on the location, extension, and depth
of the caries lesion.
he occlusal portion of the Class II preparation is prepared
similarly as described for the Class I preparation. he p rimary
A
BCD
• Fig. 8.13 Class II direct composite tooth preparation. A, Preoperative visualization of faciolingual
proximal box extensions. Arrows indicate desired extensions. B, Round or oval, small elongated pearl
instrument used. C and D, Facial, lingual, and gingival margins may need undermined cavosurface enamel
(indicated by dotted lines) removed with straight-sided thin and lat-tipped rotary instrument or hand
instrument.
DEJ
• Fig. 8.14 Box-only Class II composite preparation.
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
Preserve
marginal
ridge
Caries
Preparation
outline
• Fig. 8.16 When only one proximal surface is affected, the opposite
marginal ridge should be maintained.
Caries
DEJ
AB
• Fig. 8.17 Occlusal extension into faulty proximal surface. A and B,
Extension exposes the dentinoenamel junction (DEJ) but does not hit the
adjacent tooth. Facial and lingual extensions as preoperatively visualized
(see Fig. 10.9 for initial pulpal loor depth).
AB CCaries
• Fig. 8.15 Facial or lingual slot preparation. A, Cervical caries on the proximal surface. B, The round
diamond or bur enters the tooth from the accessible embrasure, oriented to the occlusogingival middle
of the lesion. C, Slot preparation.
and gingival extensions of the proximal box of the preparation.
Although it is not required to extend the proximal box beyond
contact with the adjacent tooth (i.e., provide clearance with the
adjacent tooth), it may simplify the preparation, matrix placement,
and contouring procedures. If all of the defect can be removed
without extending the proximal preparation beyond the contact,
however, the restoration of the proximal contact with the composite
is simpliied ( Fig. 8.18D ).
Before the instrument is extended through the marginal ridge,
the pro ximal ditch cut is initiated. he operator holds the instrument
over the DEJ with the tip of the instrument positioned to create
a gingivally directed cut that is 0.2 mm inside the DEJ (see Fig.
8.18B–D ). For a No. instrument with a tip diameter of 0.8 mm,
this would require one fourth of the instrument’s tip positioned
over the dentin side of the DEJ (the other three fourths of the tip
over the enamel side). he instrument is extended facially, lingually,
and gingivally to include all of the caries lesion or old material,
or both. he faciolingual cutting motion follows the DEJ and
therefore is usually in a slightly convex arc outward (see Fig. 8.18C ).
During this entire cutting, the instrument is held parallel to the
long axis of the tooth crown. he facial and lingual margins are
extended as necessary and should result in at least a 90-degree
margin (indicating enamel that is supported by dentin), more
obtuse being acceptable as well. If the preparation is conservative,
then a smaller, thinner instrument is used to complete the facio -
lingual wall formation, avoiding the creation of iatrogenic damage
to the adjacent tooth ( Fig. 8.19 ). Alternatively, a sharp hand
instrument such as a chisel, hatchet, or a gingival margin trimmer
can be used to inish the enamel wall. At this point, the remaining
proximal enamel that was initially maintained to prevent damage
to the adjacent tooth has been remov ed. he gingival loor is
prepared lat with an approximately 90-degree cavosurf ace margin.
Gingival extension should be as minimal as possible, to preserve
marginal enamel. he axial wall should be 0.2 mm insi de the DEJ
and have a slight outward convexity. For large caries lesions,
additional axial wall caries excavation may be necessary later
(Fig. 8.20 ).
If no caries lesion in the dentin or other defect remains, the
preparation is considered complete at this time ( Fig. 8.21 ). However,
if carious dentin or faulty restorative material/base remain on the
axial and pulpal aspects of the preparation, which is typically the
case for moderate to large Class II restorations, these areas should
be selectively excav ated to irm dentin. Often the initial preparation
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
also may be mor e diicult to inish. Bevels are rarely used on any
of the proximal box walls because of the diiculty in restoring
these areas, particularly when using inherently viscous composites.
Bevels also are not recommended along the gingival margins of
the proximal box; however, it is still necessary to remove brittle
unsupported enamel rods along the margins because of the gingival
orientation of the enamel rods. For most Class II preparations,
this margin already is approaching the cementoenamel junction
(CEJ), and the enamel is thin. Care is taken to maintain any
enamel in this area to achieve a preparation with all-enamel margins.
If the preparation extends onto the root surface, more attention
must be focused on keeping the area isolated during the bonding
technique, but no diferences in tooth preparation are required.
Usually, the only r emaining inal tooth preparation procedure that
might be necessary is additional removal of the caries lesion associ -
ated with the dentin on either the pulpal loor or the axial wall.
If necessary, a round bur or appropriate spoon excavator is used
for selective removal of any remaining carious tissue.
Retorative Technique
Matrix Application
One of the most important steps in restoring Class II preparations
with direct composites is proper matrix selection and setup. As
with most restorative procedures involving a proximal surface, a
matrix is necessary to (1) conine the restorative material excess
and (2) assist in the development of the appropriate axial tooth
AB
CDMargin left
in contact
• Fig. 8.18 A, The proximal wall may be left in contact with the adjacent
tooth. B, Proximal ditch cut. The instrument is positioned such that a
gingivally directed cut creates the axial wall 0.2 mm inside the dentinoe -
namel junction (DEJ). C, Faciolingual direction of axial wall preparation
follows the DEJ. D, Axial wall 0.2 mm inside the DEJ.
AB
• Fig. 8.19 Using a smaller instrument to prepare the cavosurface
margin areas of facial and lingual proximal walls. A, Facial and lingual
proximal margins undermined. B, Using a smaller instrument.
• Fig. 8.20 Proximal extension. The enamel margin on the gingival loor
is critical for bonding, so it should be preserved, if not compromised. Any
remaining soft dentin on the axial wall (or the pulpal loor) is excavated as
part of the inal tooth preparation (as indicated by dotted lines).
AB
• Fig. 8.21 Final Class II composite tooth preparation. A, Occlusal view.
B, Proximal view.
outline will have to be enlarged to allow access at this stage of the
preparation. Once selective removal of any remaining carious tissue
or removal of faulty existing restorative/base materials is accom -
plished, consideration should be given for pulp protection as
described previously in the Class I restorative technique section
of this chapter. When treating a tooth with very extensive and
deep caries on a vital, asymptomatic tooth, care should be exercised
to avoid a pulp exposure, which would considerably compromise
the prognosis for the tooth. See Chapter 2 for considerations on
selective removal of carious dentin.
Because the composite is retained in the preparatio n by adhesion,
no secondary preparation retention features are necessary. No bevels
are placed on the occlusal cavosurface margins because these walls
already have exposed enamel rod ends. Beveled composite margins
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
prefer ence. hese systems may use a bitine ring to (1) aid in stabiliz -
ing the sectional matrix and (2) provide additional tooth separation
while the composite is inserted. he primary bene it of these systems
is a simpler method for establishing an appropriate composite
proximal contour and contact.45 Use of these systems for restoring
wide faciolingual proximal preparations requires careful application;
otherwise the bitine ring prongs may cause deformation of the
matrix band, resulting in poor restoration contour.
When both proximal surfaces are involved, a Tolemire retainer
with an ultrathin (0. mm or 0. inch) and burni shable matrix
band is used. he band is contoured, positioned, wedged, and
shaped, as needed, for proper proximal contacts and embrasures.
Before placement, the metal matrix band for posterior composites
should be burnished on a paper pad to impart proper proximal
contour to the band. Alternatively, an ultrathin pr econtoured metal
matrix band may be used in the Tolemire retainer.
Regardless of the type of matrix system used, the m atrix material
should extend at least 1 mm beyond the gingival margin (gingivally)
and the area corresponding to the marginal ridge of the restoration
(occlusally). he matrix should not extend further subgingivally
or occlusally so as not to interfere with the restorative procedure.
If a wedge was used during the tooth preparation procedures, it
is removed so that the matrix band can be installed, and immediately
reinserted. A wedge is needed at the gingival margin to (1) hold contours. In contrast to amalgam, which can be condensed against
the matrix and thereby improve the proximal contact, Class II
composites are almost totally dependent on the contour and position
of the matrix for establishing appropriate proximal contacts. Early
wedging and retightening of the wedge during tooth preparation
aid in achieving suicient separation of teeth to compensate for
the thickness of the matrix material. Before placing the composite
material, the matrix material must be in absolute contact with
(i.e., touching) the adjacent contact area.
Generally, the matrix is applied before adhesive placement. An
ultrathin metal matrix band generally is preferred for the restoration
of a Class II composite because it is thinner than a typical metal
band and can be contoured better than a clear polyester matrix.
No signi icant problems are experienced in placing and light curing
composite material when using a metal matrix as long as an
incremental technique is used.
Although a Tolemire-type matrix band can be used for restoring
a two-surface tooth preparation, precontoured sectional metallic
matrices are preferable ( Fig. 8.22 ), because only one thickness of
metal matrix material is encountered instead of two, making contact
generation easier . hese sectional matrices are relatively easy to
use, ver y thin, and come in diferent sizes so as to accommodate
for varied occlusogingival heights of the proximal box. here are
several systems available, and selection is based on operator
B
A
C
D
• Fig. 8.22 Sectional matrix systems for posterior composites. A, Sectional matrix system in place with
plastic wedge and bitine ring to restore the maxillary premolar with direct composite. B, Sectional matrix
system in place with wooden wedge and bitine ring to restore the mandibular premolar with direct com -
posite. C, Sectional matrix system in place with plastic wedge and bitine ring to restore the maxillary
premolar with direct composite. D, Case presented in C after placement and light curing of the composite,
and matrix removal, before any contouring. Note minimal excess composite as a result of good matrix
adaptation to facial and lingual embrasures.
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
along the gingiv al loor and should extend slightly up the facial
(or lingual) wall (see Fig. 8.23 ). his increment (or increments
for a large box) should be no more than 2 mm thick because it is
the farthest increment from the curing light and the most critical
in establishing a proper gingival seal. A second increment is then
placed against the lingual (or facial) wall to restore about two
thirds of the bo x. he inal increment is then placed to complete
the proximal box and develop the marginal ridge. Subsequent
additions, if needed, are made and light cured (usually not exceeding
2 mm in thickness at a time) until the proximal box is fully restored
(see Fig. 8.23 ). Increments should be light cured for as long as
needed, depending on the shade and opacity of the composite
used, the distance of the composite from the light tip, and the
power of the light-curing unit. Regardless of the number of incre -
ments needed, when restoring the proximal box, an efort should
be made to develop the anatomy of marginal ridge without excessive
composite, to reduce the amount of rotary instrumentation required
during inishing.
When the proximal box is completed, the occlusal step of the
preparation is restored exactly as it was described for the Class I
direct composite restoration—that is, using an anatomic layering
technique.
he incremental insertion and light-curing technique described
provides enhanced control over the application and polymerization
of individual increments of composite. he increment al technique
also allows for (1) orientation of the polymerization light beam
according to the position of each increment of composite, thus
enhancing the polymerization potential; (2) intrinsic restoration
characterization with darker or pigmented composites; and (3)
sculpture of the restoration occlusal stratum with a more translucent
material simulating the natural enamel. Appropriate proximal
contact intensity can also be better achieved when composite is
applied in increments. he matrix can be held in physical contact
with the adjacent proximal surface while the contact-related incre -
ment of composite is light cured. A hand instrument with a large
surface area (e.g., a small football-shaped or round burnisher) is
well suited for that purpose. Once this increment is cured, the
proximal contact is established, and remaining increments can be
inserted and light cured. he matrix is removed and the restoration
is light cured from the facial and lingual directions. he restoration
is inished and polished immediately after the last increment is
cured.
Composite resin placement may be made more diicult by the
stifness and stickiness of some composite materials. Heating the
composite material prior to insertion in the preparation may help
overcome these problems. Commercial “composite warmers” are
available (e.g., Calset, AdDent Inc., Danbury, CT) to preheat the
composite resin to preset temperatures up to 68°C ( °F). he
increased temperature lowers the viscosity of the composite resin,
potentially resulting in better marginal adaptation and re duced
microleakage, although some of these results have been shown to
be composite speciic.46-49 he elevated composite temperatures
have been shown to be safe for clinical use.50,51
When a stifer or “packable” high-viscosity composite is used
for the restoration of the proximal box, a very small increment of
a lowable composite may be irst placed in close proximity to the
external margins of the proximal box so as to improve marginal
adaptation of the restoration.52,53
Finishing and Polishing of the Composite
Finishing can be initiated immediately after the composite material
has been fully light cured ( Fig. 8.24 ). If the occlusal anatomy the matrix in position, (2) provide slight separation of the teeth,
and (3) prevent a gingival overhang of the composite material. A
wedge must be used to separate teeth suiciently to compensate
for the thickness of the matrix if the completed restoration is to
have appropriate proximal contacts.
Several types of commercial wedges are available in assorted
sizes. An anatomical (triangle-shaped) wedge of compatible size is
indicated for most preparations. he wedge is kept as short as
possible so as not to limit operator access to the preparation during
insertion of the restorative material, and should also not push the
matrix onto the preparation space.
For posterior restorations, the wedge is placed from the larger
to the smaller interproximal gingival embrasure, typically from a
lingual approach, just apical to the gingival margin. he wedge
should engage (stabilize) the matrix band. When a rubber dam is
used, wedge placement may be aided by a small amount of watersoluble lubricant on the tip of the wedge. he rubber dam is irst
stretched gingivally (on the side from which the wedge is inserted),
then released gradually during wedge insertion.
Placement of the Adhesive
he technique for adhesive placement is as described previously
for the Class I direct composite restoration. Care should be exercised
to avoid adhesive pooling along the matrix and preparation margins
gingivally, facially, and lingually.
Insertion and Light Curing of the Composite
he technique for insertion of Class II posterior composites is
illustrated in Fig. 8.23 . It is best to restore the proximal box portion
of the preparation irst. Hand instruments or a “composite gun”
may be used to insert the composite material. It is important to
place and light cure the composite incrementally to maximize the
curing potential and to reduce the negative efects of polymerization
shrinkage as discussed earlier in this chapter. Many techniques
have been described for the restoration of the proximal box. Research
comparing diferent insertion and light-curing techniques is not
conclusive and no single technique has been universally accepted.
he number of increments will depend on the size of the proxima l
box. At the University of North Carolina, we recommend an oblique
incremental technique: he irst increment(s) should be placed
3 3
2 2
1 1
• Fig. 8.23 Oblique incremental technique to restore proximal boxes in
Class II direct composite restorations. The number of increments will
depend on the size of the proximal box. The irst increment(s) (1) should
be placed along the gingival loor and should extend slightly up the facial
wall. This increment should be only approximately 1 to 2 mm thick
because it is the farthest increment from the curing light and the most
critical in establishing a proper gingival seal. A second increment (2) is
then placed against the lingual wall, to restore about two thirds of the box.
The inal increment (3) is then placed to complete the proximal box and
develop the marginal ridge. Subsequent additions, if needed, are made
and light cured (usually not exceeding 2 mm in thickness at a time) until
the proximal box is illed.
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
F
E
G
H
B
A
C
D
• Fig. 8.24 Contouring and inishing of posterior composite restorations. A, After sectional matrix
removal, excess composite is noted on facial and lingual proximal embrasures. B, Contouring lingual
embrasure with inishing disk. C, Polishing the occlusal surface with inishing brush. D, Completed restora -
tion. E, Note minimal excess composite after removal of sectional matrix because of good matrix adapta -
tion to facial and lingual embrasures and careful incremental insertion of the composite. F–H, Contouring
and polishing with disks and brush.
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
was developed as described in the previous sections, the need for
additional contouring is greatly minimized. I f inishing is needed,
the occlusal surface is shaped with a round or oval, 12-bladed
carbide inishing bur or inishing diamond. Excess composite is
removed at the proximal margins and embrasures with a lameshaped, 12-bladed carbide inishing bur or inishing diamond and
abrasive discs (see Fig. 8.24B ). Any overhangs at the gingival area
are removed with a No. 12 surgical blade mounted in a Bard-Parker
handle with light shaving strokes to remove the excess. Narrow
inishing strips may be used to smooth the gingival proximal
surface. Care must be exercised in maintaining the position of
the inishing strips gingival to the proximal contact area to avoid
inadvertent removal of the composite contact with t he adjacent
proximal sur face. he rubber dam (or other means of isolation)
is removed, and the occlusion is evaluated for prop er contact.
Further adjustments are made, if needed, and the restorations are
polished with appropriate polishing points, cups, brushes, or discs
(see Fig. 8.24C, F–H ).
Extenive Cla II Direct Compoite Retoration
and Foundation
Direct composite is not usually indicated for extensive posterior
restorations but may be used as such when economic factors prevent
the patient from selecting a more ideal (and more costly) indirect
restoration, or as a semipermanent restoration in teeth with
questionable prognosis. he 12-year survival rate of large posterior
composite restorations has been shown to be similar to that of
large amalgam restorations, although amalgam performed better
in patients with high caries risk.54 In addition to being used in
selected cases for extensive restorations, composites also may be
considered for use as a foundation for indirect restorations (crowns
and onlays) when the operator determines that insuicient natural
tooth structure remains to provide adequate retention and resistance
form for the cro wn. he tooth irst is restored with a large restoration
and is then prepared for the indirect restoration.
In addition to the tooth preparation form, the primary retention
form for a very large Class II composite restoration is the micro -
mechanical bonding of the composite to enamel and dentin. When
a full-coverage preparation is anticipated, secondary retention
features must be incorporated, however, because of (1) the decreased
amount of tooth structure available for bonding and (2) the increased
concern for retaining the composite in the tooth. hese features
may include grooves, coves, and slots.
he primary diferences for these very large preparat ions include
the following: (1) Some or all of the cusps may be reduced and
covered with composite (“capped”), (2) extensions in most directions
are greater than in more conservative preparations, (3) secondary
retention features are used, and (4) additional resistance form
features are used. A cusp must be reduced and covered with
composite if loss of supporting dentin is severe enough to leave
the cusp in a weakened, fracture prone state. Reducing and covering
a cusp with composite usually is indicated when the occlusal outline
form extends more than two thirds the distance from a primary
groove to a cusp tip. An operator sometimes may choose to ignore
this general rule when using a bonded restoration if that weakened
cusp will be covered and reinforced as part of the preparation
design for the subsequent indirect restoration.
If the tooth has had endodontic treatment, the pulp chamber
can be opened and extensions can be made several millimeters
into each treated canal. Because of the increased surface area for
bonding and the mechanical retention from extensions into the canals, usually fewer secondary retention features are incorporated
into the remaining tooth preparation.
he elongated pear-shaped diamond or bur is used to prepare
the occlusal step. As already noted, the occlusal outline form is
usually extensive. When moving the instrument from the central
groove area toward a cuspal prominence, the pulpal depth that is
approximately 0.2 mm inside the DEJ should be maintained, if
possible. his creates a pulpal loor, which rises occlusally as it is
extended either facially or lingually (see Fig. 8.8 ). If a cusp must
be reduced and covered, the side of the rotary instrument can be
used irst to make several depth cuts in the remaining cuspal form
to serve as a guide for cusp reduction. Cusps should be reduced
as early in the tooth preparation procedure as possible, providing
more access and visibility for the preparation. he depth cut is
made with the instrument held parallel to the cuspal incline (from
cusp tip to central groove) and approximately 1.5 to 2 mm deep.
For a large cusp, multiple depth cuts can be made. hen, the
instrument is used to join the depth cuts and extend to the
remainder of the cuspal form ( Fig. 8.25 ). he reduced cusp has a
relatively lat surface that may rise and fall with the normal mesial
and distal inclines of the cusp. It also should provide enoug h
clearance with the opposing tooth to result in approximately 1.5
to 2 mm of composite material to restore form and function. he
cusp reduction should be blended in with the rest of the occlusal
step portion of the preparation.
he proximal boxes are prepared as described previously. he
primary diference is that they may be much larger, that is, extend
farther in every direction. he extent of the caries lesion may
dictate that a proximal box extend around the line angle of the
tooth to include the caries lesion or faulty facial or lingual tooth
structure. When the outline form has been established (the margins
extended to sound tooth structure), carious tissue at the pulpal
and axial walls is selectively removed and the preparation is assessed
carefully for additional retention form needs.
Retention form can be enhanced by the placement of grooves,
coves, or slots. All such retention form features must be strategically
placed in dentin so as to maintain dentinal support of remaining
enamel while avoiding areas that increase the risk of pulpal involve -
ment. At times, bevels may be placed on available enamel margins
to enhance retention form, even on occlusal areas. Retention form
for foundations must be placed far enough inside the DEJ (at least
1 mm) to remain after the crown preparation is subsequently
accomplished. Otherwise, essential secondary feature s that are
retaining the foundation may potentially be lost ( Fig. 8.26 ).
Matrix placement is more demanding for these large restorations
because more tooth structure is missing, and more margins may
be subgingival. Proper burnishing of the matrix band to achieve
appropriate axial contours is important, unless immediate full
coverage of the tooth is planned. It also may be necessary to modify
the matrix band to provide more subgingival extension in some
areas and prevent extrusion of the composite at the matrix band–
retainer tooth junction.
Typical adhesive placement techniques are followed. Because
much of the composite bond is to dentin, proper tec hnique is
crucial. Placement of the adhesive is accomplished as previously
described.
When a light-cured composite is used, irst it is placed in 1to
2-mm increments into the most gingival areas of the proximal
boxes. Each increment is cured, as directed. It may be helpful to
use a hand instrument to hold the matrix against the adjacent
tooth while light curing the composite. his may assist in restoring
the proximal contact.
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
not polymerize with the previously placed adhesive. Some manu -
facturers have introduced optional chemical catalysts that can be
mixed with the light-cured adhesive to reduce or prevent this
problem.
Contouring the large composite also is more diicult because
of the number of surfaces that may be involved and the amount
of composite present. Anatomically correct contours and contacts
are necessary for restorations, but they are less important for
foundations that will be present only for a short time before the
crown preparation is accomplished and the tooth is stabilized.
Because of the extensiveness of these restorations, a careful assess -
ment of the contours should be made from all angles. When inish -
ing has been completed, the occlusion is adjusted as necessary,
and the restoration is polished. Because these very large restorations
may stretch the limits of composite restorations, the patient should
be on a frequent recall regimen.
Clinical Technique for Cla III Direct
Compoite Retoration
Initial Clinical Procedure
hese are similar to those already described: (1) Anesthesia is usually
necessary for patient comfort and may help decrease salivary low
during the procedure; (2) occlusal assessments should be made to
determine the tooth preparation design and to properly adjust the
restoration’s function; (3) the composite shade must be selected
before the tooth dehydrates and concomitantly lightens; (4) the
area must be isolated to facilitate access and permit efective bonding; Self-cured and dual-cured composite resin materials are frequently
used for large composite foundations because these can be injected
in the preparation in a single increment. However, it is recom -
mended that even when dual-cured composites are used, they be
carefully light cur ed during and after the inal placement. When
this technique is used, the operator should carefully select the
adhesive system, as some simpliied adhesives have been shown
to be incompatible with some self-cured composite foundation
materials. Acidic monomers in these adhesives scavenge the
activators (tertiary amines) in the self-cure composite.55,56 If
the activator does not function properly, then the composite at
the adhesive interface does not polymerize thoroughly and does
AB
CD E
• Fig. 8.25 Cusp reduction. A, The initial outline form weakens the mesiolingual cusp enough to neces -
sitate capping. B, Depth cuts made. C, Depth cuts. D, Cusp reduction prepared. E, Vertical wall main -
tained between reduced and unreduced cusps.
Composite foundation
Crown preparation
Retention
form
• Fig. 8.26 The retention form for foundations must be internal to even -
tual crown preparation.
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
light pressure and intermittent cutting (brush stroke) are used to
gain access into the preparation. Incorrect entry overextends the
lingual outline and unnecessarily weakens the tooth (see Fig. 8.28B
and C ).
he same instrument may be used to enlarge the initial access
opening suiciently to permit, in subsequent steps, carious tissue
removal, completion of the preparation, and insertion of the
restorative material (see Fig. 8.28D ). No e fort is made to prepare
the walls that are perpendicular to the enamel surface; for small
preparations, the walls may diverge externally from the axial depth
resulting in a beveled marginal design and conservation of internal
tooth structure ( Fig. 8.29 ). For larger preparations, the initial tooth
preparation still is as conservative as possible, but the preparation
walls may not be as divergent from the axial wall. Subsequent
beveling or laring of accessible enamel areas may be required.
Despite the size of the lesion, the objective of the initial tooth
preparation is the same: to prepare the tooth as conservatively as
possible by extending the outline form just enough to include the
peripheral extent of the lesion. Sometimes, the incorporation of
an enamel bev el also may be used to extend the inal outline form
to include the caries lesion. If possible, the outline form should
not (1) include the entire proximal contact area, (2) extend onto
the facial surface, or (3) extend subgingivally. Extensions should
be minimal, including only the tooth structure that is compromised
by the extent of the caries lesion or defect. Some undermined
enamel can be left in nonocclusal stress areas, but very friable
enamel at the margins should be removed.
he extension axially also is dictated by the extent of the fault
or caries lesion and usually is not uniform in depth. As noted
earlier, most initial composite restorations (primary caries) use an
ultraconservative preparation design ( Fig. 8.30A and B ). Because
a caries lesion that requires a restoration usually extends into dentin,
many Class III preparations extend to an initial axial wall depth
of 0.2 mm into dentin and are widened such that peripheral enamel
has dentinal support ( Fig. 8.31 ). No attempt is made however to
prepare distinct or uniform axial preparation walls; rather, the
objective is to selectively remove carious tissue as conservatively
as possible. Additional marginal r einement may be necessary later.
If the preparation outline extends gingivally onto the root surface,
the gingival loor should form a cavosurface margin of 90 degrees,
and the depth of the gingivoaxial line angle should be not more
than 0.75 mm at this initial stage of tooth pr eparation. he external
walls are prepared perpendicular to the root surface. In this area
of the tooth, apical of the cementoenamel junction (CEJ), the
external walls are composed entirely of dentin and cementum.
When completed, the initial tooth preparation extends the
outline form to include the entire fault unless it is anticipated that
the incorporation of an additional enamel bevel would enhance
retention form or improve the potential for an optimal esthetic
result. Small preparations typically have a beveled marginal con -
iguration from the initial tooth preparation.
Little may need to be done in the inal tooth preparation stage
for these preparations. Final tooth preparation steps for a Class
III direct composite restoration are, when indicated, (1) selective
removal of carious dentin; (2) pulp protection; (3) bevel placement
on accessible enamel margins; and (4) inal procedures of cleaning
and inspecting. he selective removal of carious dentin is accom -
plished using round burs, small spoon excavators, or both. Particular
care must be exercised not to weaken the walls or incisal angles
that are subject to masticatory forces.
Larger preparations may require additional beveling of the
accessible enamel walls to enhance retention by bonding ( Fig. and (5) if the restoration involves the proximal contact, inserting
a wedge in the area beforehand may assist in the reestablishment
of the proximal contact with composite.
Tooth Preparation
In general, the tooth preparation for a Class III direct composite
restoration involves (1) obtaining access to the defect (ca ries lesion,
fracture, noncarious defect), (2) removing faulty structures (carious
tissue, defective dentin and enamel, defective restoration, base
material), and (3) creating the convenience form fo r the restoration
(Fig. 8.27 ). In most cases, an enamel bevel is used on the facial
cavosurface margin to provide a gradual color transition from the
restoration to the surrounding tooth structure for esthetics. If
unsupported enamel is intentionally left on the facial aspect of
the preparation, a facial cavosurface bevel may not be indicated
as it can unnecessarily extend the facial display of the restoration.
Obtaining access to the defect may include removal of sound
enamel to access the caries lesion. he extension of the preparation
is therefore ultimately dictated by the extension of the fault or
defect. It is usually not necessary to reduce sound tooth structure
to provide either “bulk for strength” or conventional retention
and resistance forms.
Because of the adequate bond of composite to enamel and
dentin, most Class III composite restorations are retained almost
exclusively by bonding, and no additional preparation retention
form is necessary. In the rare cases when additional retention form
is needed, it can be achieved either by increasing the surface area
with a wider enamel bevel or by adding retentive features in the
preparation internal dentin walls.
When a proximal surface of an anterior tooth is to be restored,
and a choice between facial or lingual entry into the tooth is
available, the lingual approach is always preferable unless such an
approach would necessitate excessive removal of the tooth structure,
such as in instances of irregular alignment of teet h or facial position -
ing of the lesion. he advantages of restoring the proximal lesion
using a lingual approach are:
1. he facial enamel is conserved for enhanced esthetics. (Some
unsupported, but nonfriable, enamel may be left on the facial
wall of the preparation.)
2. Shade matching of the composite is less critical.
3. Discoloration or deterioration of the restoration is less visible.
Indications for a facial approach include:
1. he caries lesion is positioned facially, and facial access would
signiicantly conserve the tooth structure.
2. Teeth are irregularly aligned, and facial access would signiicantly
conserve the tooth structure.
3. An extensive caries lesion extends onto the facial surface.
4. A faulty restoration that originally was placed from the facial
approach needs to be replaced.
When the facial and the lingual surfaces are involved, the
approach that provides the best access for instrumentation should
be used.
he preparation is initiated from a lingual approach (if possible)
by using a round carbide bur or diamond instrument of a size
compatible with the extent of the lesion. he point of entry is
located within the incisogingival dimension of the lesion or defect
and as close to the adjacent tooth as possible without contacting
it (Fig. 8.28A ). he initial opening is made by holding the cutting
instrument perpendicular to the enamel surface but at an entry
angle that places the neck portion of the bur or diamond instrument
as far into the embrasure (next to the adjacent tooth) as possible;
D E
F G
HB A C
• Fig. 8.27 A, Small proximal caries lesion on the mesial surface of a maxillary lateral incisor. B, Dotted
line indicates normal outline form dictated by shape of the caries lesion. C, Extension (convenience form)
required for preparing and restoring preparation from lingual approach when teeth are in normal alignment.
D–H, Clinical case showing conservative Class III preparation, facial approach. D, Facial view of a caries
lesion on the distal surface of the maxillary central incisor. E and F, Obtaining access to carious dentin.
G, Infected dentin is removed with round bur. H, Completed caries excavation.
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
gingivally to a position where the remaining enamel thickness is
minimal or nonexistent, the bevel is omitted from this area to
preserve the remaining enamel margin or maintain a 90-degree
cavosurface margin in dentin. Likewise, a bevel on the lingual
enamel margin of a maxillary incisor may be contraindicated if it
would result in the creation of a restoration marginal interface at
the area of occlusal contact.
Remaining old restorative material on the axial wall should be
removed if any of the following conditions are pres ent: (1) he
old material is amalgam, and its color would negativ ely afect the
color of the new restoration; (2) clinical or radiographic evidence
of a caries lesion under the old material is present; (3) the tooth
pulp was symptomatic preoperatively; (4) the periphery of the
remaining restorative material is not intact; (5) there is noticeable
deterioration of the bonding of the remaining restorative material;
or (6) the use of the underlying dentin is necessary to efect a
stronger bond for retention purposes. If none of these conditions
is present, the operator may elect to leave the remaining restorative
material rather than risk unnecessary excavation nearer to the pulp
and subsequent irritation or exposure of the pulp. A RMGI base
is applied only if the remaining dentin thickness is judged to be
less than 1.5 mm and in the deepest portions of the preparation.26
Calcium hydroxide liners are used only in cases when the remaining
dentin thickness is 0.5 mm or less as an indirect pulp-capping 8.32; see Fig. 8.30C and D ). hese enamel margins are beveled
with a lame-shaped or round diamond instrument. he bevel is
prepared by creating a 45-degree angle to the external surface and
to a width of 0.5 to 2 mm, depending on the size of the preparation,
location of the margin, and esthetic requirements of the restoration
(Fig. 8.33 ; see Fig. 8.32 ). If the gingival loor has been extended
B
CCorrect
IncorrectA
D
• Fig. 8.28 Beginning Class III tooth preparation (lingual approach). A, The bur or diamond is held
perpendicular to the enamel surface, and an initial opening is made close to the adjacent tooth at the
incisogingival level of the caries. B, The correct angle of entry is parallel to the enamel rods on the mesio -
lingual angle of the tooth. C, Incorrect entry overextends the lingual outline. D, The same bur or diamond
is used to enlarge opening for caries removal and convenience form while establishing the initial axial wall
depth.
• Fig. 8.29 A small, scoop-shaped Class III tooth preparation.
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
CD
AB
• Fig. 8.30 Preparation designs for Class III (A and B); larger preparation
designs for Class III (C and D).
AB0.2 mm
• Fig. 8.31 Ideal initial axial wall preparation depth. A, Incisogingival
section showing axial wall 0.2 mm into dentin. B, Faciolingual section
showing facial extension and axial wall following the contour of the tooth.
A
B
• Fig. 8.32 Large Class III tooth preparation. A, Beveling. The cavosur -
face bevel is prepared with a lame-shaped or round diamond, resulting
in an angle approximately 45 degrees to the external tooth surface. B,
Completed cavosurface bevel (arrowhead) .
material; in cases of pulp exposures calcium hydroxide or, increas -
ingly, MTA can be used as a direct pulp-capping material.26-28 If
used, the calcium hydroxide or MTA liners should always be covered
with a RMGI base, sealing the area and preventing the etchant
(applied later) from dissolving the liner.26,29
When replacing a large restoration or restoring a large Class
III lesion, the operator may decide that retention form should be
enhanced by placing groove (at gingival) or cove (at incisal) retention
features in addition to bonding.
For Class III direct composite preparations with facial access ,
with a few exceptions, the same stages and steps of tooth prepa ration are follow ed as for lingual access. he ability to use direct vision
simpliies the procedure ( Fig. 8.34 ).
It is expeditious to prepare and restore approximating caries
lesions or faulty restorations on adjacent teeth at the same appoint -
ment. If one of the lesions is larger (more extended outline form)
than the other, then the larger outline form is dev eloped irst. he
second preparation usually can be more conservative because of
the improved access provided by the larger preparation. he reverse
order would be followed when the restorative material is inserted.
A Class III lesion on the distal surface of a maxillary right
central incisor is shown in Fig. 8.35A . he rubber dam is placed
after the anesthetic has been administered and the shade has been
selected. A wedge is inserted in the gingival embrasure to depress
the rubber dam and underlying soft tissue, improving gingival
access (see Fig. 8.35B ). Using a carbide bur or diamond instrument
rotating at high speed and with air-water spray, the outline form
is prepared with appropriate extension and the initial, limited
pulpal depth as previously described in the lingual approach
preparation (see Fig. 8.35C ). Carious tissue is removed with a
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
A Before bevel
B After bevel
• Fig. 8.33 Cross section of facial approach Class III before (A) and after
(B) 45-degree cavosurface bevel on the facial margin.
• Fig. 8.34 Completed Class III tooth preparation (facial approach), with
the bevel marked.
D
C
B
A
• Fig. 8.35 Class III initial preparation (facial approach). A, Large proximal caries with facial involvement.
B, Isolated area of operation. C, Entry and extension with No. 2 bur or diamond. D, Caries removal with
spoon excavator. (Courtesy Vilhelm G. Ólafsson.)spoon excavator (see Fig. 8.35D ). Some undermined enamel may
be left if it is not in a high-stress area.
When a proximal caries lesion or defective restoration extends
onto the facial and the lingual surfaces, access may be accomplished
from either a facial approach or a lingual approach. An example
of an extensive Class III initial tooth preparation that allows such
choice is illustrated in Fig. 8.36 .
Retorative Technique
Matrix Application
A matrix is a device that is applied to a prepared tooth before the
insertion of the restorativ e material to (1) conine the restorative
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
completed by direct placement of the composite. When correctly
used, not only would a matrix aid in placing and contouring the
composite restorative material, but it may also reduce the amount
of ex cess material, thus minimizing the inishing time.
A properly contoured section of Mylar matrix material is used
for most Class III and IV preparations. Because the proximal
surface of a tooth is usually convex incisogingivally and the matrix
material may be lat, it is necessary to shape the matrix to conform
to the desired tooth contour. One way to contour a Mylar matrix
is by drawing it along a hard, rounded object ( Fig. 8.37 ). he
amount of convexity placed in the matrix depends on the size and
contour of the anticipated restoration. Several pulls of th e matrix,
with heavy pressure, across the rounded end of the operating pliers
may be required to obtain enough convexity. he contoured matrix
is positioned between teeth so that the convex area conforms to
the desired tooth contour ( Fig. 8.38A ). he matrix is extended at
least 1 mm beyond the prepared gingival and incisal margins.
Sometimes, the matrix does not slide through or is distorted by a
tight contact or preparation margin. In such instances, a wedge is
lightly positioned in the gingival embrasure before the matrix is
inserted. Care must be taken not to injure the interproximal tissues
and induce bleeding. When the matrix is past the binding area,
it may be necessary to loosen the wedge to place the strip past the
gingival margin (between the wedge and margin). hen the wedge
is reinserted tightly (see Fig. 8.38B ).
A wedge is needed at the gingival margin to (1) hold the Mylar
matrix in position, (2) provide slight separation of the teeth, and
(3) prevent a gingival overhang of the composite material. A wedge
must be used to separate teeth suiciently to compensate for the
thickness of the matrix if the completed restoration is to contact
the adjacent tooth properly.
Several types of commercial wedges are available in assorted
sizes. A triangular-shaped wedge (in cross section) is indicated for
preparations with margins that are deep in the gingival sulcus.
he end of a round wooden toothpick usually is an excellent wedge
for preparations with margins coronal to the gingival sulcus. he
wedge is kept as short as possible so as not to limit operator access
to the preparation during insertion of the restorative material.
he wedge is placed, using No. pliers, from the facial
approach for lingual access preparations, and vice versa for facial
access, just apical to the gingival margin. When isolation is
accomplished with the rubber dam, wedge placement may be
aided by a small amount of water-soluble lubricant on the tip of
the wedge. he r ubber dam is irst stretched gingivally (on the
side from which the wedge is inserted), then released gradually material excess and (2) assist in the development of the appropriate
axial tooth contours. he matrix usually is applied and stabilized
with a wedge before application of the adhesive because it helps
contain the adhesive components to the prepared tooth. Care must
be taken, however, to avoid pooling of adhesive adjacent to the
matrix.
A properly contoured and wedged matrix is a prerequisite for
a restoration involving the entire proximal contact area, unless the
adjacent tooth is missing in which case the restoration may be
A
B
C
• Fig. 8.36 Large Class III tooth preparation extending onto root surface.
A, Facial view. B, Lingual view. C, Mesial view showing gingival and incisal
retention, which is only used when deemed necessary to increase reten -
tion. The tooth preparation is now ready for beveling of the enamel walls.
• Fig. 8.37 Contouring Mylar strip matrix. (Courtesy Aldridge D. Wilder,
DDS.)
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
during wedge insertion ( Fig. 8.39 ). Subsequently, a trial opening
and closing of the Mylar matrix is helpful. It must open enough
for access to insert the adhesiv e and composite and close suiciently
to ensure a proper contour. It may be necessary to shorten the
wedge or insert it from the opposite embrasure to optimize access.
Placement of the Adhesive
Adhesive placement steps are accomplished with strict adherence
to the manufacturer’s directions for the particular adhesive system
being used.
Insertion and Light Curing of the Composite
he mesial surface of a maxillary left lateral incisor is used to
illustrate facial insertion of a light-cured composite ( Fig. 8.40 ).
he matrix is contoured, placed interproximally, and wedged at
the gingival margin. he lingual aspect of the matrix is secured
with the index inger, while the thumb relects the facial portion
out of the way (see Fig. 8.40 ). Light-cured materials are not dis -
pensed until r eady for use. he composite should be protected
from ambient light to prevent premature polymerization. Likewise,
the compule tip (when used) should be recapped immediately to
prevent setting of the composite at the end of the syringe.
he composite is inserted by a hand instrument or syringe and
pressed into the preparation. Most modern composites will not
stick to a clean instrument, but if stickiness is perceived, the hand
instrument should be thoroughly cleaned and dried. Once the
desired aspect of the preparation is adequately restored, the material
is polymerized. A second increment of composite is applied, if
needed, to ill the preparation completely and provide a slight
B
A
• Fig. 8.38 Inserting and wedging Mylar strip matrix. A, Strip with
concave area next to the preparation is positioned between teeth. B, Strip
in position and wedge inserted. The length of the Mylar strip can be
reduced as needed.
excess so that positive pressure can be applied with the matrix
strip when closed. Any gross excess is removed quickly with the
blade of the insertion instrument or an explorer tine before closing
the matrix.
he operator closes the lingual end of the matrix over the
composite and holds it with the index inger. Next, the operator
pulls the matrix toward the facial direction to ensure excellent
adaptation of the composite with the facial margin. Before light
curing the composite, the operator closes the facia l end of the
matrix over the tooth with the thumb and index inger of the
C
B
A
• Fig. 8.39 Using a triangular wood wedge to expose gingival margin
of large proximal preparation. A, The dam is stretched facially and gingi -
vally with the ingertip. B, Insertion of wedge (the dam is released during
wedge insertion). C, Wedge in place.
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
between layers if the surface has not been contaminated, and the
oxygen-inhibited layer remains.
With large restorations, it is better to add and light cure the
composite in several increments to r educe the efects of polymeriza -
tion shrinkage and to ensure complete light curing in remote
regions. If two adjacent preparations are present, the preparation
with the least access (usually the one prepared second) is restored
irst. Contouring of the proximal surface of the irst restoration
should be completed before the second restoration is started. Because
the second tooth preparation has been contaminated, it must be
cleaned (usually by use of the adhesive system etchant) before
bonding materials and composite are applied. During these pro -
cedures, a Mylar matrix or piece of Telon tape should be in place
to protect adjacent surfaces.
Finishing and Polishing of the Composite
Good technique and experience in inserting composites signiicantly
reduce the amount of inishing required. Usually a slight excess
of material will need to be removed so as to provide correct contours.
Similar to tooth preparation rotary instruments, inishing and
polishing instruments should be used according to the speciic
surface being inished and polished. For example, lex ible discs
and inishing strips are suitable for convex and lat surfaces; ovalshaped inishing burs and polishing points are more suitable for
concave surfaces; and polishing cups can be used in both convex
and concave surfaces.
Coarse diamond instruments may be used to eiciently remove
gross excess, but leave a rough surface on the restoration and
the tooth. A lame-shaped carbide inishing bur or diamond is
recommended for removing excess composite on facial surfaces.
Medium speed with light intermittent brush strokes and air
coolant are used to create correct contours. Special ine diamond
finishing instruments, 12-bladed carbide finishing burs, and
abrasive inishing disks may then be used to obtain excellent
surface smoothness if the manufacturers’ instructions are fol -
lowed. Care must be exercised with all rotary instruments so as
to prevent damage to the tooth structure, especially at the gingival
marginal areas.
Abrasive discs (the degree of abrasiveness depends on the amount
of excess to be removed) mounted on a mandrel speciic to the
disc type, in a contra-angle handpiece at low speed, can be used
instead of or after the inishing bur or diamond in facial surfaces
and some interproximal and incisal embrasures ( Fig. 8.41A ). Several
brands of abrasive discs are available, and most are efective when
used correctly . hese discs are lexible and are pr oduced in diferent
diameters, thicknesses, and abrasive textur es. hin discs with small
diameters it into embrasure areas easily and are especially useful
in inishing and polishing accessible embrasure areas. Regardless
of the type of disc chosen, discs are used sequentially from coarse
to very ine grit so as to generate a smooth, inal sur face. he
external enamel surface should act as a guide for proper contour
and surface texture. A constant shifting motion aid s in contouring
and preventing the development of a lat surface. Final polishing
is initiated after correct contours and surface texture have been
achieved and is accomplished with rubber or silicone polishing
instruments, diamond-impregnated polishers, polishing discs, and
polishing pastes.
Excess lingual composite is removed using a round or ovalshaped, 12-bladed carbide inishing bur or inishing diamond. A
smoother surface is produced using a iner round or oval carbide
inishing bur (with 18–24 or 30–40 blades) or ine diamond at
medium speed with air coolant and light intermittent pressure other hand, tightening the gingival aspect of the matrix ahead
of the incisal por tion. he closed matrix is manually shifted so
as to provide proximal contours that allow normal embrasure
form and contact with the adjacent tooth, and the composite is
light cured.
he composite is light cured through the matrix as directed
(see Fig. 8.40C ). he matrix should not be touched with the tip
of the light initially because it could distort the contour of the
restoration. he operator remov es the index inger and light cures
the lingual surface. Longer light exposures usually are required for
the polymerization of dark and opaque shades. If the restoration
is undercontoured, more composite can be added to the previously
placed composite and light cured. No etching or adhesive is required
C
B
A
• Fig. 8.40 Insertion of light-cured composite. A, Bonding adhesive is
applied and light cured. B, The lingual aspect of the strip is secured with
the index inger, while the facial portion is relected away for access. C,
After insertion of the composite, the matrix strip is closed and the material
is cured through the strip.
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
D
B
C
A
F E
• Fig. 8.41 Finishing composites. A, Abrasive disk mounted on mandrel can be used for inishing when
access permits. B, The round carbide inishing bur is well suited for inishing lingual surfaces. C, The No.
12 surgical blade in Bard-Parker handle can be used for removing interproximal excess. D, The abrasive
strip should be curved over the area to be inished. E and F, Replacement of old composite restoration,
before (E) and after (F).
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
(see Fig. 8.41B ). he appropriate size and shape depend on the
amount of excess and shape of the lingual surface. Polishing is
achieved with rubber polishing instruments and diam ondimpregnated polishers.
Proximal surface contours and margins should be assessed visually
and tactilely with an explorer and unwaxed, ultrathin dental loss.
he loss is positioned apical to the gingival margin, adapted to
the convex tooth surface, and slowly moved in an occlusal direction
across the gingival tooth-restoration interface. he loss will begin
to separate (catch, fray) as an indication of excess adhesive,
composite, or other marginal defect. A No. 12 surgical blade
mounted in a Bard-Parker handle (see Fig. 8.41C ) is well suited
for removing excess material from the gingival proximal area as it
is thin and has a curved shape consistent with natural embrasure
contours. he instrument should be moved from the tooth to the
restoration or along the margins, using light shaving strokes, keeping
a portion of the cutting edge on the external enamel surface as a
guide to prevent overreduction. If a large amount of composite is
removed with one stroke or in the wrong direction, it may com -
promise the restoration interface resulting in a marginal defect or
void. Immediate correction of this area is indicated so as to limit
the potential for plaque/debris accumulation resulting in additional
caries and/or discoloration. Rotary instruments especially designed
for this task are also available and can be used for removing excess
and the creation of correct embrasure contours. Careless use of
rotary instrumentation increases the risk of producing an under -
contoured (“ledged”) area just adjacent to the contact. All carbide
instruments are made of carbon steel and may leave gray marks
on the r estoration. his discoloration is supericial and is removed
easily during the inal inishing by abrasive strips or discs (see
Fig. 8.41D ).
Further contouring of proximal surfaces may be completed
with abrasive materials such as Sof-Lex Finishing Strips. hese
inishing strips have two diferent sizes of abrasive particles (e.g.,
medium and ine) impregnated on opposing ends of a polyester
strip, with a small in-between area where no abrasive is present.
he centrally located, nonabrasive area allows easy and safe passage
of the strip through the contact area and apically to the gingival
area in need of additional contouring. If the intensity of the
contact is too great, then the inishing strip may need to be passed
under the contact so as to position it for inishing the gingival/
proximal contours. In addition, thin diamond-coated metal strips
also are commercially available in various grits. Diferent widths
of strips are available and the size of the strip must be selected
based on the contouring needs of the particular situation. he
strip should be curved over the restoration and tooth surface in
a fashion similar to that used with a shoeshine cloth, concentrat -
ing on areas that need attention (see Fig. 8.41D ). To open the
lingual embrasure or round the marginal ridge, the lingual part
of the strip is held against the composite with the index inger of
one hand, while the other end of the strip is pulled facially with
the other hand. Caution must be used so as to prevent gingival
damage and/or excessive removal of the carefully created composite
contours.
Finally, occlusion should be carefully checked after the rubber
dam is removed, if one was used. he operator evaluates the
occlusion in maximum intercuspation and eccentric movements
by having the patient close on a piece of articulating paper and
slide mandibular teeth over the restored area. If excess composite
is present, the operator removes only a small amount at a time
and rechecks with articulating paper. Usually, occlusion is adj usted
until it does not difer from the original occlusion.Instead of working sequentially by surface as previously described
(facial, lingual, proximal, and occlusal), the operator may elect to
work by instrument sequence—that is, contour all surfaces of the
restoration by using inishing instruments irst and then proceed
to polish all surfaces by using the polishing instruments described.
his approach improves eiciency of the overall procedure by
limiting the number of times a inishing or polishing instrument
is changed. Fig. 8.41E and F show before and after replacement
of a Class III composite restoration.
Clinical Technique for Cla IV Direct
Compoite Retoration
Initial Clinical Procedure
he same initial procedure considerations presented earlier are
appropriate for Class IV direct composite restorations. he preopera -
tive assessment of the occlusion is even more important for Class
IV restorations because it might inluence the tooth preparation
extension (placing margins in noncontact areas) and retention and
resistance form features (heavy occlusion requires increased retention
and resistance form).
Also, proper shade selection can be more diicult for large Class
IV restorations. Use of separate translucent and opaque shades of
composite is often necessary. Speciic information for esthetic
considerations is presented in Chapters 7 and 9.
For large Class IV lesions or fractures, a preoperative impression
may be taken to be used as a template for developing the restoration
contours. his technique is described later in the chapter.
Tooth Preparation
Similar to the Class III preparation, the tooth preparation for a
Class IV direct composite restoration involves (1) creating access
to the defective structure (caries lesion, fracture, noncarious defect),
(2) removing faulty structures (carious tissue removals, defective
dentin and enamel, defective restoration, and base material), and
(3) creating the convenience form for the restoration ( Fig. 8.42A
and B ). he tooth preparation for large incisoproximal areas requires
more attention to the retention form than that for a small Class
IV defect (see Fig. 8.42C and D ). If a large amount of tooth
structure is missing and the restoration is in a high occlusal stress
area, groove retention form may be indicated even when the
preparation periphery is entirely in enamel. Also, enamel bevels
can be increased in width to provide greater surface area for etching,
resulting in a stronger bond between the composite and the tooth,
and potentially a better esthetic result. Fig. 8.42E and F show a
direct composite restoration of a Class IV defect.
he treatment of teeth with minor coronal fractures requires
minimal preparation. If the fracture is conined to enamel, adequate
retention usually can be attained by simply beveling the sharp
cavosurface margins in the fractured area with a lame-shaped
diamond instrument followed by bonding ( Fig. 8.43 ). Regardless
of its size, the extensions of the Class IV direct composite preparation
are ultimately dictated by the extension of the caries lesion, fracture,
or failed restoration being replaced. he outline form is prepared
to include weakened, friable enamel.
Preparation of a maxillary right central incisor with a large Class
IV defect and fractured mesioincisal corner, which necessitates a
Class IV restoration, is illustrated in Fig. 8.44 . he outline form
is prepared using a round carbide bur or diamond instrument of
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
Retorative Technique
Matrix Application
Most Class IV composite restorations requir e a matrix to conine
the restorative material and to assist in the development of the
appropriate axial tooth contours, except for very small incisal edge
enamel fractures, which can be restored using a fre e-hand technique.
he Mylar matrix, described previously, also can be used for most
Class IV preparations, although matrix lexibility makes control
diicult. his diiculty may result in an overcontoured or under -
contoured restoration, open contact, or both. Also, composite
material extrudes incisally, but this excess can be easily removed
when contouring and inishing.
Creasing (folding) the matrix at the position of the lingual line
angle helps reduce the potential undercontouring (rounding) of
that area of the r estoration. he matrix is positioned and wedged
as described for the Class III composite technique. Gingival
overhangs and open contacts are common with any matrix technique
that does not employ gingival wedging. A commercially available
preformed plastic or celluloid crown form is usually too thick and
is not recommended as a matrix. Alternatively, a custom lingual
matrix may be used for large Class IV preparations.57 Fig. 8.45A
illustrates a large defective distofacial Class IV that needs to be
replaced. he shade should be selected before isolating the area
and removing the restorative material (see Fig. 8.45B ). Fig. 8.45C
shows a lingual view of the defective restoration after a rubber
dam has been placed. Before the existing restoration is removed,
the lingual matrix is prepared with either a polyvinyl siloxane appropriate size at high speed with air-water coolant. All weakened
enamel is removed, and the initial axial wall depth is established.
As with the Class III tooth pr eparation, the inal tooth preparation
steps for a Class IV tooth preparation are, when indicated, (1)
selective carious tissue removal (if present), (2) pulp protection
(if needed), (3) bevel placement on accessible enamel margins,
and (4) inal procedur es of cleaning and inspecting. he operator
bevels the cavosurface margin of all accessible enamel margins of
the preparation. he bevel is prepared at a 45-degree angle to the
external tooth surface with a lame-shaped or round diamond
instrument (see Fig. 8.44A ). he width of the bevel should be 0.5
to 2 mm, depending on the amount of tooth structure missing
and the retention perceived necessary. he use of a scalloped,
nonlinear bevel sometimes helps in masking the restoration
margin.
Although retention for most Class IV direct composite restora -
tions is provided primarily by bonding of the composite to enamel
and dentin, when large incisoproximal areas are being restored,
additional mechanical retention may be obtained by groove-shaped
or other forms of undercuts, dovetail extensions, or a combination
of these. If retention undercuts are deemed necessary, a gingival
retention groove is prepared using a No. 14 round bur. It is prepared
0.2 mm inside the DEJ at a depth of 0.25 mm (half the diameter
of the No. 14 round bur). his groove should extend the length of
the gingival loor and slightly up the facioaxial and linguoaxial line
angles (see Fig. 8.44B ). No retentive undercut is usually needed at
the incisal area, where mostly enamel exists. Fig. 8.44C illustrates
the completed large Class IV tooth preparation.
F E
CD
AB
• Fig. 8.42 Preparation designs for Class IV (A and B), and larger preparation designs for Class IV
(C and D). E and F, Direct composite restoration of a Class IV defect, before (E) and after (F).
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
E
F
G
H
AB
C
D
• Fig. 8.43 Class IV tooth preparation and restoration. A, Extraoral view, minor traumatic fracture. B,
Intraoral view. C, Fractured enamel is roughened with a lame-shaped diamond instrument. D, The con -
servative preparation is etched, while adjacent teeth are protected with Mylar strip. E and F, Contouring
and polishing the composite. G, Intraoral view of the completed restoration. H, Extraoral view.
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
matrix technique is used, adhesive placement should occur before
seating the matrix.
Insertion and Light Curing of Composite
After application of the adhesive, the operator inserts the composite
with a hand instrument or a syringe as described earlier for Class
III restorations. he composite is inserted in increments less than
2 mm thick. It is usually helpful to develop the lingual surface of
the r estoration irst, then its body, and inally the facial surface.
his approach facilitates the development of adequate anatomy
with less potential for resultant excess composite material. his
anatomic incremental layering also facilitates the development
of adequate shade characterization, as dentin and e namel com -
posite shades can be applied according to the structure they are
replacing.
When using a properly contoured Mylar matrix, care must be
taken when closing the matrix not to pull with excessive force
because the soft material is extruded incisally and results i n an
undercontoured restoration. When this happens, composite should
be added to restore proper contour and contact.
When a custom lingual matrix is used, the operator positions
the lingual matrix and inserts the initial composite increment
against the matrix in the lingual part of the preparation (see Fig.
8.45E ). This initial increment, when polymerized, generally
establishes the lingual, pro ximal, and incisal contours of the inal
restoration (see Fig. 8.45F ). he operator continues to place and
light cure additional increments until the desired f orm is obtained
(see Fig. 8.45G ). During these additions, color modiiers or tints
may be incorporated to enhance the natural blue opalescence
between tooth lobes or other subtle esthetic efects (see Fig. 8.45H ).
Because light-cured composites possess the advantage of an extended
working time, the material can be manipulated and shaped to a
considerable degree before light curing. Incremental insertion of
light-cured composites also enables the clinician t o layer composites
with diferent optical properties (more opaque, darker in color, or
both, to mimic dentin; and more translucent, lighter in color, or
both, to mimic enamel), which can result in natural-looking
composite restorations. After polymerization, the lingual matrix
is removed. To ensure optimal polymerization, the operator light
cures the restoration from facial and lingual dir ections. he inal
restoration is illustrated in Fig. 8.45I and J . his technique is
particularly useful when the lingual contour of an existing composite
restoration is to be duplicated in a new composite restoration,
such as the case described. he technique facilitates the development
of proper lingual, incisal, and proximal forms, reducing the need
for contouring of the restoration.
Finishing and Polishing of the Composite
Finishing and polishing the Class IV composite are similar to the
technique described for a Class III composite but usually more
diicult. he primary diferences are the involvement of the incisal
angle and incisal edge of the tooth and an extended facial surface
in large Class IV restorations. Finishing and polishing these sections
of the restoration require similar procedural steps but close assess -
ment of the incisal edge length and thickness, as well as of the
facial macroanatomy and microanatomy of the tooth being restored.
he functional demands of anterior guidance will have a direct
inluence on the inal position and contours of the lingual surface
and incisal edge. Careful adjustment and reinement will prevent
excessive occlusal loading of the restoration and limit the potential
for premature clinical failure. he facial, lingual, and proximal
areas are inished and polished as described previously.impression putty or a fast-set silicone matrix material. he operator
records the lingual and incisal contours of the existing restoration
by using a small amount of the silicone material, thus creating a
guide or index with which the new restoration will be formed.
he lingual matrix also can be fabricated from a quickly inserted
mockup restoration or waxed study model for more complex cases
when tooth structure is missing preoperatively. When obtained,
the lingual matrix is set aside until it is time to insert the composite.
Fig. 8.45D-E illustrate how the lingual matrix its with the tooth
preparation.
Placement of the Adhesive
Steps for placing the adhesive are the same as previously described
for the Class III composite restoration. Also, the same considerations
presented previously are appropriate for whether or not the matrix
is placed before or after adhesive placement. When the lingual
C
B
A
• Fig. 8.44 Class IV tooth preparation. A, Beveling cavosurface margin
of a large Class IV preparation. B, Gingival retention groove. C, Completed
Class IV tooth preparation.
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
A
B
D
F
H
J
C
E
G
I
• Fig. 8.45 Custom lingual matrix. A, Facial preoperative view. B, Preoperative shade determination.
C, Lingual preoperative view after placement of the rubber dam. D, The old composite material is removed,
and a conservative enamel bevel is placed. E, The lingual matrix obtained before tooth preparation is
positioned and guides the application of the irst lingual composite layer. F, The lingual composite layer
determines the future contours of the restoration; note the intrinsic material translucency. Custom lingual
matrix. G, The dentin buildup can be made directly against the lingual enamel; the clinician can visualize
the whole tooth shape and place dentin with appropriate thickness and relation to the incisal edge.
H, Color modiier or tint blue material is applied between the dentin lobes and slightly below the incisal
edge to simulate the blue natural opalescence. I, View of the completed restoration (with second enamel
layer placed on the buccal surface), after inishing. J, Facial postoperative view. (Courtesy of Dr. Didier
Dietschi.)
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
than for conservative Class V defects, especially when little enamel
is available for bonding. Areas of hypermineralized (sclerotic) dentin
also may require special attention, as these r espond diferently to
bonding than areas with normal dentin.58-60 Enamel bevels are
typically used on the occlusal/incisal margins of the preparation,
while at the cervical margin, bevels are usually not recommended
because of the absence of enamel in this area. Class V tooth
preparations will vary slightly, depending on the type and extension
of the defect being restored.
he objective of the Class V tooth preparation for small or
moderate lesions or defects that do not extend onto the root surface
is to restore the lesion or defect as conservatively as possible. No
efort is made to prepare the walls as butt joints, and usually
no secondary retentive features ar e incorporated. he lesion or
defect is conservatively prepared resulting in a form that may
have a div ergent wall coniguration and an axial surface that
usually is not uniform in depth ( Fig. 8.46A and B ). Small or
moderate Class V tooth preparations are ideal for small enamel
defects or small primary caries lesions ( Fig. 8.47A ). hese include
decalc iied and hypoplastic areas located in the cervical third
of the teeth, which may be restored for esthetic r easons. he
typical outline form for a Class V lesion in enamel is shown in
Fig. 8.48 .
After the usual preliminary procedures, the initial tooth prepara -
tion is accomplished with a round diamond or carbide bur, eliminat -
ing the entire enamel lesion or defect. he preparation is extended
into dentin only when the defect warrants such extension. No
efort is made to prepare 90-degree cavosurface margins. If carious
tissue remains in dentin, it is selectively removed with a round
bur or spoon excavator. Usually, this preparation t echnique will
result in a slightly beveled enamel margin. If deemed necessary,
the enamel margin can be further bev eled. he completed restoration
is shown in Fig. 8.47B .
An example of a small cervical caries lesion was presented in
Fig. 8.49A , which illustrates a path of a decalciied enamel lesion
(in enamel only) having a broken, rough surface that extends
mesially or distally from the cavitated lesion (or failing existing
restoration). After preparation of the cavitated lesion (or failing
restoration), the margins of the preparation are extended to
include these areas of decalciication by using a round diamond
or bur to prepare the cavosurface margin in the form of a
chamfer, extended in the enamel only to a depth tha t removes
the defect. A completed preparation of this type was illustrated in
Fig. 8.49B .Clinical Technique for Cla V Direct
Compoite Retoration
Initial Clinical Procedure
he same initial procedure considerations presented for Class III
restorations apply for Class V restorations, except for occlusal
evaluation, which is not required for Class V restorations unless
there are concerns about occlusal factors as an etiology for noncarious
cervical lesions. During shade selection, it should be noted that
the tooth is typically darker and more opaque in the cervical third.
Isolation may be achieved by a rubber dam and No. retainer
or with a cotton roll and retraction cord.
Tooth Preparation
Class V tooth preparations, by de inition, are located in the gingival
one third of the facial and lingual tooth surfaces. Because of esthetic
considerations, composites most frequently are used for the restora -
tion of cervical caries lesions in anterior and premolar teeth.
Numerous factors, including esthetics, nature of lesion and substrate
characteristics, caries activity, caries risk, access to the lesion, and
moisture control must be taken into consideration in material
selection.
Because many Class V restorations involve root surfaces, at
least on their cervical margins, careful consideration should be
given to the choice of restorativ e material. he use of materials
other than composite (i.e., that do not require adhesive placement)
should be considered when factors that may compromise the
performance of composite restorations are present. hese factors
include decreased salivary function, decreased patient motivation
or ability for home care, increased diiculty in adequately isolating
the operating area, and increased diiculty in performing the
operative procedure because of the patient’s physical or medical
problems. Despite these concerns, the use of composite as a
restorative material for cervical caries lesions predominates in areas
of esthetic concern.
Similar to the Class III and IV preparations, tooth preparation
for a Class V direct composite restoration involves (1) creating
access to the defect (caries lesion, noncarious defect), (2) removing
the defect (caries lesion, defective dentin and enamel, defective
restoration and base material), and (3) creating the convenience
form for the restoration. he tooth preparation for large Class V
lesions or defects may require more attention to retention form
CD
AB
• Fig. 8.46 Preparation designs for Class V (A and B) initial composite restorations (primary caries) and
larger preparation designs for Class V (C and D) restorations.
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
A
B
• Fig. 8.48 A, Class V caries. B, Typical outline form.
A B
• Fig. 8.47 Class V tooth preparation. A, Small cavitated Class V lesion. B, Restored with composite
resin. (Courtesy Vilhelm G. Ólafsson.)
Small or moderate Class V tooth preparations also are used to
restore noncarious cervical lesions (NCCLs). As noted elsewhere
in this textbook, NCCLs have a multifactorial etiology in which
contributing factors include intrinsic and/or extrinsic erosion,
abrasion, abfraction, and/or biocorrosion.61 If the causative factors
are not eliminated, these lesions tend to progress and enlarge with
time. When they are detected ( Fig. 8.50A ), the operator irst must
decide, with input from the patient, whether the area needs to be
restor ed. his decision is based on the following considerations.
Caries
If active caries is present, caries management should be initiated.
For the incipient lesion, treatment may consist of application of
a topical luoride or resin-based materials including adhesives and
resin iniltration materials. Inactive lesions may be monitored and
kept unrestored indeinitely, but sometimes these can be esthetically
unsatisfactory. (Most NCCLs are not carious.)
Gingival Health
If the defect is determined to be contributing to the development
of gingival inlammation and/or gingival recession ( i.e., plaque
retention, mechanical trauma due to poor tooth cont ours), the
defect should be restored.Esthetics
If the defect is in an esthetically critical position, the patient may
elect to have the area restored with a tooth-colored restoration.
Sensitivity
If the defect is very sensitive, application of an adhesive or desensitiz -
ing agent may reduce or eliminate the sensitivity, at least temporarily.
Continuing sensitivity may require restoration of the area.
Pulp Protection
If the defect is very large and deep pulpally, its restoration may
be indicated to avoid further defect development that may cause
a pulpal exposure.
Tooth Strength
If the defect is very large or deep, the strength of the tooth at the
cervical area may be compromised. Placement of a bonded restora -
tion reduces the potential for further progression of the defect and
may restore some of the lost strength.
Periodontal therapy with gingival grafts also may be considered
as a treatment option for these exposed root surfaces being used
solo or combined with the restorative therapy.
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
he tooth preparation for a Class V NCCL usually requires only
surface debridement of any exposed dentin and roughening/beveling
all enamel margins with a diamond instrument22 (see Fig. 8.50B ).
Often, because of the inherent form of an abraded or eroded
lesion, further preparation of root surface cavosurface margins is
not needed. he completed preparation with etched enamel is
shown in Fig. 8.50C .
In Class V tooth preparation for large lesions or defe cts that extend
onto the root surface (Fig. 8.51A ), the gingival aspect of the prepara -
tion form is similar to that described in Chapter 10 for a Class V
amalgam restoration. he features of the preparation include a
90-degree cavosurface margin. Groove retention form usually is
not necessary but may be used if retention of the restoration is a
concern. he enamel margins are prepared using the same design
described for small or moderate Class V tooth preparations, that
is, with a conservative enamel bevel. his preparation design is
indicated for the replacement of an existing, defective Class V
restoration that initially used a conventional preparation or for a
large, new caries lesion. he large Class V preparation initially
exhibits 90-degree cavosurface margins (that subsequently can be
beveled when in enamel) and an axial wall that may or may not be uniform in depth (see Fig. 8.47C and D ). he axial depth into
dentin is determined by the selective removal of the carious tissue.
Many of these larger preparations are a combination of beveled
enamel margins and 90-degree root surface cavosurface margins.
A completed large Class V preparation extending onto the root
surface is illustrated in Fig. 8.52 .
To initiate the preparation, a taper ed issure carbide bur (No.
) or similarly shaped diamond is used at high speed with
air-water spray. If interproximal or gingival access is limited, an
appropriately sized round bur or diamond may be used. When a
tapered issure bur or diamond is used, the handpiece is maneuvered
to maintain the bur’s long axis perpendicular to the external surface
of the tooth during preparation of the outline form, which should
result in 90-degree cavosurface margins. At this initial tooth
preparation stage, the extensions in every direction are to sound
tooth structure. Deeper areas of the caries lesion or old restoration
may still remain in the axial wall at this point in the procedure
(see Fig. 8.51B ). Carious tissue remaining on this initial axial wall
is selectively removed during the inal stage of tooth preparation
(see Fig. 8.51C ). Old restorative material remaining may or may
not be removed according to the concepts stated previously. When
the desired distal extension is obtained, the instrument is moved
mesially, incisally (occlusally), and gingivally for indicated extensions,
while maintaining proper depth and the instrument’s long axis
perpendicular to the external surface. he axial wall should follow
the original contour of the facial or lingual surface, which is convex
outward mesiodistally and sometimes occlusogingivally. he outline
form extension of the mesial, distal, occlusal (incisal), and gingival
walls is dictated by the extent of the caries lesion, defect, or old
restorative material indicated for replacement (sometimes the new
material abuts a still satisfactory old restoration).
All of the external preparation walls of a Class V tooth prepara -
tion are visible when viewed from a facial position (outwardly
divergent walls). Final tooth preparation consists of the following
steps: (1) removing the remaining carious dentin or old restorative
material (if indicated) on the axial wall; (2) applying a base, only
if necessary, as discussed previously in this chapter; and (3) beveling
the enamel margins and adding groove retention, if indicated. he
bevel on the enamel margin is accomplished with a lame-shaped
or round diamond instrument, resulting in an angle approximately
45 degrees to the external tooth surface, and prepared to a width
of at least 0.5 mm depending on the preparation size and esthetic
considerations. A completed Class V preparation is shown in
Fig. 8.53 .
Occasionally, a tooth surface that normally is smooth has a pit
in the enamel ( Fig. 8.54A ). Most unusual pit faults in enamel are
restored best with the preparation design described for small or
moderate Class V defects. For such a preparation for an unusual
pit fault, the outline form (extensions and depth) is dictated by
the extent of the fault or caries lesion. Faults existing entirely in
enamel are prepared with an appropriately sized round diamond
instrument by merely eliminating the defect leaving a lared enamel
margin (see Fig. 8.54B ). Adequate retention is obtained by bonding.
When the defect includes carious dentin, the tissue is selectively
removed as indicated.
Retorative Technique
In most cases no matrix is needed for Class V restorations because
the contour can be controlled as the composite restorative material
is being inserted. However, clear precontoured Class V matrix materials
are available if the operator prefers a matrix-assisted technique.
A
B
• Fig. 8.49 A, Decalciied area extending mesially from cavitated Class
V lesion. B, Completed Class V preparation with conservative mesial
extension.
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
E
GF
H
D
A B C
• Fig. 8.50 Class V tooth preparation for abrasion and erosion lesions. A, Preoperative notched lesion.
B, Beveling the enamel margin. C, Completed preparation with etched enamel. Restoration of a noncari -
ous cervical lesion. D, After application of bonding adhesive, composite resin is inserted incrementally
and the restorative material is light cured. Finishing and polishing. E, Flame-shaped inishing bur removing
excess and contouring. F and G, Rubber polishing point (F) and aluminum oxide polishing paste (G) used
for inal polishing. H, Completed restoration.
Placement of the Adhesive
he techniques for acid etching of the involved toot h structure
and placement of the adhesive are the same as previously described
in this chapter.
Insertion and Light Curing of the Composite
he composite can be inserted with a hand instrument or syringe.
Composites and RMGIs are recommended for Class V restorations.
A light-cured material is recommended for most Class V preparations
because of the extended working time and control of contour
before polymerization. Careful placement allows for minimal need
of rotar y inishing. hese features are particularly valuable when
restoring large preparations or preparations with margins located
on cementum because rotary instrumentation can easily damage
the contiguous tooth structure and/or compromise the marginal
integrity of the restoration.
After bonding procedures (according to manufacturer’s instruc -
tions), it is recommended to insert the composite incrementally
with a hand instrument or syringe. he number and position of
the increments depend on the size and depth of the preparation.
For large and deep preparations, an incremental technique is recom -
mended. Deep preparations with retentive undercuts are usually
illed with at least two axially placed increments with minimal
contact on the occlusal/incisal and gingival walls. he operator
should avoid placing increments that connect to both occlusal/incisal walls and gingival walls, or mesial and distal walls, simultane -
ously, so as to minimize polymerization shrinkage stresses. Regardless
of the technique used, before light curing the last increment that
deines the contour of the restoration, the material is shaped as
close to the inal contour as possible. An explorer or blade of a
composite instrument, or a lat No. 2 sable brush, is useful in
removing excess material from the cervical margin and obtaining
the inal contour. As noted earlier, clear plastic matrices are available
for Class V composite restorations and can be used if the operator
prefers a matrix-assisted approach rather than a free-hand technique.
he light source is applied for polymerization (see Fig. 8.50D ).
he restoration should require very little inishing.
Finishing and Polishing of the Composite
When excess composite is present, a lame-shaped car bide inishing
bur or diamond is recommended for removing excess composite
on the facial surface (see Fig. 8.50E ). Medium speed with light
intermittent brush strokes and an air coolant are used for inishing
the restoration to the correct contours. Final polishing is achieved
with a rubber polishing point (see Fig. 8.50F ) or cup, diamondimpregnated polisher, and sometimes a polishing paste (see Fig.
8.50G and H ).
For some locations, abrasive discs, as stated earlier, mounted
on an appropriate mandrel in an angled handpiece at low speed
can be used (see Fig. 8.41A ). he degree of abrasiveness depends
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
• Fig. 8.52 Completed Class V tooth preparation extending onto the
root; the incisal margin is beveled; the root portion has a retention groove
for increased retention. Retention grooves on the incisal aspect are rarely
required and are shown here for illustration purposes only.
E D
AB C
• Fig. 8.51 Class V tooth preparation. A, Lesion extending onto root surface. B, Initial tooth preparation
with 90-degree cavosurface margins and axial wall depth of 0.75 mm. C, Remaining infected dentin
excavated, and incisal enamel margin beveled. D and E, Direct composite restoration of three Class V
lesions with composite resin, before (D) and after (E). (D and E, Courtesy Vilhelm G. Ólafsson.)
• Fig. 8.53 Completed large Class V preparation. A retention groove on
the incisal aspect is rarely required and is shown here for illustration pur -
poses only.
on the amount of excess to be remov ed. he external enamel
surface should act as a guide for a proper contour, preventing the
development of a lat surface contour.
Rotary instruments should be used carefully in ging ival locations
(especially on margins adjacent to the root surface) to prevent inadvertent and undesirable damage to tooth structure and peri -
odontal tissues. Finely pointed rotary instruments (inishing burs
or diamonds) are diicult to use to remove gingival margin excess.
Because of the convexity that typically exists in this area, a more
rounded rotary instrument (a ine diamond) may remove the excess
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
with less potential to damage the unprepared root surface. L ikewise,
abrasive discs used on the root surface may cause ditching of the
cementum, if not used correctly. Fig. 8.51D and E show restoration
of a Class V lesion with composite resin.
Clinical Technique for Cla VI Direct
Compoite Retoration
One of the most conservative indications for a directly placed
posterior composite is a small faulty developmental pit located on
a cusp tip. Fig. 8.55A is an example of a Class VI defect on the
facial cusp tip of a maxillary premolar. he typical Class VI tooth
preparation should be as small in diameter and as shallow in depth
as possible. he faulty pit is entered with an appropriate round
bur or diamond oriented perpendicular to the surface and extended
pulpally to eliminate the lesion (see Fig. 8.55B ). Visual examination
and probing with an explorer often reveal that the fault is limited
to enamel because the enamel in this area is quite thick. If a faulty
restoration or extensive caries lesion is present on the cusp tip, a
round bur of appropriate size is used to remove the faulty restoration
or any remaining carious tissue. Stains that appear through the
translucent enamel should be removed; otherwise they may be
seen after the composite restoration is completed. Some undermined,
but not friable, enamel may be left and bonded to the composite
in areas that are not associated with a functional occlusal contact.
he conservative preparation is restored with composite following
adhesion protocols, incremental placement and light curing of the
composite material, and inishing and polishing. he inal Class
VI restoration should, as with any other type of restoration, restore
the tooth to its ideal anatomy relative to tooth contours, occlusion,
esthetics, and surface characteristics ( Fig. 8.55C ).
Clinical Technique for Gla
Ionomer Retoration
Glass ionomers possess the favorable quality of releasing luoride
when exposed to the oral environment.62,63 hese materials also
A
B
• Fig. 8.54 A, Faulty pit on the facial surface of the maxillary incisor. B, Tooth preparation for an enamel
pit defect.
have been shown to “recharge” with luoride when exposed to
luoride from various sources.64 hese properties theoretically may
indicate the use of glass ionomer restorations in patients with high
caries risk especially when esthetic demands are minimal. (See
Chapter 13 for types of glass ionomers.)
Because of their limited strength and wear resistance, glass
ionomers are indicated generally for the restoration of low-stress
areas ( not for typical Class I, II, or IV restorations), where caries
activity potential is of signiicant concern. In addition to being
indicated for root-surface caries lesions in Class V locations, slotlike
preparations in Class II or III cervical locations (not involving the
proximal contact) may be restored with glass ionomers, if access
permits.
he restoration of caries lesions on the roots of patients with
active caries is the primary indication for the use of a glass ionomer
as a restorative material. Cervical defects of idiopathic erosion
or abrasion origin (or any combination) also may be indications
for restoration with glass ionomers, if esthetic demands are not
critical. he tooth preparations for either of these clinical indications
are the same as previously described for composite restorations
(see Figs. 8.50, 8.51, and 8.52 ), except bevels are rarely used.
Gingival recession and interproximal gingival inlammation also
increase the risk of developing caries on proximal root surfaces.
Gingival recession sometimes provides access to this type of
caries lesion from the facial or lingual direction, allowing a slot
preparation to be used. he same slot preparation design used
for amalgam is used for glass ionomers. (he reader is referred
to the sections on slot preparations in Chapter 10 and to Fig.
8.56 for speciic details.) With the exception of the matrix used
(if needed), slot preparations for Class II and III restorations are
restored in a single increment and in a similar manner to a Class V
preparation.
Most conventional glass ionomer systems require mild dentin
conditioning to remove the smear layer, efecting improved adhe -
sion of the glass ionomer to dentin. To condition dentin, a mild
acid, such as 10% polyacrylic acid, is applied to the preparation
according to manufacturer’s instructions, followed by rinsing and
removal of excess water, leaving dentin slightly moist. Some modiied
glass ionomer materials may have a substantial resin component
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
Most current restorative GICs and RMGIs available may be
inished and polished immediately after light or complete chemical/
dual curing. When the material has set, the matrix, if used, is
removed and the gross excess is shaved away with a No. 12 surgical
blade. Finishing should be accomplished as much as possible with
hand instruments, while striving to preserve the smooth surface
that occurs on setting. If rotary instrumentation is needed, care
must be taken not to dehydrate the surface of the r estoration.
Also, lexible abrasiv e discs used with a lubricant can be efective.
A ine-grit aluminum oxide polishing paste applied with a prophy
cup is used to impart a smooth surface. Fig. 8.57 shows a con -
ventional glass ionomer restoration with a modiied matrix band.
he Tolemire matrix band was adapted around the tooth and an
access hole was created using a No. 2 round bur. he conventional
glass ionomer material was then injected into the p reparation
through the access hole until the material illed into the preparation
space and excess material extruded through the access. Suicient
time was allowed for the material to set before inishing the surface
with a No. 12 blade.
Repairing Compoite Retoration
If a patient presents with a composite restoration that has a local -
ized defect, a repair usually can be made.65,66 Easily accessible
areas may be roughened with a diamond; the area is etched; an
appropriate adhesive is applied; and the composite is inserted,
inished, and polished. If the defect is not easily accessible, a tooth
preparation must be created that exposes the defective area, and
a matrix may be necessary; the adhesive and the composite are
then placed.
If a void is detected immediately after insertion of a composite
restoration, but before contouring is initiated, more composite
may be added directly to the void ar ea. hese materials bond
because the void area has an oxygen-inhibited surface layer that
permits composite additions. If any contouring has occurred,
however, the oxygen-inhibited layer may have been removed or
contaminated, and the area must be “refreshed” by a brief etch/
rinse cycle and reapplication of the adhesive prior to the addition
of more composite.
Common Problem :Caue and
Potential Solution
his section lists the causes of common problems associated with
some composite restorations and potential solutions to those
problems.
White Line Adjacent to the Enamel Margin
A white line adjacent to the enamel margin of a direct composite
restoration is usually caused by a microseparation (space) between
the composite and the tooth or a microfracture within the marginal
enamel, either of which is typically caused by:
• Inadequate etching and bonding of the afected area
• High-intensity, fast light curing resulting in excessive polymeriza -
tion stresses
• T raumatic inishing techniques
Potential solutions are as follows:
• Use atraumatic inishing techniques (e.g., light intermittent
pressure)
• Use proper polymerization techniques (see Chapter 6 )and require a special primer to facilitate bonding. Each system
should be used strictly according to the manufacturer’ s speciic
instructions.
Encapsulated glass ionomers, for triturator mixing, or paste–paste
materials are greatly preferred to powder and liquid materi als. Such
systems optimize and simplify the mixing procedure. Glass ionomer
material should be placed into the preparation in slight excess and
quickly shaped with a composite instrument. Clear plastic cervical
matrices also are available for providing contour to the restoration.
If a conventional glass ionomer is used, a thin coat of light-cured,
resin-based coating is placed on the surface immediately after
placement to limit dehydration and resultant disintegration (“crack -
ing”) of the restoration during the initial setting phase. Newer
glass ionomers may be more resistant to dehydration; however,
careful attention to manufacturer’s instructions for restoration
placement is paramount.
C
B
A
• Fig. 8.55 Class VI tooth preparation for composite restoration.
A, Class VI preparation on the lingual cusp tip of the maxillary premolar. B,
Entry with small round bur or diamond. C, Final composite restoration and
sealant placed in the occlusal groove. (Courtesy Vilhelm G. Ólafsson.)
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
Weak or Miing Proximal Contact
(Cla II, III, and IV)
Causes of weak and missing proximal contacts are as follows:
• Inadequately contoured matrix band
• Inadequate wedging, preoperatively and during the composite
insertion
• Matrix band movement during composite insertion or matrix
band not in direct contact with the adjacent proximal surface
• A circumferential matrix being used when restoring only one contact
• Adherence of composite to hand instruments during insertion
and resultant pulling away from matrix contact area
• Matrix band too thick
Potential solutions include the following:
• Contour the matrix material properly
• Have the matrix in contact with the adjacent toothSome of these small defects may not be clinically relevant and
can be monitored over time for signs of marginal deterioration.
However, often they need to be managed, as follows:
• Seal the gap with adhesive
• Conservatively remove the defect and re-restore
Void
Causes of voids include the following:
• Spaces left between increments during insertion (lamination
defects)
• Adherence of composite to hand instruments during placement
in the preparation, which is related to the previous item
Potential solutions are as follows:
• Use a more careful restorative technique
• Repair marginal voids by preparing the area and re-restoring
AB C
DELingual
cd
• Fig. 8.56 Class III tooth preparation for a lesion entirely on the root surface. A, Mesiodistal longitudinal
section illustrating a caries lesion. B, Initial tooth preparation. C, Tooth preparation with infected caries
dentin removed. D, Retention grooves shown in longitudinal section. Transverse section through plane
cd illustrates the contour of the axial wall and the direction of the facial and lingual walls. E, Preparing
the retention form to complete the tooth preparation.
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
Inaccurate Shade
Causes of an incorrect shade matching include the following:
• Inappropriate operatory lighting while selecting the shade
• Selection of shade after the tooth has dehydrated
• Shade tab not matching the actual composite shade
• Wrong shade utilized
Potential solutions are as follows:
• Use natural light when selecting shade, if possible
• Select the shade before isolating the tooth
• Place some of the selected shade on the tooth and cure preop -
eratively to verify shade selection
• Do not shine the operator light (overhead or attached to operator
loupes) directly on the area during shade selection
• Understand the typical zones of diferent shades for natural
teeth
Contouring and Finihing Problem
Causes of contouring and/or inishing problems are as follows:
• Inadequate anatomic tooth form (overcontour or undercontour
of the restoration)
• Improper selection of finishing instrument and improper
composite placement
• Iatrogenic damage to adjacent unprepared tooth structure
Potential solutions include the following:
• Have a proper matrix with appropriate axial and line angle
contours
• Create embrasures to match the adjacent tooth embrasure form
• Remember the outline form of the preparation
• Use a properly shaped inishing instrument for the area being
contoured
• Be careful with the use of rotary instruments to avoid adversely
afecting the structure of the adjacent tooth or teeth
• Do not use rotary instruments that leave roughened surfaces
Potoperative Senitivity
Postoperative sensitivity can result from the following:
• Aggressive tooth preparation (inadequate use of coolant systems,
ineicient cutting instruments)
• Incorrect use of adhesive systems
• Not using a liner/base when indicated
• Formation of microgaps secondary to excessive polymerization
shrinkage stress, particularly in situations of high C-factor
• Aggressive inishing of the restoration
Potential solutions include the following:
• Use careful tooth preparation technique
• Use liners/bases properly
• Use adhesive systems properly
• Use a desensitizer solution after dentin acid etching
• Insert and polymerize the composite material properly
• Finish the composite restoration properly
C
B
A
• Fig. 8.57 Conventional glass ionomer restoration with a modiied
matrix band is shown before (A), matrix band adapted with access hole
prepared into the band (B), and immediately postop (C). (Courtesy Vilhelm
G. Ólafsson.)
• Use adequate preoperative and insertion wedging technique
• Use a matrix system that places the matrix only around the
proximal surface to be restored
• Use a hand instrument to hold the matrix against the adjacent
tooth while curing incremental placements of composite
• Be careful with insertion technique
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
Summary
Direct composite restorations are increasingly used because of the
beneits accrued from adhesive bonding to tooth structure, esthetic
qualities, and almost universal clinical use. When accomplished
properly, a composite restoration is able to provid e excellent service
for many years. Composite is the material of choice for most Class
III and IV restorations and most esthetically demanding Class V restorations. When used in Class I and II restorations, however,
composites are more difficult and sensitive to the operator ’s
technique than are amalgam restorations. To achieve optimal clinical
results, the operating site must be free from contamination, and
the bonding technique and composite handling must be meticulous
in every way.
Reference
1. Bowen RL, inventor: Dental illing material comprising vinyl-silane
treated fused silica and a binder consisting of the reaction product
of bis-phenol and glycidyl acrylate. US patent 3,06, .
11/27/ .
2. Bowen RL: Adhesive bonding of various materials to hard tooth
tissues. 3. Bonding to dentin improved by pre-treat ment and the use
of surface-active comonomer. J Dent Res 44(5): – , .
3. Bowen RL: Adhesive bonding of various materials to hard tooth
tissues. II. Bonding to dentin promoted by a surfac e-active comonomer.
J Dent Res 44(5): – , .
4. Brudevold F , Buonocore M, Wileman W: A report on a resin composi -
tion capable of bonding to human dentin surfaces. J Dent Res
35(6): – , .
5. Casagrande L, Seminario AT, Correa MB, et al: Longevity and
associated risk factors in adhesive restorations of young permanent
teeth after complete and selective caries removal: a retrospective study.
Clin Oral Investig .
6. Demarco FF , Correa MB, Cenci MS, et al: Longevity of posterior
composite restorations: not only a matter of materials. Dent Mater
28(1):87– , .
7. Opdam N: Clinical trials: Randomization, completeness of data and
restoration longevity. Dent Mater 32(4): – , .
8. Opdam NJ, van de Sande FH, Bronkhorst E, et al: Longevity of
posterior composite restorations: a systematic revi ew and meta-analysis.
J Dent Res 93(10): – , .
9. Opdam NJ, Bronkhorst EM, Cenci MS, et al: Age of failed restorations:
A deceptive longevity parameter. J Dent 39(3): – , .
10. Ausiello P , De Gee AJ, Rengo S, et al: Fracture resistance of
endodontically-treated premolars adhesively restored. Am J Dent
10(5): – , .
11. Liberman R, Ben-Amar A, Gontar G, et al: he efect of posterior
composite restorations on the resistance of cavity walls to vertically
applied occlusal loads. J Oral Rehabil 17(1):99– , .
12. Ahovuo-Saloranta A, Hiiri A, Nordblad A, et al: Pit and issure
sealants for preventing dental decay in the permanent teeth of children
and adolescents. Cochrane Database Syst Rev (3):CD001830,
.
13. Simonsen RJ: Retention and efectiveness of a single application of
white sealant after 10 years. J Am Dent Assoc (1):31–36,
.
14. Swift EJ, Jr: he efect of sealants on dental caries: a review. J Am
Dent Assoc (6): – , .
15. Handelman SL, Leverett DH, Espeland MA, et al: Clinical radiographic
evaluation of sealed carious and sound tooth surfaces. J Am Dent
Assoc (5): – , .
16. Mertz-Fairhurst EJ, Smith CD, Williams JE, et al: Cariostatic and
ultraconservative sealed restorations: six-year results. Quintessence Int
(Berl) 23(12): – , .
17. Beauchamp J, Cauield PW, Crall JJ, et al: Evidence-based clinical
recommendations for the use of pit-and-issure sealants: a report of
the American Dental Association Council on Scientiic Afairs. J Am
Dent Assoc (3): – , .
18. Bendinskaite R, Peciuliene V, Brukiene V: A ive ye ars clinical evalu -
ation of sealed occlusal surfaces of molars. Stomatologija 12(3):87–92,
.19. Simonsen RJ: Preventive resin restorations (II). Quintessence Int Dent
Dig 9(2):95– , .
20. Simonsen RJ: Preventive resin restorations (I). Quintessence Int Dent
Dig 9(1):69–76, .
21. Simonsen RJ: Preventive resin restorations: three-year results. J Am
Dent Assoc (4): – , .
22. Perdigao J: Dentin bonding-variables related to the clinical situation
and the substrate treatment. Dent Mater 26(2):e24–e37, .
23. Peumans M, De Munck J, Mine A, et al: Clinical efectiveness of
contemporary adhesives for the restoration of non-carious cervical
lesions. A systematic review. Dent Mater 30(10): – ,
.
24. Peumans M, De Munck J, Van Landuyt KL, et al: E ight-year clinical
evaluation of a 2-step self-etch adhesive with and without selective
enamel etching. Dent Mater 26(12): – , .
25. Van Meerbeek B, Yoshihara K, Yoshida Y, et al: State of the art of
self-etch adhesives. Dent Mater 27(1):17–28, .
26. Ritter AV, Swift EJ, Jr: Current restorative concepts of pulp protection.
Endod Topics 5(1):41–48, .
27. Hilton TJ, Ferracane JL, Mancl L: Comparison of CaOH with MTA
for direct pulp capping: a PBRN randomized clinical trial. J Dent
Res 92(7 Suppl):16S–22S, .
28. Nair PN, Duncan HF , Pitt Ford TR, et al: Histological, ultrastructural
and quantitative investigations on the response of healthy human
pulps to experimental capping with Mineral T rioxide Aggregate: a
randomized controlled trial. . Int Endod J 42(5): – , .
29. Goracci G, Mori G: Scanning electron microscopic evaluation of
resin-dentin and calcium hydroxide-dentin interface with resin
composite restorations. Quintessence Int (Berl) 27(2): – , .
30. Tantbirojn D, Pfeifer CS, Braga RR, et al: Do low-shrink composites
reduce polymerization shrinkage efects? J Dent Res 90(5): – ,
.
31. Versluis A, Douglas WH, Cross M, et al: Does an incremental illing
technique reduce polymerization shrinkage stresses? J Dent Res
75(3): – , .
32. Versluis A, Tantbirojn D: heoretical considerations of contraction
stress. Compend Contin Educ Dent Suppl 25:S24–S32, quiz S73,
.
33. Versluis A, Tantbirojn D, Pintado MR, et al: Residual shrinkage
stress distributions in molars after composite restoration. Dent Mater
20(6): – , .
34. Ikemi T, Nemoto K: Efects of lining materials on the composite
resins shrinkage stresses. Dent Mater J 13(1):1–8, .
35. Tolidis K, Nobecourt A, Randall RC: Efect of a resin-modiied glass
ionomer liner on volumetric polymerization shrinkage of various
composites. Dent Mater 14(6): – , .
36. van Dijken JW, Pallesen U: Clinical performance of a hybrid resin
composite with and without an intermediate layer of lowable resin
composite: a 7-year evaluation. Dent Mater 27(2): – , .
37. Browning WD: he beneits of glass ionomer self-adhesive materials
in restorative dentistry. Compend Contin Educ Dent Suppl
27(5): – , quiz 15-6, .
38. Loguercio AD, Alessandra R, Mazzocco KC, et al: Microleakage in
class II composite resin restorations: total bonding and open sandwich
technique. J Adhes Dent 4(2): – , .
39. Ritter AV: Posterior composites revisited. J Esthet Restor Dent
20(1):57–67, .
CHAPTER 8 Clinical Technique for Direct Compoite Rein and Gla Ionomer Retoration
53. Olmez A, O ztas N, Bodur H: he efect of lowable resin composite
on microleakage and internal voids in class II composite restorations.
Oper Dent 29(6): – , .
54. Opdam NJ, Bronkhorst EM, Loomans BA, et al: 12-year survival
of composite vs. amalgam restorations. J Dent Res 89(10): – ,
.
55. Sanares AM, Itthagarun A, King NM, et al: Adverse surface interactions
between one-bottle light-cured adhesives and chemical-cured com -
posites. Dent Mater 17(6): – , .
56. Swift EJ, Jr, May KN, Jr, Wilder AD, Jr: Efect of polymerization
mode on bond strengths of resin adhesive/cement systems. J Prosthodont
7(4): – , .
57. Dietschi D: Free-hand bonding in the esthetic treatment of anterior
teeth: creating the illusion. J Esthet Dent 9(4): – , .
58. Ritter AV, Heymann HO, Swift EJ, Jr, et al: Clinical evaluation of
an all-in-one adhesive in non-carious cervical lesions with diferent
degrees of dentin sclerosis. Oper Dent 33(4): – , .
59. Tay FR, Pashley DH: Resin bonding to cervical sclerotic dentin: a
review. J Dent 32(3): – , .
60. Yoshiyama M, Sano H, Ebisu S, et al: Regional strengths of bon ding
agents to cervical sclerotic root dentin. J Dent Res 75(6): – ,
.
61. Grippo JO, Simring M, Coleman TA: Abfraction, abrasion, biocor -
rosion, and the enigma of noncarious cervical lesions: a 20-year
perspective. J Esthet Restor Dent 24(1):10–23, .
62. Mount GJ: Adhesion of glass-ionomer cement in the clinical environ -
ment. Oper Dent 16(4): – , .
63. Swift EJ, Jr: Efects of glass ionomers on recurrent caries. Oper Dent
14(1):40–43, .
64. Markovic D, Petrovic BB, Peric TO: Fluoride content and recharge
ability of ive glassionomer dental materials. BMC Oral Health 8:21,
.
65. Dias WR, Ritter AV, Swift EJ, Jr: Repairability of a packable resin-based
composite using diferent adhesives. Am J Dent 16(3): – , .
66. Teixeira EC, Bayne SC, hompson JY, et al: Shear bond strength of
self-etching bonding systems in combination with various composites
used for repairing aged composites. J Adhes Dent 7(2): – ,
.40. Van Ende A, De Munck J, Van Landuyt K, et al: Efect of bulk-illing
on the bonding eicacy in occlusal class I cavities. J Adhes Dent
18(2): – , .
41. Francis AV, Braxton AD, Ahmad W, et al: Cuspal lexure and extent
of cure of a bulk-ill lowable base composite. Oper Dent 40(5): – ,
.
42. Fronza BM, Rueggeberg FA, Braga RR, et al: Monomer conversion,
microhardness, internal marginal adaptation, and shrinkage stress of
bulk-ill resin composites. Dent Mater 31(12): – , .
43. Leprince JG, Palin WM, Vanacker J, et al: Physico-mechanical
characteristics of commercially available bulk-ill composites. J Dent
42(8): – , .
44. van Dijken JW, Pallesen U: A randomized controlled three year
evaluation of “bulk-illed” posterior resin restorations based on stress
decreasing resin technology. Dent Mater 30(9):e245–e251, .
45. Wirsching E, Loomans BA, Klaiber B, et al: Inluence of matrix
systems on proximal contact tightness of 2and 3-surface posterior
composite restorations in vivo. J Dent 39(5): – , .
46. da Costa J, McPharlin R, Hilton T, et al: Efect of heat on the low
of commercial composites. Am J Dent 22(2):92–96, .
47. Elsayad I: Cuspal movement and gap formation in premolars restored
with preheated resin composite. Oper Dent 34(6): – ,
.
48. Froes-Salgado NR, Silva LM, Kawano Y, et al: Composite pre-heating:
efects on marginal adaptation, degree of conversion and mechanical
properties. Dent Mater 26(9): – , .
49. Wagner WC, Aksu MN, Neme AM, et al: Efect of pre-heating resin
composite on restoration microleakage. Oper Dent 33(1):72–78,
.
50. Daronch M, Rueggeberg FA, Hall G, et al: Efect of composite
temperature on in vitro intrapulpal temperature rise. Dent Mater
23(10): – , .
51. Rueggeberg FA, Daronch M, Browning WD, et al: In vivo temperature
measurement: tooth preparation and restoration with preheated resin
composite. J Esthet Restor Dent 22(5): – , .
52. Chuang SF , Jin YT, Liu JK, et al: Inluence of lowable composite
lining thickness on Class II composite restorations. Oper Dent
29(3): – , .
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
Additional Conservative Esthetic
Procedures
HARALD O. HEYMANN, ANDRÉ V. RITTER
Signiicant improvements in tooth-colored restorative materials
and adhesive techniques have resulted in numerous c onservative
esthetic treatment possibilities. Although restorative dentistry
is a blend of art and science, conservative esthetic dentistry truly
emphasizes the artistic component. As Goldstein stated, “Esthetic
dentistry is the art of dentistry in its purest form.”1 As with many
forms of art, conservative esthetic dentistry provides a means of
artistic expression that feeds on creativity and imagination. Dentists
ind performing conservative esthetic procedures enjoyable, and
patients appreciate the immediate esthetic improvements rendered,
often without the need for local anesthesia.
One of the greatest assets a person can have is a smile that
shows beautiful, natural teeth ( Fig. 9.1 ). Children and teenagers
are especially sensitive about unattractive teeth. When teeth are
discolored, malformed, crooked, or missing, often the person makes
a conscious efort to avoid smiling and tries to “cover up” his or
her teeth. Correction of these types of dental problems can produce
dramatic changes in appearance, which often result in improved
conidence, personality, and social life. he restoration of a smile
is one of the most appreciated and gratifying services a dentist can
render. he positive psychologic efects of improving a patient’s
smile often contribute to an improved self-image and enhanced
self-esteem. hese improvements make conservative esthetic dentistry
particularly gratifying for the dentist and represent a new dimension
of dental treatment for patients.
his chapter presents conservative esthetic procedures in the
context of their clinical applications. he principles and clinical
steps involved in adhesive bonding for the treatment alternatives
discussed in this chapter are similar to those described in other
chapters in this textbook. Only speciic conservative esthetic clinical
procedures or variations from previously described techniques are
presented in this chapter.
Artitic Element
Regardless of the result desired, certain basic artistic elements must
be considered to ensure an optimal esthetic result. In conservative
esthetic dentistry, these elements include the following:
• Shape or form
• Symmetry and proportionality
• Position and alignment
• Surface texture• Color
• T ranslucency
Some or all of these elements are common to virtually every
conservative esthetic dental procedure; a basic knowledge and
understanding of these artistic elements is required to attain esthetic
results consistently.
Shape or Form
he shape of teeth largely determines their esthetic appearance.
To achieve optimal dental esthetics, it is imperative that natural
anatomic forms be achieved. A basic knowledge of normal tooth
anatomy is fundamental to the success of any conservative esthetic
dental procedure.
When viewing the clinical crown of an incisor from a facial
(or lingual) position, the crown outline is trapezoidal. Subtle
variations in shape and contour produce very diferent appearances,
however. Rounded incisal angles, open incisal and facial embrasures,
and softened facial line angles typically characterize a youthful
smile. A smile characteristic of an older individual having experi -
enced attrition secondary to aging typically exhibits incisal
embrasures that are more closed and incisal angles that are more
prominent (i.e., less rounded). Frequently, minor modiication of
existing tooth contours, sometimes referred to as cosmetic contouring ,
can efect a signiicant esthetic change (see section Alterations of
Shape of Natural Teeth ). Reshaping enamel by rounding incisal
angles, opening incisal embrasures, and reducing prominent facial
line angles can produce a more youthful appearance ( Fig. 9.2 ).
Signiicant generalized esthetic changes are possible when treating
all anterior teeth (and occasionally the irst premolars) visible in
the patient’s smile. his fact is particularly true when placing
full-coverage facial restorations such as veneers (see section Veneers ).
With this treatment method, the dentist can produce signiicant
changes in tooth shapes and forms to yield a variety of diferent
appearances.
Although less extensive, restoring an individual tooth rather
than all anterior teeth simultaneously may require greater artistic
ability. Generalized restoration of all anterior teeth with full facial
veneers afords the dentist signiicant control of the contours
generated. When treating an isolated tooth, however, the success
of the result is determined largely by how well the restored tooth
esthetically matches the surrounding natural teeth. he contralateral
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
tooth to the one being restored should be examined closely for
subtle characterizing features such as developmental depressions,
embrasure form, prominences, or other distinguishing characteristics
of form. A high degree of realism must be reproduced artfully to
achieve optimal esthetics when restoring isolated teeth or areas.
Illusions of shape also play a signiicant role in dental esthetics.
he border outline of an anterior tooth (i.e., facial view) is primarily
two dimensional (i.e., length and width). he third dimension of
depth is crucial, however, in creating illusions, especially those of
apparent width and length.
Prominent areas of contour on a tooth typically are hi ghlighted
with direct illumination, making them more noticeable, whereas
areas of depression or diminishing contour are shadowed and less
conspicuous. By controlling the areas of light reflection and
shadowing, full facial coverage restorations (in particular) can be
esthetically contoured to achieve various desired illusions of form.
he apparent size of a tooth can be changed by altering the
position of facial prominences or heights of contou r without
changing the actual dimension of the tooth. Compared with normal
tooth contours ( Fig. 9.3A ), a tooth can be made to appear narrower
by positioning the mesiofacial and distofacial line angles closer
together (see Fig. 9.3B ). Developmental depressions also can be
positioned closer together to enhance the illusion of narrowness.
Similarly, greater apparent width can be achieved by positioning
the line angles and developmental depressions further apart (see
Fig. 9.3C ).
Although mor e diicult, the apparent length of teeth also can
be changed by illusion. Compared with normal tooth contours
(Fig. 9.4A ), a tooth can be made to appear shorter by emphasizing
the horizontal elements such as gingival perikymata and by position -
ing the gingival height of contour further incisally (see Fig. 9.4B ).
Slight modiication of the incisal area, achieved by moving the
incisal height of contour further gingivally, also enhances the illusion
of a shorter tooth. he opposite tenets are true for increasing the
apparent length of a tooth. he heights of contour a re moved
farther apart incisogingivally, and vertical elements such as devel -
opmental depressions are emphasized (see Fig. 9.4C ).
Used in combination, these illusionary techniques are particularly
valuable for controlling the apparent dimension of teeth in pro -
cedures that result in an actual increased width of teeth, such as
in diastema (i.e., space) closure (see section Correction of Diastemas ).
By contouring the composite additions in such a way that the
original positions of the line angles are maintained, the increased
widths of the restored teeth are less noticeable ( Fig. 9.5 ). If full
facial coverage restorations are placed in conjunction with a diastema
A
B
C
• Fig. 9.1 Examples of conservative esthetic procedures. A, A beautiful
radiant smile is one of the greatest assets a person can have. B, The
appearance of this aspiring young model was marred by hypocalciied
areas of maxillary anterior teeth. C, A simple treatment consisted of remov -
ing part of the discolored enamel, acid etching the preparations, and
restoring with direct-composite partial veneers. (Courtesy Dr. C.L.
Sockwell.)
A B
• Fig. 9.2 Cosmetic contouring. A, Anterior teeth before treatment. B, By reshaping teeth, a more
youthful appearance is produced.
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
closure, vertical elements can be enhanced and horizontal features
deemphasized to control further the apparent dimens ion of teeth.
Symmetry and Proportionality
he overall esthetic appearance of a human smile is governed
largely by the symmetry and proportionality of the teeth that
constitute the smile. Asymmetric teeth or teeth that are out of
proportion to the surrounding teeth disrupt the sense of balance
and harmony essential for optimal esthetics. Assuming that the
patient’s teeth are aligned normally (i.e., rotations or faciolingual
A
Normal Narrowing WideningBC
• Fig. 9.3 Creating illusions of width. A, Normal width. B, A tooth can
be made to appear narrower by positioning mesial and distal line angles
closer together and by more closely approximating developmental depres -
sions. C, Greater apparent width is achieved by positioning line angles
and developmental depressions farther apart.
AB C
Normal Shortening Lengthening
• Fig. 9.4 Creating illusions of length. A, Normal length. B, A tooth can be made to appear shorter by
emphasizing horizontal elements and by positioning the gingival height of contour farther incisally. C, The
illusion of length is achieved by moving the gingival height of contour gingivally and by emphasizing vertical
elements, such as developmental depressions.
A
B
• Fig. 9.5 Controlling apparent tooth size when adding proximal dimension. A, Teeth before treatment.
B, By maintaining original positions of the facial line angles (see areas of light relection), increased widths
of teeth after composite augmentations are less noticeable. positional defects are not present), dental symmetry can be
maintained if the sizes of contralateral teeth are equivalent. A
dental caliper should be used in conjunction with any conservative
esthetic dental procedure that would alter the mesiodistal dimension
of teeth. his recommendation is particularly true for procedures
such as diastema closure or other procedures involving augmentation
of proximal surfaces with composite. B y irst measuring and
recording the widths of the interdental space and the teeth to be
augmented, the appropriate amount of contour to be generated
with composite resin addition can be determined ( Fig. 9.6 ). In
this manner, symmetric and equal tooth contours can be generated
(see section Correction of Diastemas ). When dealing with restora -
tions involving the midline, particular attention also must be paid
to the incisal and gingival embrasure forms; the mesial contours
of both central incisors must be mirror images of one another to
ensure an optimally symmetric and esthetic result.
In addition to being symmetric, anterior teeth must be in proper
proportion to one another to achieve maximum esthetics. he
quality of proportionality is relative and varies greatly, depending
on other factors (e.g., tooth position, tooth alignment, arch form,
coniguration of the smile). One long-accepted theorem of the
relative proportionality of maxillary anterior teeth typically visible
in a smile involves the concept of the golden proportion .2 Originally
formulated as one of Euclid’s elements, this theorem has been
relied on through the ages as a geometric basis for proportionality
in the beauty of art and nature.3 On the basis of this formula, a
smile, when viewed from the front, is considered to be esthetically
pleasing if each tooth in that smile (starting from the midline)
is approximately 60% of the apparent mesiodistal width of the
tooth immediately mesial to it. he exact proportion of the distal
tooth to the mesial tooth is 0. ( Fig. 9.7A ). hese recurring
esthetic dental proportions are based on the apparent mesiodistal
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
Little scientiic information is available regarding the proper
proportions of individual anterior teeth. A study by Sterrett et al.
revealed that the average width-to-length ratio for a maxillary
central incisor in men was 0.85 and in women was 0. 86.6 he
actual width-to-length ratios found in this same study for maxillary
lateral incisors in men and women were 0.76 and 0.79, respectively.
Another study by Magne et al. reported average width-to-length
ratios of 0.87 for worn maxillary central incisors and 0.78 for
unworn maxillary central incisors.7 An accepted theorem for
achieving esthetically pleasing central incisors maintains that the
ideal width-to-length ratio should be 0.75 to 0.80.8 his ratio
represents the ideal proportions needed to optimize the esthetic
result and can help guide the treatment planning process. Consider -
ing the range of recommended width-to-length ratios, 0.80 seems width of teeth when viewed straight on and not the actual mesio -
distal width of individual teeth. An example of an esthetically
pleasing smile that meets the golden proportion can be seen in
Fig. 9.7B .
Although the golden proportion is not the absolute determinant
of dental esthetics, it does provide a practical and proven guide
for establishing proportionality when restoring anterior teeth,
especially if these teeth are considered long. However, according
to a study by Preston, only 17% of the population naturally exhibits
smiles that meet the golden proportion as the recurring esthetic
dental proportion.4 According to a survey of dentists by Ward, a
recurring esthetic dental proportion of 70% (as opposed to 61.8%
as with the golden proportion) is preferred when teeth are of
normal dimension.5
A
B
• Fig. 9.6 Diastema closure. A, Teeth before composite additions. B, Symmetrical and equal contours
are achieved in the inal restorations.
C
E
B
D
F
A. 1. 1.0
• Fig. 9.7 Tooth proportions. A, The rule of the golden proportion. The exact ratios of proportionality.
B, The anterior teeth of this patient are in golden proportion to one another. C, Width-to-length ratios.
Preoperative view reveals width-to-length ratio of 1 to 1. D, Following a periodontal surgical crown length -
ening procedure, a more esthetic width-to-length ratio of 0.80 exists. E, Final result with etched porcelain
veneers. A width-to-length ratio of 0.80 is maintained. F, A 7-year postoperative view reveals a stable and
esthetic long-term result.
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
Malposed teeth are treated in a similar manner. Teeth in mild
linguoversion can be treated by augmentation with full facial veneers
placed directly with composite or made indirectly from processed
composite or porcelain (see Fig. 9.8C and D ). Care must be exercised
in maintaining physiologic gingival contours that do not impinge
on tissue or result in an emergence pr oile of the restoration that
is detrimental to gingival health. A functional incisal edge should
be maintained by appropriate contouring of the restoration (an
excessively thick incisal edge should be avoided). If the occlusion
allows, limited reduction of enamel on the lingual aspect can be
accomplished to reduce the faciolingual dimension of the incisal
portion of the tooth. Lingual areas participating i n protrusive
functional contact should not be altered, however. Individual teeth
that are signiicantly displaced facially (i.e., facioversion) are best
treated orthodontically.
Surface Texture
he character and individuality of teeth are determined largely by
their surface texture and existing characteristics. Realistic restorations
closely mimic the subtle areas of stippling, concavity, and convexity
that are typically present on natural teeth. Teeth in young individu als
characteristically exhibit signiicant surface characterization, whereas
teeth in older individuals tend to possess a smoother surface texture
caused by abrasional wear. Even in older patients, however, restorations
that are devoid of surface characterizations are rarely indicated.
he surfaces of natural teeth typically break up light and r elect
it in many directions. Consequently, anatomic features (e.g.,
developmental depressions, prominences, facets, per ikymata) should
be examined closely and reproduced to the extent that they are
present on the surrounding surfaces. he restored areas of teeth
should relect light as in the unrestored adjacent surfaces. In addi -
tion, as alluded to earlier, by controlling areas of light relection
and shadowing, various desired illusions also can be created.
Color
Color is the most complex and least understood artistic element.
It is an area in which numerous interdependent factors exist, all
of which contribute to the inal esthetic outcome of the restoration.
Although complex, a basic knowledge of color is imperative to
producing consistently esthetic restorations (see Chapter 7 ).
hree fundamental elements of color are hue, value , and chroma .
Hue is the intrinsic quality or shade of the color. Value refers to
the relative lightness or darkness of a hue. It is determined by the
amount of white or black in a hue. Chroma is the intensity of any to be a good benchmark for achieving optimally esthetic results
when restoring maxillary central incisors and 0.75 for maxillary
lateral incisors.
A good example can be seen in Fig. 9.7C–F . Because of altered
passive eruption, this teenaged patient exhibited a preoperative
width-to-length ratio of 1 to 1 for her maxillary central incisors
(see Fig. 9.7C ). She revealed excessive gingival tissues relative to
the display of her anterior teeth. To achieve a more esthetic appear -
ance, it was determined that a width-to-length ratio of 0.80 would
be desirable. After a periodontal surgical crown-lengthening
procedure, a more esthetic width-to-length ratio of 0.80 was attained
(see Fig. 9.7D ). After placement of eight porcelain veneers for the
treatment of luorosis discoloration, the same 0.80 width-to-length
ratio can be seen (see Fig. 9.7E ). A 7-year postoperative photograph
reveals the long-term esthetic result (see Fig. 9.7F ).
Because central incisors are the dominant focal point in dental
composition, the dentist must avoid narrow, elongated, or shortand-wide contours. Adequate treatment planning and a fundamental
knowledge of the importance of the ideal width-to-length ratios
can optimize the final esthetic outcome. The importance of
interdisciplinary treatment involving orthodontics, periodontics,
or both cannot be underestimated.
Poition and Alignment
he overall harmony and balance of a smile depend largely on
proper position of teeth and their alignment in the arch. Malposed
or rotated teeth disrupt the arch form and may interfere with the
apparent relative proportions of teeth. Orthodontic treatment of
such defects always should be considered, especially if other
positional or malocclusion problems exist in the mouth. If orth -
odontic tr eatment is either impractical or unafordable, however,
minor positional defects often can be treated with composite
augmentation or full facial veneers indirectly made from composite
or porcelain. Only problems that can be treated conservatively
without signiicant alteration of the occlusion or gingival contours
of teeth should be treated in this manner.
Minor rotations can be corrected by reducing the enamel in
the area of prominence and augmenting the deicient area with
composite resin ( Fig. 9.8A and B ). Care must be taken to restrict
all recontouring of prominent areas to enamel. If the rotation is
to be treated with an indirectly fabricated composite or porcelain
veneer, an intraenamel preparation is recommended, with greater
reduction provided in the area of prominence. his prepar ation
allows subsequent restoration to appropriate physiologic
contours.
AB CD
• Fig. 9.8 Position and alignment. A, A minor rotation is irst treated by reducing enamel in the area of
prominence. B, The deicient area is restored to proper contour with composite. C, Maxillary lateral incisor
is in slight linguoversion. D, Restorative augmentation of facial surface corrects malposition.
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
also is inluenced by the physiologic limitations of the dentist’s
eye. On extended viewing of a particular tooth site, eyes experience
color fatigue, resulting in a loss of sensitivity to yellow-orange
shades.7 By looking away at a blue object or background (i.e., the
complementary color), the dentist’s eyes quickly recover and are
able to distinguish subtle variations in yellow-orange hues again.
Because of the many indirect factors that inluence color perception,
it is recommended that the dentist, the assistant, and especially
the patient all be involved in shade selection.
Tranlucency
T ranslucency is another factor that afects the esthetic quality of
the restoration. he degree of translucency is related to how deeply
light penetrates into the tooth or restoration before it is relected
outward. Normally, light penetrates through enamel into dentin
before being relected outward ( Fig. 9.9A ); this afords the realistic
esthetic vitality characteristic of normal, unrestored teeth. Shallow
penetration of light often results in loss of esthetic vitality. his
phenomenon is a common problem encountered when treating
severely intrinsically stained teeth such as teeth afected by tetra -
cycline with direct or indirect veneers. Although opaque resin
media can mask the underlying stain, esthetic vitality is usually
lost because of reduced light penetration (see Fig. 9.9B ). Indirect
veneers of processed composite or porcelain fabricated to include
inherent opacity also may have this problem.
Illusions of translucency also can be created to enhance the
realism of a restoration. Color modiiers (also referred to as tints)
can be used to achieve apparent translucency and tone down bright
stains or to characterize a restoration. Fig. 9.10 shows a case in
which the maxillary right central incisor with intrinsic yellow
staining caused by trauma to the tooth warranted restoration.
When bleaching treatments were unsuccessful because of calciic
metamorphosis, a direct composite veneer was used i n this patient.
After an intraenamel preparation and acid etching, a violet color
modiier (the complementary color of yellow) was applied to the
prepared facial surface to reduce the brightness and intensity of
the underlying yellow tooth. Additionally, a mixture of gray and
violet color modiiers was used to simulate vertical areas of trans -
lucency. he inal restoration is shown in Fig. 9.10B . Color modiiers
also can be incorporated in the restoration to simulate maverick
colors, to check lines, or to surface spots for further characterization.
Color modiiers always should be placed within a composite restora -
tion, not on its surface.particular hue. Some current shade guides are based irst on value
because of the importance of this element of color.
Dentists also must understand the coloration of natural teeth
to select the appropriate shades of restorative materials accurately
and consistently. Teeth typically are composed of a multitude of
colors. A gradation of color usually occurs from the gingival region
to the incisal region, with the gingival region being typically darker
because of thinner enamel. Use of several diferent shades of
restorative material may be required to restore a tooth esthetically.
Exposed root surfaces are particularly darker (i.e., dentin colored)
because of the absence of overlying enamel. In most individuals,
canines are slightly darker than are incisors.
Young individuals with thick enamel characteristically exhibit
lighter teeth. Individuals with darker complexions usually appear
to have lighter teeth because of the contrast that exists between
teeth and the surrounding facial structures. Women can enhance
the apparent lightness of their teeth simply by using a darker shade
of makeup or lipstick. By increasing the contrast between teeth
and the surrounding facial tissue, the illusion of lighter teeth can
be created.
Color changes associated with aging also occur, primarily owing
to wear. As the facial enamel is worn away, the underlying dentin
becomes more apparent, resulting in a darker tooth. Incisal edges
are often darker because of the thinning of enamel or the exposure
of dentin because of normal attrition. Cervical areas also tend to
darken because of abrasion.
An understanding of normal tooth coloration enhances the
dentist’s ability to create a restoration that appe ars natural. Several
clinical factors also must be considered, however, to enhance the
color-matching quality of the restoration. Many shade guides for
composite materials are inaccurate. Not only are they often
composed of a material dissimilar to that of the composite, but
they also do not take into consideration color changes that occur
from batch to batch or changes caused by aging of the composite.
Accurate shade selection is best attained by applying and curing
a small amount of the composite restorative material in the area
of the tooth that may need restoration. Shade selection should be
determined before isolating teeth so that color variations that can
occur as a result of drying and dehydration of teeth are avoided.
Problems in color perception also complicate selection of the
appropriate shade of restorative material. Various light sources
produce diferent perceptions of color. his phenomenon is referred
to as metamerism .9 he color of the surrounding environment
inluences what is seen in the patient’s mouth. Color perception
ABLight Light Dentin
Enamel
Opaque resin
VeneerDentin
Enamel
• Fig. 9.9 Translucency and light penetration. A, Light normally penetrates deeply through enamel and
into dentin before being relected outward. This affords realistic esthetic vitality. B, Light penetration is
limited by opaquing resin media under veneers. Esthetic vitality is compromised.
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
Often these procedures can be incorporated into routine restorative
treatment. he objective is to improve esthetics and yet preserve
as much healthy tooth structure as possible, consistent with the
acceptable occlusion and health of surrounding tissue. hese
procedures include reshaping natural teeth, correcting embrasures,
and closing diastemas.
Alteration of Shape of Natural Teeth
Some esthetic problems can be corrected conservatively without
the need for tooth preparation and restoration. Consideration
always should be given to reshaping and polishing natural teeth
to improve their appearance and function ( Fig. 9.11 ). In addition,
the rounding of sharp angles can be considered a prophylactic
measure to reduce stress and to prevent chipping and fractures of
the incisal edges.
Etiology
Attrition of the incisal edges often results in closed incisal embrasures
and angular incisal edges (see Fig. 9.11A ). Anterior teeth, especially
maxillary central incisors, often are fractured in accidents. Other
esthetic problems, including attrition and abnormal wear from
poor dental habits (e.g., biting ingernails, holding objects with
teeth), often can be corrected or the appearance improved by
reshaping natural teeth.Clinical Conideration
Although an understanding of basic artistic element s is imperative
to successfully placing esthetic restorations, certain clinical con -
siderations must be addressed concomitantly to ensure the overall
quality of the restoration. In addition to being esthetic, restorations
must be functional. Dawson stated, “Esthetics and function go
hand in hand. he better the esthetics, the better the function is
likely to be and vice versa.”10
he occlusion always must be assessed before any conservative
esthetic procedure. Anterior guidance, in particular, must be main -
tained and occlusal harmony ensured when treating areas involved
in occlusion. Another requirement of all conservative esthetic restora -
tions is that they possess physiologic contours that promote good
gingival health. Particular care must be taken in all treatments to
inish the gingival areas of the restoration adequately and to remove
any gingival excess of material. Emergence angles of the restorations
must be physiologic and not impinge on gingival tissue.
Conervative Alteration of Tooth
Contour and Contact
Many unsightly tooth contours and diastemas can be corrected or
the appearance greatly improved by several conservative methods.
A
B
• Fig. 9.10 Use of internally placed color modiiers. A, The maxillary right central incisor exhibits bright
intrinsic yellow staining as a result of calciic metamorphosis. B, Color modiiers under direct-composite
veneer reduce brightness and intensity of stain and simulate vertical areas of translucency.
A
B
C
D
E
F
• Fig. 9.11 Reshaping natural teeth. A, Maxillary anterior teeth with worn incisal edges. B, Areas to be
reshaped are outlined. C, Outlined areas give the patient an idea of what the inal result will look like. D,
A diamond instrument is used to reshape the incisal edges. E, A rubber abrasive disk is used to polish
the incisal edges. F, Reshaping results in a more youthful smile.
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
instruments and abrasive disks and points for contouring and
polishing the central incisors. he inished result is illustrated in
Fig. 9.12B .
As some patients grow older or have the habit of bruxism, the
incisal surfaces often wear away, leaving sharp edges that chip
easily. his is also accompanied by loss of the incisal embrasures
(Fig. 9.13A ). To lessen the chance of more fractures and to create
a more youthful smile, the incisal embrasures are opened and the
incisal angles of teeth are rounded (see Fig. 9.13B ).
Alteration of Embraure
Etiology
Anterior teeth can have embrasures that are too open as a result
of the shape or position of teeth in the arch. When the permanent
lateral incisors are congenitally missing, canines and posterior teeth
may drift mesially or the space may be closed orthodontically. he
facial surface and cusp angle of some canines can be reshaped to
appear like lateral incisors. In many instances, the mesioincisal
embrasures remain too open ( Fig. 9.14A ).
Treatment
Composite can be added to establish an esthetic contour and
correct the open embrasures. Evaluation of the occlusion before
restoration determines if the addition would be compatible with
functional movements. he patient should understand the proce -
dures involved and should want to have the change made. Line
drawings, esthetic imaging, or photographs of similar examples
are often helpful in explaining the procedure and allaying patient
concerns. Another patient aid involves adding composite to teeth
(unetched/unbonded) to ill the embrasure temporarily to simulate
the inal result, which is known as a composite mockup.
Preliminary procedures include cleaning the involved teeth,
selecting the shade, and isolating the area. Local anesthesia usually
is not required because the preparation does not extend subgingivally
and involves only enamel. A coarse, flame-shaped diamond Treatment
Consultation and examination are necessary before any changes
are made to the shapes of teeth. Photographs, study models, line
drawings, and esthetic imaging devices enable the patient to envision
the potential improvement before any changes are made.
As noted earlier, cosmetic contouring to achieve youthful
characteristics often includes rounding incisal angles, reducing
facial line angles, and opening incisal embrasures. he opposite
characteristics typically are considered more mature features.
Cosmetic reshaping to smooth rough incisal edges and improve
symmetry is equally beneicial to women and men.
he patient must understand what is involved and must want
to have the alteration made. If reshaping is desired, it is helpful
to mark, by using a pencil or alcohol-marking pen, an outline of
the areas of the teeth to be reshaped (see Fig. 9.11B ). By marking
the anticipated areas for enamel reshaping, the patient is provided
some indication of what the postoperative result may look like
(see Fig. 9.11C ). If available, esthetic computer imaging also can
be used to illustrate the possible result before treatment.
Because all reshaping is restricted to enamel, anesthesia is not
required. A cotton roll is recommended for isolation. Diamond
instruments and abrasive disks and points are used for contouring,
inishing, and polishing (see Fig. 9.11D and E ). hrough careful
reshaping of appropriate enamel surfaces, a more esthetic smile
(characterized by youthful features) is attained. Rounded incisal
edges also are less likely to chip or fracture (see Fig. 9.11F ).
A second example involves the irregular, fractured incisal surfaces
of maxillary central incisors ( Fig. 9.12A ). An esthetic result can
be accomplished by slightly shortening the incisal edges and
reshaping both teeth to a symmetrical form. Photographs, line
drawings, esthetic imaging, or marking the outline on the patient’s
teeth enables the patient to envision the potential improvement
before any changes are made. Protrusive function always should
be evaluated to prevent inadvertent elimination of this occlusal
contact. Conservative treatment consists of using diamond
A
B
• Fig. 9.12 Irregular incisal edges. A, Central incisors have rough, fractured incisal edges. B, Esthetic
result is obtained by recontouring incisal edges.
A
B
• Fig. 9.13 Loss of incisal embrasures from attrition. Before (A) and after (B) recontouring teeth to
produce a more youthful appearance and improve resistance to fracture.
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
he correction of a diastema between maxillary central incisors
is described and illustrated in Fig. 9.15 . After the teeth are cleaned
and the shade selected, a Boley gauge or other suitable caliper is
used to measure the width of the diastema and the individual t eeth
(see Fig. 9.15B and C ). Occasionally, one central incisor is wider,
requiring a greater addition to the narrower tooth. Assuming the
incisors are of equal width, symmetrical additions can be ensured
by using half of the total measurement of the diastema to gauge
the width of the irst tooth restored. Cotton rolls, instead of a
rubber dam, are recommended for isolation because of the impor -
tance of relating the contour of the restoration directly to the
proximal tissue. Usually the restoration must begin slightly below
the gingival cr est to appear natural and to be conluent with the
tooth contours.
With cotton rolls in place, a gingival retraction cord of an
appropriate size is tucked in the gingival crevice of each tooth
from midfacial mesially to midlingual (see Fig. 9.15D ). he cord
retracts the soft tissue and prevents seepage from the crevice. In
some instances, the retraction cord may need to be inserted for
one tooth at a time to prevent strangulation of interproximal tissue
during preparation and restorative procedures. To enhance retention
of the composite, a coarse, lame-shaped diamond instrument is
used to roughen the proximal surfaces, extending from the facial
line angle to the lingual line angle (see Fig. 9.15E ). More extension
may be needed to correct the facial or lingual cont ours, depending
on the anatomy and position of the individual tooth. he enamel
is acid etched approximately 0.5 mm past the prepared, roughened
surface. he acid should be applied gingivally only to the extent
of the anticipated restoration. After rinsing and drying, the etched
enamel should display a lightly frosted appearance (see Fig. 9.15F ).
A 5-cm by 5-cm (2-inch by 2-inch) gauze is draped across the
mouth and tongue to prevent inadvertent contamination of the
etched preparations by the patient. After both preparations are
completed, the teeth are restored one at a time.
A polyester strip is contoured and placed proximally, with the
gingival aspect of the strip extending below the gingival crest.
Additional contouring may be required to produce enough convexity
in the strip. In most cases, a wedge cannot be used. he strip is
held (with the index inger) on the lingual aspect of the tooth to
be restored, while the facial end is r elected for access. A light-cured
composite is used for the restoration. After the bonding agent is
applied, the composite material is inserted with a hand instrument
(see Fig. 9.15G ). Careful attention is given to pressing the material
lingually to ensure conluence with the lingual surface. he matrix
is gently closed facially, beginning with the gingival aspect (see
Fig. 9.15H ). Care must be taken not to pull the strip too tightly
because the resulting restoration may be undercontoured faciolin -
gually, mesiodistally, or both. he light-cured composite material instrument is used to remove overly convex enamel surfaces (if
present) and to roughen the enamel surface area to be augmented
with composite material. It may be necessary to place a wedge and
use an abrasive strip to prepare the proximal sur face. he inal
contour of the restoration should be envisioned before the prepara -
tion is made so that all areas to be bonded are adequately
roughened.
A polyester strip or a Telon tape is inserted to protect the
adjacent tooth during acid etching. After etching, rinsing, and
drying, the contoured strip is positioned. A light-cured composite
material is inserted, and the strip is closed during polymerization.
he incisal embrasures of both canines are corrected, and both
restorations are inished by routine procedures (see Fig. 9.14B ).
he occlusion should be evaluated to assess centric contacts and
functional movements, and any adjustments or corrections should
be made, if indicated.
Correction of Diatema
Etiology
he presence of diastemas between anterior teeth is an esthetic
problem for some patients ( Fig. 9.15A ). Before treatment, a diagnosis
of the cause is made, including an evaluation of the occlusion. A
frequent site of a diastema is between maxillary central incisors.
A prominent labial frenum with nonelastic fibers extending
proximally often prevents the normal approximation of erupting
central incisors.11 Other causative factors include congenitally
missing teeth, undersized or malformed teeth, interarch tooth size
discrepancies (i.e., Bolton discrepancy), supernumerary teeth, and
heredity. Diastemas also may result from other problems such as
tongue thrusting, periodontal disease, or posterior bite collapse.
Diastemas should not be closed without irst recognizing and
treating the underlying cause, as merely treating the cause may
correct the diastema.
Treatment
T raditionally, diastemas have been treated by surgical, periodontal,
orthodontic, and prosthetic procedures. hese types of corrections
can be impractical or unafordable and often do not result in
permanent closure of the diastema. In carefully selected cases, a
more practical alternative is to use composite augmentation of
proximal surfaces via adhesive procedures (see Figs. 9.5 and 9.6).
All treatment options (including no treatment) should be considered
before resorting immediately to composite augmentation. Line
drawings, photographs, computer imaging, models with spaces
illed, and direct temporary additions of ivory-colored wax or
composite material on natural teeth (unetched) are important
preliminary procedures.
A
B
• Fig. 9.14 Closing incisal embrasures. A, Maxillary canines moved to close spaces left by missing
lateral incisors. The mesial incisal embrasures are too open. B, Canines reshaped to appear like lateral
incisors.
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
• Fig. 9.15 Diastema closure. A, Esthetic problem created by space between central incisors. B and
C, Interdental space and size of central incisors measured with caliper. D, Teeth isolated with cotton rolls
and retraction cord tucked into the gingival crevice. E, A diamond instrument is used to roughen enamel
surfaces. F, Etched enamel surface indicated (arrow). G, Composite inserted with composite instrument.
H, Matrix strip closed with thumb and foreinger. I, Composite addition is cured. J, Finishing strip used
to inalize contour of irst addition. K, A tight contact is attained by displacing the second tooth being
restored in a distal direction with thumb and foreinger, while holding matrix in contact with adjacent
restoration. L, Flame-shaped inishing bur used to contour restoration. M, Finishing strip used to smooth
the subgingival areas. N, The restoration is polished with a rubber abrasive point. O, Final luster attained
with polishing paste applied with Prophy cup. P , Unwaxed loss used to detect any excess composite.
Q, Diastema closed with symmetrical and equal additions of composite.
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
or overhang (see Fig. 9.15P ). he inal esthetic result is seen in
Fig. 9.15Q .
Multiple diastemas among the maxillary anterior teeth are shown
in Fig. 9.16A . Closing the spaces by orthodontic movement was
considered in this patient; however, because the patient’s teeth
were undercontoured mesiodistally, the diastemas were closed by
bonding composite to the proximal surfaces. he teeth after treat -
ment are shown in Fig. 9.16B . In the presence of defective Class
III restorations or proximal caries, it is recommended that the
teeth be restored with the same composite used for closing the
diastema. Often these restorations can be performed at the same
time the diastema is closed with composite additions ( Fig. 9.17 ).
Occasionally, diastemas are simply too large to close esthetically
with composite augmentation alone ( Fig. 9.18A ). Closing a large
space of this magnitude with composite would merely create an
alternative esthetic problem—that is, excessively large central
incisors, which would further exacerbate the existing discrepancy
in proportionality among anterior teeth. In such cases, large spaces
are best redistributed orthodontically among anterior teeth so that
symmetric and equal composite additions can be made to the
central and lateral incisors (see Fig. 9.18B and C ). his approach
that involves space distribution results in improved proportionality
among anterior teeth (see earlier section Artistic Elements ). he
inal result, immediately after completion, is shown in Fig. 9.18D .
Conervative Treatment for
Dicolored Teeth
One of the most frequent reasons patients seek dental care is
discolored anterior teeth. Even patients with teeth of normal color
request whitening procedures. T reatment options include removal
of surface stains, bleaching, microabrasion or macroabrasion,
veneering, and placement of porcelain crowns. Many dentists
recommend porcelain crowns as the best solution for badly is polymerized with the light directed from the facial and lingual
directions for an appropriate amount of time. Note that curing
times may vary according to the type of light source, the composite
used, and the thickness of the material (see Fig. 9.15I ). Initially,
it is better to overcontour the irst restoration slightly to facilitate
inishing it to an ideal contour.
When polymerization is complete, the strip is removed. Contour -
ing and inishing are achieved with appropriate carbide inishing
burs, ine diamonds, or abrasive disks (see Fig. 9.15L ). Finishing
strips are invaluable for inalizing the proximal contours (see Fig.
9.15J and M ). When composite is being added to two adjoining
surfaces, which is often the case, inal polishing is deferred until
the contralateral restoration is completed. However, it is sometimes
necessary to utilize inishing discs to contour the irst composite
addition to achieve the correct mesiodistal dimension of the irst
tooth before the second tooth is restored. It is imperative for good
gingival health that the cervical aspect of the composite addition
be immaculately smooth and continuous with the tooth structure.
Overhangs must not be present. Removal of the gingi val retraction
cord facilitates inspection and smoothing of this area. Flossing
with a length of unwax ed loss v eriies that the gingival margin is
correct and smooth if no fraying of the loss occurs (see Fig. 9.15P ).
After etching, rinsing, and drying, the second restoration is
completed. A tight proximal contact can be attained by displacing
the second tooth being restored in a distal directi on (with the
thumb and the index inger) while holding the matrix in contact
with the adjacent restoration (see Fig. 9.15K ). Contouring is
accomplished with a 12-luted carbide bur and inishing strips
(see Fig. 9.15L and M ). Articulating paper should be used to
evaluate the patient’s occlusion to ensure that the restorations are
not ofensive in centric or functional movements; adjustments can
be made with a carbide inishing bur or abrasive disks. Final polish -
ing is achieved with rubber polishing points or polishing paste
applied with a prophy cup in a low-speed handpiece (see Fig.
9.15N and O ). Unwaxed loss is used to detect any excess material
A
B
• Fig. 9.16 Multiple diastemas occurring among maxillary anterior teeth. A, Before correction.
B, Appearance after diastemas are closed with composite augmentation.
A
B
• Fig. 9.17 A, Diastema closure and cosmetic contouring. B, Signiicant esthetic improvement is
achieved by replacing defective Class III restorations and closing diastemas with conservative composite
additions and cosmetically reshaping teeth.
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
discolored teeth. If crowns are done properly with the highly esthetic
ceramic materials currently available, they have great potential for
being esthetic and long lasting. However, increasing numbers of
patients do not want their teeth “cut down” for crowns and choose
an alternative, conservative approach such as veneers (see section
Veneers ) that preserves as much of the natural tooth as possible.
his treatment is performed with the understanding that the
corrective measures may be less permanent.
Discolorations are classiied as extrinsic or intrinsic. Extrinsic
stains are located on the outer surfaces of teeth, whereas intrinsic
stains are internal. he etiology and treatment of extrinsic and
intrinsic stains are discussed in the following sections.
Extrinic Dicoloration
Etiology
Stains on the external surfaces of teeth (referred to as extrinsic
discolorations ) are common and may be the result of numerous
factors. In young patients, stains of almost any color can be
found and are usually more prominent in the cervical areas of
teeth ( Fig. 9.19A ). hese stains may be related to remnants of
Nasmyth membrane, poor oral hygiene, existing restorations,
gingival bleeding, plaque accumulation, eating habits, or the
presence of chromogenic microorganisms.12 In older patients,
stains on the surfaces of teeth are more likely to be brown, black,
or gray and occur on areas adjacent to gingival tissue. Poor
oral hygiene is a contributing factor, but cofee, tea, and other
types of chromogenic foods or medications can produce stains
(even on plaque-free surfaces). Tobacco stains also are observed
frequently. Existing restorations may be discolored for the same
reasons.
An example of one of the most interesting and unusual types
of external staining is illustrated in Fig. 9.19B . In Southeast Asia,
some women traditionally dye their teeth with betel nut juice to
match their hair and eyes as a sign of beauty.13 Slices of lemon are
held in contact with the teeth before applying the betel nut juice
to make the staining process more efective. his example was
probably one of the irst applications of the acid-etch technique.
A
B
C
D
• Fig. 9.18 Space distribution. A, Midline diastema too large for simple closure with composite addi -
tions. B and C, Space distributed among four incisors with orthodontic treatment. D, Final result after
composite additions.
B
A
• Fig. 9.19 Extrinsic stains. A, Surface stains on facial surfaces in a
young patient. B, Exotic decoration of anterior teeth by etching with citrus
fruit juice and applying black pigment (betel nut stain). (A, Courtesy Dr.
Tim Wright. B, From Daniel SJ, Harfst SA, Wilder RS: Mosby’s dental
hygiene: Concepts, cases, and competencies, ed 2, St. Louis, ,
Mosby. Courtesy Dr. George Taybos, Jackson, MS.)
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
A weak acid, such as that found in citrus fruits, i s known to cause
rapid decalciication of enamel.
Treatment
Most surface stains can be removed by routine prophylactic
procedures ( Fig. 9.20 ); however, some supericial discolorations
on tooth-colored restorations and decalciied areas on teeth cannot
be corrected by such cleaning. Conservative correction may be
accomplished by mild microabrasion or by surfacing the thin,
outer, discolored layer with a lame-shaped, carbide inishing bur
or diamond instrument (i.e., macroabrasion), followed by polishing
with abrasive disks or points to obtain an acceptable result. (See
section Microabrasion and Macroabrasion for details of clinical
technique.)
Intrinic Dicoloration
Etiology
Intrinsic discolorations are caused by deeper (not supericial) internal
stains or enamel defects, and are more complex to treat than are
external discolorations. Teeth with vital or nonvital pulps as well
as endodontically treated teeth can be afected. Vital teeth may be
discolored at the time the crowns are forming, and the abnormal
condition usually involves several teeth. Causative factors include
hereditary disorders, medications (particularly tetracycline prepara -
tions), excess luoride, high fevers associated with early childhood
illnesses, and other types of trauma.12 he staining may be located
in enamel or dentin. Discolorations restricted to dentin still may
show through enamel. Discoloration also may be localized or
generalized, involving the entire tooth.
Various preparations of the antibiotic drug tetracycline can
cause the most distracting, generalized type of intrinsic discoloration
(Fig. 9.21A ).14 he severity of the staining depends on the dose,
the duration of exposure to the drug, and the type of tetracycline
analogue used. Diferent types of tetracyclines induce diferent
types of discoloration, varying from yellow-orange t o dark blue-gray.
A
B
C
• Fig. 9.20 Treatment of surface stains. A, Tobacco stains. B, Pumicing teeth with rubber cup. C, Shade
guide used to conirm normal color of natural teeth.
A
B
• Fig. 9.21 Intrinsic stains. A, Staining by tetracycline drugs. B, Staining of the maxillary left central
incisor from tooth trauma and degeneration of the pulp. Dark blue-gray, tetracycline-stained teeth are considerably more
diicult to treat than are teeth with mild yellow-orange discolor -
ations. Staining from tetracycline-type drugs most frequently occurs
at an early age and is caused by ingestion of the drug concomitant
with the development of permanent teeth. Studies indicate that
permanent teeth in adults also can experience a graying discoloration,
however, as a result of long-term exposure to minocycline, a tet -
racycline analogue.14
he presence of excessive luoride in drinking water and other
sources at the time of teeth formation can result in another type
of intrinsic stain called luorosis . he staining usually is generalized.
Localized areas of discoloration may occur on individual teeth
because of enamel or dentin defects induced during tooth develop -
ment. High fevers and other forms of trauma can damage the
tooth during its development, resulting in unesthetic hypoplastic
defects. Additionally, localized areas of dysmineralization, or the
failure of the enamel to calcify properly, can result in hypocalciied
white spots. After eruption, poor oral hygiene also can result in
decalciied white spots. Poor oral hygiene during orthodontic
treatment frequently results in these types of decalciied defects.
White or discolored spots with intact enamel surface (i.e., surface
not soft) are often evidence of intraoral remineralization, however,
and such spots are not indications for invasive treatment (unless
for esthetic concerns). Additionally, caries, metallic restorations,
corroded pins, and leakage or secondary caries around existing
restorations can result in various types of intrinsic discoloration.
As noted earlier, aging efects also can result in yellowed teeth.
As patients grow older, the tooth enamel becomes thinner because
of wear and allows underlying dentin to become more apparent.
Also, often continuing deposition of secondary dentin occurs in
older individuals, resulting in greater dentin thickness. his depo sition results in a yellowing efect, depending on the intrinsic color
of dentin. Additionally, the permeability of teeth usually allows
the infusion (over time) of signiicant organic pigments (from
chromogenic foods, drinks, and tobacco products) that produce
a yellowing efect.
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
macroabrasion, and veneering. Mild discolorations are bes t
left untreated, are bleached, or are treated conservatively with
microabrasion or macroabrasion because no restorative material
is as good as the healthy, natural tooth structure. he patient
should be informed that the gingival tissue adjacent to restorative
material will never be as healthy as that next to normal tooth
structure.
Color photographs of previously treated teeth with intrinsic
staining (i.e., before and after treatment) are excellent adjuncts to
help the patient make an informed decision. Esthetic imaging with
modern computer simulation of the postoperative result also can
be an efective educational tool. Patients appreciate knowing what
the cause of the problem is, how it can be corrected, how much
time is involved, and what the cost will be. hey also should be
informed of the life expectancy of the various treatment alternatives
suggested. Vital bleaching usually results in tooth lightening for
only 1 to 3 years, whereas an etched porcelain veneer should last
10 to 15 years or longer. With continuous improvements in materials
and techniques, a much longer lifespan may be possible with any
of these procedures. he clinical longevity of esthetic restorations
also is enhanced in patients with good oral hygiene, proper diet,
a favorable bite relationship, and little or no contact with agents
that cause discoloration or deterioration.
Correction of intrinsic discolorations caused by failing restora -
tions entails replacement of the faulty portion or the entire restora -
tion. Correction of discolorations caused by caries lesions requires
appropriate restorative treatment. Esthetic inserts for metal restora -
tions are described later in this chapter. For the other types of
intrinsic discolorations previously discussed, detailed treatment
options are presented in the following three sections.
Bleaching Treatment
he lightening of the color of a tooth through the application of
a chemical agent to oxidize the organic pigmentation in the tooth
is referred to as bleaching . In keeping with the overall conservative
philosophy of tooth restoration, consideration should be given
irst to bleaching anterior teeth when intrinsic discolorations are
encountered. Bleaching techniques may be classiied as to whether
they involve vital or nonvital teeth and whether the procedure is
performed in the oice or outside the oice. Bleaching of nonvital
teeth was irst reported in ; in-oice bleaching of vital teeth
was irst reported in .15 By the early 1900s, in-oice vital
bleaching had evolved to include the use of heat and light for
activation of the process. Although a 3% ether and peroxide
mouthwash used for bleaching in has been reported in the
literature, the “dentist-prescribed, home-applied” technique (also
referred to as nightguard vital bleaching or at-home bleaching ) for
bleaching vital teeth outside the oice began around , although
it was not commonly known until the late 1980s.16
Most bleaching techniques use some form or derivative of
hydrogen peroxide in diferent concentrations and application
techniques. he mechanism of action of bleaching teeth with
hydrogen peroxide is considered to be oxidation of organic pigments,
although the chemistry is not well understood. Bleaching generally
has an approximate lifespan of 1 to 3 years, although the change
may be permanent in some situations.
With all bleaching techniques, a transitory decrease occurs in
the potential bond strength of composite when it is applied to
bleached enamel and dentin. his reduction in bond strength
results from residual oxygen or peroxide residue in the tooth that
inhibits the setting of the bonding resin, precluding adequate resin Nonvital teeth also can become discolored intrinsically. hese
stains usually occur in individual teeth after eruption has taken
place. he pulp may become infected or degenerate as a result of
trauma, deep caries, or irritation from restorative procedures. If
these teeth are properly treated by endodontic therapy, they usually
retain their normal color. If treatment is delayed, discoloration of
the crown is more likely to occur. he degenerative products from
the pulp tissue stain dentin, and this is readily apparent because
of the translucency of enamel (see Fig. 9.21B ). T rauma resulting
in calciic metamorphosis (i.e., calciication of the pulp chamber,
root canal, or both) also can produce signiicant yellowing of the
tooth. his condition is extremely diicult to treat (see Fig. 9.10 ).
Treatment
Some people deinitely have esthetic problems because of intrinsic
stains, but others worry needlessly about the overall color of their
teeth. In the latter instance, the dentist must decide if the color
of teeth can be improved enough to justify treatment, even though
the patient insists on having something done. Individuals with
light complexions may believe that their teeth are too dark, when
actually they are normal in color ( Fig. 9.22A ). Positioning a shade
tab from a shade guide of tooth colors next to such teeth often
shows these patients that the color of their teeth is well within the
normal range of shades. As stated earlier, tanned skin, darker
makeup, or darker lipstick usually make teeth appear much whiter
by increasing the contrast between teeth and the surrounding facial
features (see Fig. 9.22B ).
he patient should be told that many discolorations can be
corrected or the appearance of teeth greatly improved through
conservative methods such as bleaching, microabrasion or
B
A
• Fig. 9.22 Illusion of a lighter appearance of teeth by use of darker
makeup. A, Before. B, After. (From Freedman G: Contemporary esthetic
dentistry , St. Louis, , Mosby.)
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
instrument into the pulp chamber. he thermocatalytic technique
is not recommended, however, because of the potential for cervical
resorption.19 A more current technique uses 30% to 35% hydrogen
peroxide pastes or gels that require no heat. his t echnique is
frequently the preferr ed in-oice technique for bleaching nonvital
teeth. In both techniques, it is imperative that a sealing cement
(resin-modiied glass ionomer [RMGI] cement is recommended)
be placed over the exposed endodontic illing before application
of the bleaching agent to prevent leakage and penetration of the
bleaching material in an apical direction. It is also recommended
that the bleaching agent be applied in the coronal portion of the
tooth incisal to the level of the periodontal ligament (not down
into the root canal space) to prevent unwanted leakage of the
bleaching agent through the lateral canals or canaliculi to the
periodontal ligament.
Walking Bleach Technique
Before beginning the walking bleach technique, the dentist needs
to evaluate the potential for occlusal contact on the area of the
root canal access opening. he dentist places a rubber dam to
isolate the discolored tooth and removes all materials in the coronal
portion of the tooth (i.e., access opening). he dentist removes
gutta-percha (to approximately 1–2 mm apical of the clinical crown)
and enlarges the endodontic access opening suiciently to ensure
complete debridement of the pulp chamber. Next, the dentist
places an RMGI liner to seal the gutta-percha of the root canal,
illing from the coronal portion of the pulp chamber. After this
seal has hardened, the dentist trims any excess material from the
seal so that the discolored dentin is exposed peripherally.
Sodium perborate is used with this technique because it is
deemed extremely safe.24 Using a cement spatula, with heavy pressure
on a glass slab, one drop of saline or sterile anesthetic solution is
blended with enough sodium perborate to form a creamy paste.
A spoon excavator or similar instrument is used to ill the pulp
chamber (with the bleaching mixture) to within 2 mm of the
cavosurface margin, avoiding contact with the enamel cavosurface
margins of the access opening. he dentist uses a cotton pellet to
blot the mixture and places a temporary sealing material (e.g.,
Cavit [3M ESPE, St. Paul, MN] or Fuji IX [GC America, Alsip,
IL]) to seal the access opening. he area should remain isolated
for approximately 5 minutes after closure to evaluate the adequacy
of the seal of the temporary restoration. If bubbles appear around
the margins of the temporary material indicating leakage, t he
temporary restoration must be replaced. If no bubbles appear, the
dentist removes the rubber dam and checks the occlusion to assess
the presence or absence of contact on the temporary restoration.
he sodium perborate should be changed weekly. On su ccessful
bleaching of the tooth, the chamber is rinsed and illed to within
2 mm of the cavosurface margin with a paste consisting of calcium
hydroxide powder in sterile saline. (he enamel walls and margins
are kept clean and free of the calcium hydroxide paste.) As noted
earlier, a paste of calcium hydroxide powder and sterile water is
placed immediately after bleaching in the pulp chamber to reduce
the possibility of resorption.21 he dentist reseals the access opening
with a temporary restorative material, as previously described, and
allows the calcium hydroxide material to remain in the pulp chamber
for 2 weeks. Subsequently, the dentist removes the temporary
restorative material, rinses away the calcium hydroxide, and dries
the pulp chamber. Next, the dentist restores the tooth with a
light-cured composite ( Fig. 9.24 ).
Occasionally, a tooth that has been bleached by using the walking
bleach technique and sealed with a composite restoration may tag formation in the etched enamel. No loss of bond strength is
noted if the composite restorative treatment is delayed at least 1
week after cessation of any bleaching.17
Nonvital Bleaching Procedure
he primary indication for nonvital bleaching is to lighten teeth
that have undergone endodontic therapy. Discoloration may be a
result of bleeding into dentin from trauma before root canal therapy,
degradation of pulp tissue left in the chamber after such therapy,
or staining from restorative materials and cements placed in the
tooth as a part of the endodontic treatment. Most posterior teeth
that have received endodontic therapy require full-cov erage restora -
tions that encompass the tooth to prevent subsequent fracture.
Anterior teeth needing restorative treatment and that are largely
intact may be restored with composite rather than with partialcoverage or full-coverage restorations without signiicantly com -
promising the strength of the tooth.18 his knowledge has resulted
in a resurgence in the use of nonvital bleaching techniques. Nonvital
bleaching techniques include an in-oice technique and an outof-oice procedure referred to as walking bleach . (See the following
sections for details of these two techniques.)
Although nonvital bleaching is efective, a slight potential (i.e.,
1%) exists for a deleterious side efect termed external cervical
resorption (Fig. 9.23 ).19 his sequela requires prompt and aggressive
treatment. In animal models, cervical resorption has been observed
most when using a thermocatalytic technique with high heat.20
he walking bleach technique or an in-oice technique that does
not require the use of heat is preferred for nonvital bleaching. To
reduce the possibility of resorption, immediately after bleaching,
a paste of calcium hydroxide powder and sterile water is placed
in the pulp chamber as described in the following sections.21 Also,
sodium perborate alone, rather than in conjunction with hydrogen
peroxide, should be used as the primary bleaching agent. Although
sodium perborate may bleach more slowly, it is safer and less
aggressive to the tooth.22 Periodic radiographs should be obtained
after bleaching to screen for cervical resorption, which generally
has its onset in 1 to 7 years.23
In-O ice Nonvital Bleaching Technique
he in-oice bleaching for nonvital teeth historically has involved
a thermocatalytic technique consisting of the placement of 35%
hydrogen peroxide liquid into the debrided pulp chamber and
acceleration of the oxidation process by placement of a heating
• Fig. 9.23 Radiograph revealing the presence of extensive cervical
resorption.
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
thought to account for the mild tooth sensitivity occasionally
experienced during tr eatment. his efect is transient, however,
and no long-term harm to the pulp has been reported.
Often the dentist has to decide whether to use an in-oice
bleaching technique or prescribe a home-applied technique. he
advantages of the in-oice vital bleaching technique are that
(although it uses very aggressive chemicals) it is totally under the
dentist’s control, soft tissue is generally protected from the process,
and the technique has the potential for bleaching teeth more rapidly.
Disadvantages primarily relate to the cost, the unpredictable
outcome, and the unknown duration of the treatment. he features
that warrant concern and caution include the potential for soft
tissue damage to both patient and provider, discomfort caused by
the rubber dam or other isolation devices, and the potential for
posttreatment sensitivity. he advantages of the dentist-prescribed,
home-applied technique are the use of a lower concentration of
peroxide (generally 10% to 15% carbamide peroxide), ease of
application, minimal side efects, and lower cost because of the
reduced chair time required for treatment. he disadvantages are
reliance on patient compliance, longer treatment time, and the
(unknown) potential for soft tissue changes with excessively extended
use.
In-Oice Vital Bleaching Technique
In-oice vital bleaching requires an excellent rubber dam technique
and careful patient management. Vaseline or cocoa butter may be
placed on the patient’s lips and gingival tissue before application
of the rubber dam to help protect these soft tissues from any
inadvertent exposure to the bleaching agent. Anterior teeth (and
sometimes the irst premolars) are isolated with a heavy rubber
dam to provide maximum retraction of tissue and an optimal seal
around teeth. A good seal of the dam is ensured by ligation of the
dam with waxed dental tape or the use of a sealing putty or varnish.
Light-cured, resin-based “paint-on” rubber dam isolation media
are available for use with in-oice bleaching materials but cannot
provide the same degree of protection and isolation as a convention -
ally applied rubber dam. Etching of teeth with 37% phosphoric
acid, once considered a required part of this technique, is
unnecessary.28
Numerous commercially available bleaching agents are available
for in-oice bleaching procedures. Most consist of paste or gel
compositions that most commonly contain 30% to 35% hydrogen
peroxide. Other additives, such as metallic ion–producing materials
or alkalinizing agents that can speed up the oxidation reaction,
also are commonly found in these commercially available whitening
products. he dentist places the hydrogen peroxide–containing
paste or gel on teeth. he patient is instructed to report any sensa -
tions of burning of the lips or gingiva that would indicate a leaking
dam and the need to terminate treatment.subsequently become discolored. In this instance, the alterna -
tive treatment option should be an attempt to bleach the tooth
externally with one of the external bleaching techniques (see next
section).
Vital Bleaching Procedure
Generally the indications for the diferent vital bl eaching techniques
are similar, with patient preference, cost, compliance, and diiculty
in the removal of certain discolorations dictating the choice of
treatment or combination of treatments. Indications for vital
bleaching include teeth intrinsically discolored because of aging,
trauma, or certain medications. External vital bleaching techniques
are alternative treatment options for a failed, nonvital, walking
bleach procedure. Vital bleaching also is often indicated before
and after restorative treatments to harmonize the shades of the
restorative materials with those of natural teeth.
Teeth exhibiting yellow or orange intrinsic discoloration seem
to respond best to vital bleaching, whereas teeth exhibiting bluish
gray discolorations often are considerably more diicult to treat
in this manner. Other indications for external bleaching include
teeth that have been darkened by trauma but are still vital or teeth
that have a poor endodontic prognosis because of the absence of
a radiographically visible canal (i.e., calciic metamorphosis). Brown
luorosis stains also are often responsive to treatment, but white
luorosis stains may not be resolved efectively (although they can
be made less obvious if the surrounding tooth structure can be
signiicantly whitened).
Vital bleaching techniques include an in-oice techniqu e referred
to as power bleaching and an out-of-oice alternative that is a
“dentist-prescribed, home-applied” technique (i.e., nightguard vital
bleaching, or simply “at-home bleaching”).25,26 hese techniques
may be used separately or in combination with one another. (Details
are provided in subsequent sections.) Some over-the-counter
bleaching materials, particularly products involving a trayless strip
delivery system, also are efective for whitening teeth, but these
are not discussed in this chapter.27
Overall, vital bleaching has been proven to be safe and efective
when performed by or under the supervision of a dentist. With
short-term treatment, no appreciable efect has been observed on
existing restorative materials, either in loss of material integrity or
in color change, with one exception: Polymethyl methacrylate
restorations exhibit a yellow-orange discoloration on exposure to
carbamide peroxide. For this reason, temporary crowns should be
made from bis-acryl materials, rather than polymethyl methacrylate
crown and bridge resin, if exposure to carbamide peroxide is
anticipated.
Because hydrogen peroxide has such a low molecular weight,
it easily passes through enamel and dentin. his characteristic is
A
B
• Fig. 9.24 Indication for bleaching root canal–illed tooth. A, Before. B, After intracoronal, nonvital
bleaching.
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
5 mm from the most apical portion of the gingival crest of teeth
(facially and lingually). his excess material is remov ed irst. he
horseshoe-shaped nightguard is removed from the cast. he dentist
trims the facial edges of the nightguard in a scalloped design,
following the outline of the free gingival crest and using sharp,
curved scissors. Scalloping of the lingual surface is optional because
the bleaching material is applied primarily to the facial aspects of
teeth. Alternatively (on the lingual aspect), the nightguard may
be trimmed apically to within 2 mm of the free gingival crest in
a smooth, horseshoe-shaped coniguration. his scalloped design
is preferred because it allows the tray to cover only teeth an d
prevents entrapment of the bleaching material between gingival
tissue and the nightguard. he nightguard is completed and is
ready for delivery to the patient ( Fig. 9.25 ).
he dentist inserts the nightguard into the patient’s mouth and
evaluates it for adaptation, rough edges, or blanching of tissue. A
properly itting nightguard is shown in Fig. 9.26 . Further shortening
(i.e., trimming) may be indicated in problem areas. he dentist
evaluates the occlusion on the nightguard with the patient in
maximum intercuspation. If the patient is unable to obtain a
comfortable occlusion because of premature posterior tooth contacts,
the nightguard is trimmed to exclude coverage of the terminal
posterior teeth, as needed (to allow optimal tooth contact in
maximum intercuspation). In addition, if no lingual scalloping is
done, the edges of the guard on the palate should terminate in
grooves or valleys, where possible, rather than on the heights of
soft tissue contours (e.g., in the area of the incisive papilla).
A 10% to 15% carbamide peroxide bleaching material generally
is recommended for this bleaching technique. Commercial bleaching
products are available as clear gels and white pastes. Carbamide
peroxide degrades into 3% hydrogen peroxide (active ingredient)
and 7% urea. Bleaching materials containing Carbopol are recom -
mended because Carbopol thickens the bleaching solution and
extends the oxidation process. On the basis of numerous research
studies, carbamide peroxide bleaching materials seem to be safe
and efective when administered by or under the supervision of a
dentist.22
he patient is instructed in the application of the bleaching gel
or paste into the nightguard. A thin bead of material is extruded
into the nightguard along the facial aspects corresponding to the
area of each tooth to be bleached. Usually, only the anterior six
to eight teeth are bleached. he clinician should review proper
insertion of the nightguard with the patient. After inserting the
nightguard, excess material is wiped from the soft tissue along the
edge with a soft-bristled toothbrush. No excess material should
be allowed to remain on soft tissue because of the potential for
gingival irritation. he patient should be informed not to drink
liquids or rinse during treatment and to remove the nightguard
for meals and oral hygiene.Most of the credible research indicates that the addition of light
during the bleaching procedure does not improve the whitening
result beyond what the bleach alone can achieve.29 Use of a light to
generate heat may accelerate the oxidation reaction of the hydrogen
peroxide and expedite treatment through a thermocatalytic efect.
PAC lights and high-output quartz halogen lights have been com -
monly used for this purpose. Use of lights to heat the bleaching
agent, however, causes a greater level of tooth dehydration. his
efect not only can increase tooth sensitivity but also results in an
immediate apparent whitening of the tooth owing to dehydration
that makes the actual whitening result more diicult to assess.
Use of carbon dioxide laser to heat the bleaching mixture and
accelerate the bleaching treatment has not been recommended,
according to a report of the American Dental Association (ADA)
because of the potential for hard or soft tissue damage.30 On
completion of the treatment, the dentist rinses the patient’s teeth,
removes the rubber dam or isolation medium, and cautions the
patient about postoperative sensitivity. A nonsteroidal analgesic
and antiinlammatory drug may be administered if sensitivity is
anticipated.
Contrary to the claims of some manufacturers, optimal whitening
typically requires more than one bleaching treatment.31 Bleaching
treatments generally are rendered weekly for two to six treatments,
with each treatment lasting 30 to 45 minutes. Patients may experi -
ence transient tooth sensitivity between appointments, but no
long-term adverse efects of bleaching teeth with otherwise healthy
pulps have been reported in the literature. Because the enamel is
not acid etched, it is not necessary to polish the teeth after they
have been bleached, and it is not essential to provide any luoride
treatment.
Dentist-Prescribed, Home-Applied Technique
he dentist-prescribed, home-applied technique (i.e., nightguard
vital bleaching) is much less labor intensive and requires substantially
less in-oice time. An impression of the arch to be treated is made
and poured in cast stone. It should be ensured that the impression
is free of bubbles on or around teeth by wiping the impression
material onto teeth and the adjacent gingival areas before inserting
the impression. After appropriate infection control procedures,
the dentist rinses the impression vigorously and pours with cast
stone. Incomplete rinsing of the impression may cause a softened
surface on the stone, which may result in a nightguard (bleaching
tray) that is slightly too small and that may irritate tissue. he
dentist trims the cast around the periphery to elim inate the vestibule
and thin out the base of the cast palatally (until a hole is produced).
Generally, the cast must be lifted from the table of the cast-trimming
machine to remove the vestibule successfully without damaging
teeth. he dentist allows the cast to dry and blocks out any sig -
niicant undercuts by using a blockout material (e.g., putty, clay,
light-activated spacer material).
he nightguard is formed on the cast with the use of a heated
vacuum-forming machine. After the machine has warmed up for
10 minutes, a sheet of 0.75to 1.5-mm (0.020to 0. -inch)
soft vinyl nightguard material is inserted and allowed to be soft -
ened by heat until the material sags approximately by 25 mm (1
inch). he top portion of the machine is closed slowly and gently,
and the vacuum is allowed to form the heat-softened material
around the cast. After suicient time has been allow ed for adaptation
of the material, the dentist turns of the machine and allows the
material to cool.
Next, the dentist uses scissors or a No. 11 surgical blade in a
Bard-Parker handle to trim in a smooth, straight cut about 3 to
• Fig. 9.25 Vacuum-formed, clear plastic nightguard used for vital
bleaching (i.e., scalloped version).
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
simultaneously. Fig. 9.27 illustrates a typical case before and after
treatment with nightguard vital bleaching.
Tetracycline-stained teeth typically are much more resistant to
bleaching. Teeth stained with tetracycline require prolonged treat -
ment durations of several months before any results are observed.
Often, tetracycline-stained teeth are unresponsive to the procedure,
especially if the stains are blue-gray in color. Tetracycline-stained
teeth may approach but never seem to achieve the appearance of
normal teeth. A single tetracycline-stained tooth with previous
endodontic therapy or a diferent pulp size may respond diferently
from other teeth in the arch to the bleaching technique.
Because bleaching tetracycline-stained teeth is diicult, some
clinicians advocate intentional endodontic therapy along with the
use of an intracoronal nonvital bleaching technique to overcome
this problem ( Fig. 9.28 ). Although the esthetic result appears much
better than that obtained from external bleaching, this approach
involves all the inherent risks otherwise associated with endodontic
treatment. External bleaching techniques ofer a safer alternative,
although they may not be as rapid or efective. Veneers or full
crowns are alternative esthetic treatment methods for diicult
tetracycline-stained teeth but involve irreversible restorative
techniques (see section Indirect Veneer Techniques ). No one
bleaching technique is efective in all cases, and all successes are
not equal. Often, with vital bleaching, a combination of the in-oice Although no single treatment regimen is best for all patients,
most patients prefer an overnight treatment approach because of
the convenience. If the nightguard is worn at night, a single
application of bleaching material at bedtime is indicated. In the
morning, the patient should remove the nightguard, clean it under
running water with a toothbrush, and store it in the container
provided. Total treatment time using an overnight approach is
usually 1 to 2 weeks. If patients cannot tolerate overnight bleaching,
the bleaching time and frequency can be adjusted to accommodate
the patient’s comfort level. In addition, in these cases, tolerance
to the nightguard and bleaching material generally are improved
if the patient gradually increases the wearing time each day.
If either of the two primary adverse efects occurs (i.e., sensitive
teeth or irritated gingiva), the patient should reduce or discontinue
treatment immediately and contact the dentist so that the cause
of the problem can be determined and the treatment approach
modiied. he dentist may prescribe desensitizing agents to help
alleviate sensitivity associated with bleaching.
It is recommended that only one arch be bleached at a time,
beginning with the maxillary arch. Bleaching the maxillary arch
irst allows the untreated mandibular arch to serve as a constant
standard for comparison. Restricting the bleaching to one arch at
a time reduces the potential for occlusal problems that could occur
if the thicknesses of two mouthguards were interposed
A
B
• Fig. 9.26 Nightguard for vital bleaching. A and B, Clear plastic nightguard properly seated and posi -
tioned in the mouth (scalloped on facial, unscalloped on lingual).
A
B
• Fig. 9.27 Nightguard vital bleaching. A, Before bleaching treatment. B, After treatment.
A
B
• Fig. 9.28 Bleaching tetracycline-stained teeth. A, Before nonvital bleaching. B, After treatment. (Cour -
tesy Dr. Wayne Mohorn.)
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
because of the depth of the defect exceeding 0.2 to 0.3 mm, the
tooth will be restored with a tooth-colored restoration. Surface
discolorations resulting from luorosis also can be removed by
microabrasion if the discoloration is within the 0.2to 0.3-mm
removal depth limit.
Fig. 9.29A shows a young patient with luorosis stains on teeth
Nos. 8 and 9. A rubber dam is placed to isolate the teeth to be
treated and to protect the gingival tissues from the acid in the
Prema paste or compound (Premier Dental Products). Protective
glasses should be worn by the patient to shield the eyes from any
spatter. he Prema paste is applied to the defective area of the
tooth with a special rubber cup that has luted edges (see Fig.
9.29B and C ). he abrasive compound can be applied with either
the side or the end of the rubber cup. A 10 × gear reduction,
low-speed handpiece (similar to that used for placing pins) is
recommended for the application of the Prema compound to reduce
the possibility of removing too much tooth structure and to prevent
spatter. Moderately firm pressure is used in applying the
compound.
For small, localized, idiopathic white or light brown areas, a
hand application device also is available for use with the Prema
compound (see Fig. 9.29D ). Periodically, the paste is rinsed away
to assess the extent of defect removal. he facial surface also is
viewed with a mirror from the incisal aspect to determine how
much tooth structure has been removed. Care must be taken not
to remove too much tooth structure. he procedure is continued
until the defect is removed or until it is deemed imprudent to
continue further (see Fig. 9.29E ). he treated areas are polished
with a luoride-containing prophy paste to restore surface luster
(see Fig. 9.29F ). Immediately after treatment, a topical luoride is
applied to teeth to enhance remineralization (see Fig. 9.29G ).
Results are shown in Fig. 9.29H .
Macroabraion
An alternative technique for the removal of localiz ed, supericial
white spots (not subject to conservative, remineralization therapy)
and other surface stains or defects is called macroabrasion . Mac -
roabrasion simply uses a 12-luted composite inishing bur or a
ine-grit inishing diamond in a high-speed handpiece to remove
the defect ( Fig. 9.30A and B ). Care must be taken to use light,
intermittent pressure and to monitor the removal of tooth structure
carefully to avoid irreversible damage to the tooth. Air-water spray
is recommended, not only as a coolant but also to maintain the
tooth in a hydrated state to facilitate the assessment of defect
removal. Teeth that have white spot defects are particularly sus -
ceptible to dehydration resulting in other apparent white spots
that are not normally seen when the tooth is hydrated. Dehydration
exaggerates the appearance of white spots and makes defect removal
diicult to assess. After removal of the defect or on termination
of any further removal of tooth structure, a 30-luted inishing
bur is used to remove any facets or striations created by the previous
instruments. Final polishing is accomplished with an abrasive rubber
point (see Fig. 9.30C ). he results are shown in Fig. 9.30D .
Comparable results can be achieved with microabrasion and
macroabrasion. Both treatments have advantages as well as disad -
vantages. Microabrasion has the advantage of ensuring better control
of the removal of tooth structure. High-speed instrumentation
used in macroabrasion is technique sensitive and can have cata -
strophic results if the clinician fails to use extreme caution.
Macroabrasion is considerably faster and does not require the use
of a rubber dam or special instrumentation. Defect removal also technique and the dentist-prescribed, home-applied technique has
better results than either technique used alone.
Microabraion and Macroabraion
Microabrasion and macroabrasion represent conservative alternatives
for the reduction or elimination of supericial discolorations. As
the terms imply, the stained areas or defects are a braded away.
hese techniques result in the physical removal of the tooth structure
and are indicated only for stains or enamel defects that do not
extend beyond a few tenths of a millimeter in depth. If the defect
or discoloration remains even after treatment with microabrasion
or macroabrasion, a restorative alternative is indicated.
Microabraion
In , McCloskey reported the use of 18% hydrochloric acid
swabbed on teeth for the removal of supericial luorosis stains.32
Subsequently, in , Croll and Cavanaugh modiied the technique
to include the use of pumice with hydrochloric acid to form a
paste applied with a tongue blade.33 his technique is called
microabrasion and involves the surface dissolution of the enamel
by acid along with the abrasiveness of the pumice to remove
supericial stains or defects. Since that time, Croll further modiied
the technique, reducing the concentration of the acid to approxi -
mately 11% and increasing the abrasiveness of the paste using
silicon carbide particles (in a water-soluble gel p aste) instead of
pumice.34 his product, marketed as Prema compound (Premier
Dental Products Co., Plymouth Meeting, PA) or Opalustre
(Ultradent Products, Inc., South Jordan, UT), represents an
improved and safer means for the removal of supericial stains or
defects. his technique involves the physical removal of tooth
structure and does not remove stains or defects through any
bleaching phenomena.
Before treatment, the clinician should evaluate the nature and
extent of the enamel defect or stain and diferentiate between
nonhereditary developmental dysmineralization (i.e., abnormal
mineralization) defects (e.g., white or light brown luorotic enamel
and the idiopathic white or light brown spot) versus incipient
caries lesions. Incipient caries lesions usually are located near the
gingival margin. hese lesions have a smooth surface and appear
opaque or chalky white when dried but are less visible when
hydrated.
Incipient caries is reversible if treated immediately. Changing
the oral environment through oral hygiene practices and dietary
adjustments allows remineralization to occur. If the caries lesion
has progressed to have a slightly roughened surface, however,
microabrasion coupled with a remineralization program is an initial
option. If this approach is unsuccessful, it can be followed by a
restoration. Cavitation of the enamel surface is an indication for
restorative intervention. As the location of smooth-surface enamel
caries nears the cementoenamel junction (CEJ), then enamel is
too thin to permit microabrasion or macroabrasion as a treatment
option.
A developmental discolored spot (opaque white or light brown)
is the result of an unknown, local traumatic event during amelo -
genesis and is termed idiopathic . Its surface is intact, smooth, and
hard. It usually is located in the incisal (occlusal) half of enamel,
which contributes to the unsightly appearance. he patient (or
the patient’s parents in the case of a child) must be informed that
an accurate prognosis for microabrasion cannot be given but that
microabrasion will be applied irst. If microabrasion is unsuccessful
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
age, occlusion, tissue health, position and alignment of teeth, and
oral hygiene must be evaluated before pursuing full veneers as a
treatment option. If full veneers are done, care must be taken to
provide proper physiologic contours, particularly in the gingival
area, to ensure good gingival health. An example of poorly contoured
veneers is shown in Fig. 9.31D ; severe gingival irritation exists
around the overcontoured veneers, and a purulent exudate is evident
on probing the margins with an explorer.
Full veneers can be accomplished by the direct or indirect
technique. When only a few teeth are involved or when the entire
facial surface is not faulty (i.e., partial veneers ), directly applied
composite veneers can be completed chairside in one appointment
for the patient. Placing direct composite full veneers is time consum -
ing and labor intensive. For cases involving young children or a
single discolored tooth, or when the patient’s time or money is
limited, precluding a laboratory-fabricated veneer, the direct
technique is a viable option. Indirect veneers require two appoint -
ments but typically ofer three advantages over directly placed full
veneers:
1. Indirectly fabricated veneers are much less sensitive to opera -
tor technique. Considerable artistic expertise and attention to
detail are required to consistently achieve esthetically pleasing
and physiologically sound direct veneers. Indirect veneers
are made by a laboratory technician and are typically more
esthetic.
2. If multiple teeth are to be veneered, indirect veneers usually
can be placed much more expeditiously.is easier with macroabrasion compared with microabrasion if an
air-water spray is used during treatment to maintain hydration of
teeth. Nonetheless, microabrasion is recommended over macroabra -
sion for the treatment of supericial defects in children because of
better operator control and superior patient acceptance. To accelerate
the process, a combination of macroabrasion and microabrasion
also may be considered. Gross removal of the defect is accomplished
with macroabrasion, followed by final treatment with
microabrasion.
Veneer
A veneer is a layer of tooth-colored material that is applied to a
tooth to restore localized or generalized defects and intrinsic
discolorations (for examples, see Figs. 9.7, 9.33, 9.34, 9.35, and
9.41). Typically, veneers are made of directly applied composite,
processed composite, porcelain, or pressed ceramic materials.
Common indications for veneers include teeth with facial surfaces
that are malformed, discolored, abraded, or eroded or have faulty
restorations ( Fig. 9.31 ).
T wo types of esthetic veneers exist: (1) partial veneers and (2)
full veneers ( Fig. 9.32 ). Partial veneers are indicated for the restora -
tion of localized defects or areas of intrinsic discoloration ( Fig.
9.33; see also Fig. 9.1 ). Full veneers are indicated for the restoration
of generalized defects or areas of intrinsic staining involving most
of the facial surface of the tooth (for examples, see Figs. 9.7, 9.35,
9.36, 9.37, and 9.41 ). Several important factors including patient
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
• Fig. 9.29 Microabrasion. A, Young patient with unesthetic luorosis stains on central incisors. B and
C, Prema compound applied with special rubber cup with luted edges. Protective glasses and rubber
dam are needed for the safety of the patient. D, Hand applicator for applying Prema compound. E, Stain
removed from the left central incisor after microabrasion. F, Treated enamel surfaces polished with pro -
phylactic paste. G, Topical luoride applied to treated enamel surfaces. H, Final esthetic result. (Courtesy
Dr. Ted Croll.)
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
A
B
C
D
• Fig. 9.30 Macroabrasion. A, Outer surfaces of maxillary anterior teeth are unesthetic because of
supericial enamel defects. B and C, Removal of discoloration by abrasive surfacing and polishing pro -
cedures. D, Completed treatment revealing conservative esthetic outcome.
A
B
C
D
• Fig. 9.31 Clinical examples of indications for treatment with veneers include teeth affected by tetra -
cycline drug staining (A), luorosis or enamel hypoplasia (B), acid-induced erosion (e.g., lemon-sucking
habit) (C), and defective or improperly done existing veneers (note signiicant gingival overhang with
associated purulent exudate) (D).
3. Indirect veneers typically last much longer than do direct veneers,
especially if they are made of porcelain or pressed ceramic.
Some controversy exists regarding the extent of tooth preparation
that is necessary and the amount of coverage for both direct and
indirect fabricated veneers (see Fig. 9.32 ). Some operators prefer to etch the existing enamel and apply the veneer (direct or indirect
type) to the entire existing facial surface without any tooth prepara -
tion. he perceived advantage of these “no prep” veneers is that
little or no tooth structure is removed. Also, in the event of failure
or if the patient does not like the veneer, it supposedly can be
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
contours. Second, with regard to direct veneers, the veneer is more
likely to be dislodged when no tooth structure is removed before
the etching and bonding procedures are done. If the veneer is lost,
it can be replaced. he patient may live in constant fear, however,
that it will happen again, possibly causing embarrassment.
he reversibility of no-prep veneers may seem desirable and
appealing to patients from a psychologic standpoint; however, few
patients who elect to have veneers wish to return to the original
condition. In addition, removing full veneers with no damage to
the underlying unprepared tooth, as noted earlier, is exceedingly
diicult if not impossible. To achieve esthetically pleasing and
physiologically sound results consistently, an intraenamel preparation
is usually indicated. he only exception is in cases in which the
facial aspect of the tooth is signiicantly undercontoured because
of severe abrasion or erosion. In these cases, mere roughening of
the involved enamel and deining of the peripheral margins are
indicated.
Intraenamel preparation (or the roughening of the surface in
undercontoured areas) before placing a veneer is strongly recom -
mended for the following reasons:
1. To provide space for bonding and veneering materials for maximal
esthetics without overcontouring
2. To remove the outer, luoride-rich layer of enamel that may be
more resistant to acid etching
3. To create a rough surface for improved bonding
4. To establish a deinite inish line
Establishing an intraenamel preparation with a deinite inish
line is particularly important when placing indirectly fabricated
veneers. Accurate positioning and seating of an indirectly made
veneer are enhanced signiicantly if an intraenamel preparation is
present.
Another controversy involves the location of the gingival margin
of the veneer (see Fig. 9.32 ). Should it terminate short of the free
gingival crest at the level of the gingival crest or apical of the
gingival crest? he answer depends on the individual situation. If
the defect or discoloration does not extend subgingivally, the margin
of the veneer should not extend subgingivally. he position of the
gingival margin of any veneer is dictated by the extent of the removed (being reversible), although in actuality, it is never easy
to remove any bonded veneer without concomitant removal of
some tooth structure (see also section No-Prep Veneers ).
Several signiicant problems exist, however, with this approach.
First, to achieve an esthetic result, if the tooth is otherwise of
normal contour, the facial surface of such a restoration will be
overcontoured, appearing and feeling unnatural. his observation
is true for both direct and indirect veneers. An overcontoured
veneer frequently results in gingival irritation with accompanying
hyperemia and bleeding caused by bulbous and impinging gingival
AB C
DE FG
• Fig. 9.32 Four types of veneers. A, Facial view of partial veneer that
does not extend subgingivally or involve the incisal angle. B, Full veneer
with window preparation design that extends to the gingival crest and
terminates at the facioincisal angle. C, Full veneer with either a butt-joint
incisal preparation design or an incisal-lapping preparation design extend -
ing subgingivally and including all of incisal surface. (Subgingival extension
is indicated only for preparation of darkly stained teeth and is not consid -
ered routine.) D–G, Cross sections of the four types of veneers: partial
veneer (D), full veneer with window preparation design (E), full veneer with
butt-joint incisal preparation design (F), full veneer with incisal-lapping
incisal preparation design (G).
A
B
C
D
E
• Fig. 9.33 Direct partial veneers. A, Patient with overcontoured direct full veneers. B, After removal of
old veneer, localized white spots are evident. C, Models illustrate fault ( x) and cavity preparation ( y). The
chamfered margins are irregular in outline. D, Intraenamel preparations for partial veneer restorations.
E, Conservative esthetic result of completed partial veneers.
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
exceedingly diicult to achieve adequate reduction of the enamel
to compensate for the thickness of the veneering material. Also,
if porcelain veneers are placed on mandibular teeth, the veneers
may accelerate the wear of opposing maxillary teeth because of
the abrasive nature of the porcelain. In most cases, the lower lip
hides these teeth so esthetics is not a signiicant problem. Most
patients are satisied with the conservative approach of veneering
only maxillary anterior teeth.
Direct Veneer Technique
Direct Partial Veneers
Small localized intrinsic discolorations or defects that are surrounded
by healthy enamel are ideally treated with direct partial veneers
(see Fig. 9.1B and C ). Often practitioners place full veneers when
only partial veneers are indicated. he four anterior teeth in Fig.
9.33A illustrate the clinical technique for placing partial veneers.
hese defects can be restored in one appointment with a light-cured
composite. Preliminary steps include cleaning, shade selection,
and isolation with cotton rolls or rubber dam. Anesthesia usually
is not required unless the defect is deep, extending into dentin.
Fig. 9.33A shows four anterior teeth that had previously received
direct composite veneers with no enamel preparation for the restora -
tion of developmental white spot lesions. However, even after
veneering, the white spots still show through the veneers. On
removal of the defective veneers, the localized white spots are
evident (see Fig. 9.33B ). Models illustrating proper preparation
are shown in Fig. 9.33C . he outline form is dictated solely by
the extent of the defect and should include all discolored areas.
he clinician should use a coarse, elliptical or round diamond
instrument with air-water coolant to remove the defect. he use
of water-air spray is also imperative so that the tooth can be
maintained in a hydrated state. If dehydration is a llowed to occur,
it can cause the appearance of other white spots, which are artifacts
and which will make defect assessment much more diicult (see
Fig. 9.33D ). After preparation, etching, and restoration of t he
defective areas (as described in the following paragraph), the inished
partial veneers are seen (see Fig. 9.33E ).
Usually, it is desirable to remove all of the discolored enamel
in a pulpal direction. If the entire defect or stain is removed, a
microilled composite is recommended for restoring the preparation.
Microills are excellent “enamel replacement” materials because of
their optical properties. If the tooth has been maintained in a
hydrated state, the microilled composite can be positioned on a
trial basis to assess the accuracy of the shade prior to inal restoration.
Nanoilled composites also are excellent material choices for this
technique. If a residual lightly stained area or white spot remains
in enamel, however, an intrinsically less translucent composite can
be used rather than extending the preparation into dentin to
eliminate the defect. Most composites illed primarily with radi -
opaque illers (e.g., barium glass) are more optically opaque with
intrinsic masking qualities (in addition to being radiopaque). Use
of these types of composites for the restoration of preparations
with light, residual stains is most efective and conserves the tooth
structure. In this example, all restorations are of a light-cured
microilled composite.
Direct Full Veneers
Extensive enamel hypoplasia involving all maxillary anterior teeth
was treated by placing direct full veneers in this case ( Fig. 9.34A ).
A diastema also was present between the central incisors. he
patient desired to have the hypoplasia and the diastema corrected; defects or discoloration and the amount of tooth structure that is
visible with maximum smiling. If a patient exhibits a high smile
line that exposes the entire facial surface of the tooth and if defects
like luorosis stains are generalized, then the margin of the veneer
must be positioned at the level of the crest of tissue to optimize
esthetics. However, the only logical reason for ext ending the margin
subgingivally is if the gingival area is carious or defective, warranting
restoration, or if it involves signiicantly dark discoloration that
presents a diicult esthetic problem. No restorative material is as
good as normal tooth structure, and the gingival tissue is never as
healthy when it is in contact with an artiicial material.
hree basic preparation designs exist for full veneers: (1) a
window preparation, (2) a butt-joint incisal preparation, and (3)
an incisal-lapping preparation (see Fig. 9.32 ). A window preparation
is recommended for most direct composite veneers. It is also
frequently used in cases of indirectly fabricated veneers where the
outline form of the canine is intact and the patient is canine
guided. his intraenamel preparation design preserves the functional
lingual and incisal surfaces of maxillary anterior teeth, protecting
the veneers from signiicant occlusal stress. his quality is of
particular importance with direct composite veneers.
A window preparation design also is recommended for indirectly
fabricated porcelain veneers in patients who exhibit a canine-guided
pattern of lateral guidance and in whom the maxillary canines are
of normal contour with little incisal wear or notching. By using
a window preparation, the functional surfaces are better preserved
in enamel (see Fig. 9.32E and, later, Fig. 9.41I ). his design reduces
the potential for accelerated wear of the opposing tooth that could
result if the functional path involved porcelain on the lingual and
incisal surfaces, as with incisal butt-joint or incisal-lapping designs.
For most indirectly fabricated porcelain veneers, either a buttjoint incisal design or an incisal-lapping approach is used. A
butt-joint incisal design is used routinely in cases where no defects
exist along the lingual aspect of the incisal edge. It is the simplest
design and is used to easily provide adequate reduction of the
tooth to accommodate the needed strength of the por celain veneer
in this area of the preparation (see Fig. 9.32F ). An incisal-lapping
preparation is indicated when the tooth being veneered needs
lengthening or when an incisal defect warrants restoration. he
extent of the lapping onto the lingual surface is generally dictated
by the extent of the lingual incisal defect or by the amount of
faciolingual resistance form desired for reinforcement of the incisal
edge (see Fig. 9.32G and, later, Fig. 9.40 ).
he preparation and restoration of a tooth with a veneer should
be carried out in a manner that provides optimal function, esthetics,
retention, physiologic contours, and longevity. All of these objectives
should be accomplished without compromising the strength of
the remaining tooth structure. If the veneer becomes chipped,
discolored, or worn, it usually can be repaired or replaced.
Darkly stained teeth, especially teeth discolored by tetracycline,
are much more diicult to veneer with full veneers compared with
teeth with generalized defects but that have normal underlying
coloration (see Fig. 9.44 ). he diiculty is compounded further
when the cervical areas are badly discolored. Usually, only the six
maxillary anterior teeth require correction because they are the
most noticeable when a person smiles or talks. he maxillary irst
premolars (and to a lesser extent the second premolars) also are
included, however, if they too are noticeable on smiling.
Discolored mandibular anterior teeth are rarely indicated for
veneers because the facioincisal portions are thin and usually subject
to biting forces and attrition. Veneering mandibular teeth is discour -
aged if the teeth are in normal occlusal contact because it is
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
the gingival margin, to r educe the efects of polymerization shrink -
age. he composite is placed in slight excess to allow some freedom
in contouring. It is helpful to inspect the facial surface from an
incisal view with a mirror to evaluate the contour before polymeriza -
tion. After the irst veneer is inished, the second tooth is restored
in a similar manner (see Fig. 9.34F ). In this case, the remaining
four anterior teeth are restored with direct composite veneers (see
Fig. 9.34G ) at the second appointment. Chapter 8 describes the
procedures used to insert and inish composite restoration s. Another
excellent example of direct composite veneers is seen in Fig. 9.35 .
Indirect Veneer Technique
Many dentists ind that the preparation, placement, and inishing
of several direct veneers at one time is too diicult, fatiguing, and
time consuming. Some patients become uncomfortable and restless
during long appointments. In addition, veneer shades and contours
can be better controlled when made outside of the mouth on a
cast. For these reasons, indirect veneer techniques are usu ally
preferable. Indirect veneers are primarily made of (1) processed
composite, (2) feldspathic porcelain, and (3) cast or pressed ceramic.
Because of superior strength, durability, and conservation of the
tooth structure, feldspathic porcelain bonded to intraenamel
preparations has historically been the preferred approach for indirect
veneering techniques used by dentists. Some pressed cerami c
veneering materials ofer comparable esthetic qualities but may
require a deeper tooth preparation that is often located in dentin.
Studies show that bond strengths to dentin decline over time and
that porcelain veneers placed in intraenamel preparations ofer the
best long-term results.35-38 However, newer, currently available
pressed or castable ceramics are capable of being fabricated to
much thinner dimensions, making them viable options for indirect
fabrication as well.
Although two appointments are required for indirect veneers,
chair time is reduced because much of the work has been done in examination indicated a good prognosis. A direct technique was
used with a light-cured microilled composite. Placing direct full
composite veneers is very time consuming. Although all six teeth
can be restored at the same appointment, it may be less traumatic
for the patient and the dentist if the veneers are placed in two
appointments. In this example, the central incisors were completed
during the irst appointment, and the lateral incisors and canines
were completed during the second appointment.
After the teeth to receive the veneers are cleaned and a shade
is selected, the area is isolated with cotton rolls and retraction
cords. Both central incisors are prepared with a coarse, rounded-end
diamond instrument. he window preparation typically is made
to a depth roughly equivalent to half the thickness of the facial
enamel, ranging from approximately 0.5 to 0.75 mm midfacially
and tapering down to a depth of about 0.3 to 0.5 mm along the
gingival margin, depending on the thickness of enamel (see Fig.
9.32). A well-deined chamfer at the level of the gingival crest
provides a deinite preparation margin for subsequent inishing
procedures. he margins are not extended subgingivally because
these areas are not defective. he preparation for all veneer types
(both direct and indirect) normally is terminated just facial to the
proximal contact except in the case of a diastema (see Fig. 9.34B ).
When interdental spaces exist, the preparations must be extended
from the facial surfaces onto the mesial surfaces, terminating at
the mesiolingual line angles (see Fig. 9.34C and D ). his lingual
extension of the preparation allows for proper reestablishment of
the entire proximal contour of the tooth in the inal restoration.
he incisal edges were not included in the preparations in this
example because no discoloration was present. In addition, preserva -
tion of the incisal edges better protects the veneers from heavy
functional forces, as noted earlier for window preparations.
he teeth to be treated should be restored one at a time. After
the etching, rinsing, and drying procedures (see Fig. 9.34E ), the
dentist applies and polymerizes the resin-bonding agent. he dentist
places the composite on the tooth in increments, especially along
A
E
F
GBC
D
• Fig. 9.34 Direct full veneers using light-cured composite. A, Enamel hypoplasia of maxillary anterior
teeth. B, Typical preparation of facial surface for full veneer. C, The preparation is extended onto the
mesial surface to allow closure of diastema. D, Full veneers restore proximal contact. E, Etched prepara -
tions of central incisors. F, Veneers completed on maxillary central incisors. G, Treatment completed with
placement of full veneers on remaining maxillary anterior teeth.
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
it can later cause problems if proper case selection is not done.
No-prep veneers are best used when teeth are inherently under -
contoured, when interdental spaces or open incisal embrasures are
present, or when both conditions exist. Examples of successful
no-prep veneers following these guidelines are seen in Figs. 9.36
and 9.37.
However, no-prep veneers can be problematic. First, no-prep
veneers are inherently made thinner and consequently are more
prone to fracture, especially during the try-in phase. Second, for the laboratory. Excellent results can be obtained when proper clinical
evaluation and careful operating procedures are followed. Indirect
veneers are attached to the enamel by acid etching and bonding
with light-cured resin cement.
No-Prep Veneers
As noted earlier (see section Veneers ), one approach being used
for indirect veneers is to place them on teeth with no tooth prepara -
tion. Although this “no prep” appr oach may at irst appear desirable,
B
A
C
• Fig. 9.35 Direct full veneers using light-cured composite for defective veneers. A, Defective composite
veneers with marginal staining. B, Conservative intraenamel preparation. C, New direct composite veneers
on maxillary anterior teeth. (Courtesy Dr. Robert Margeas.)
B A
• Fig. 9.36 No-prep veneers placed on maxillary anterior teeth. A, Before treatment. B, Immediately
after placement of the no-prep veneers. (Courtesy Dr. Patricia Pereira.)
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
marginal staining, tooth sensitivity, etc.) occur when excessive
amounts of dentin are exposed in the veneer preparation.
Tooth Preparation
Because the most important consideration in determining the
success of etched porcelain veneers is tooth preparation, a systematic
approach will be pr esented irst, using a dentiform series, prior to
reviewing the associated clinical procedures ( Fig. 9.39 ). A veneer
design using a butt-joint incisal edge will be illustrated irst. he
tooth used to illustrate the preparation sequence has intentionally
been colored blue to allow better visualization of the involved
steps. However, it is not recommended that this tooth marking
be done clinically.
he veneer preparation is made with a tapered, rounded-end
diamond instrument. It is critical that the tip diameter of the
diamond be measured because the diamond will serve as the
measuring tool in gauging proper reduction depth. A diamond
with a tip diameter of 1 to 1.2 mm is recommended. he tip
diameter of the diamond used in this series is 1.2 mm.
he irst step in the veneer preparation is establishing the
peripheral outline form. Position the diamond to half its depth
(approximately 0.6 mm in this example) just facial to the proximal
contact on either proximal surface, and then extend the bur, while
maintaining its occlusogingival orientation, around the gingival
area and then back up the opposite proximal area, again keeping
the diamond positioned just facial to the proximal contact area
(see Fig. 9.39A and B ). In this example, a supragingival marginal
position was maintained. Recall that clinically, the position
of the gingival margin is determined by lip position (and the
resulting display of teeth) and the gingival extent of the facial
discoloration or defect being treated, as noted previously. If
possible, a supragingival margin position is always considered
desirable because it minimizes the potential for an adverse gingival
response.
Facial reduction is achieved by irst identifying and then reducing
three separate facial zones: the incisal third, the middle third, and
the gingival third (see Fig. 9.39C ), in that order. To prepare the
incisal zone of facial reduction, the diamond irst is aligned parallel
with the facial surface of the incisal third of the tooth. he diamond
is then moved mesiodistally from line angle to line angle until the
desired depth of approximately 0.6 mm is attained. Again, the tip
of the diamond is used to gauge this reduction. Reduction depth
can be veriied by viewing the tip of the diamond in proximity to
the unprepared tooth structure gingival to this reduced area when indirect no-prep veneers, interproximal areas are diicult to access
for proper inishing. And third, as noted earlier, if case selection
is not done properly and the teeth are already of normal contour,
the resulting veneers inevitably will be overcontoured. Veneers that
are overcontoured are not generally esthetic and often can result
in impingement of gingival tissue, as noted earlier (see Fig. 9.31D ).
For these reasons, it is advisable in most cases to use a conservative,
intraenamel preparation for the use of indirect veneers, as noted
in the next section.
Etched Porcelain Veneers
he preferred type of indirect veneer is the etched porcelain (i.e.,
feldspathic) veneer. Porcelain veneers etched with hydroluoric
acid are capable of achieving high bond strengths to the etched
enamel via a resin-bonding medium.39-41 his porcelain etching
pattern is shown in Fig. 9.38 . In addition to the high bond strengths,
etched porcelain veneers are highly esthetic, stain resistant, and
periodontally compatible. he incidence of cohesive fracture for
etched porcelain veneers is also very low.36 However, as noted
earlier, the key to the long-term success with etched porcelain
veneers is the use of a conservative intraenamel preparation . Prepara -
tions into dentin should be avoided because virtually all problems
associated with etched porcelain veneers (debonding, accelerated
B A
• Fig. 9.37 No-prep veneers placed to restore undersized maxillary lateral incisors. A, Before treatment.
B, After placement of the no-prep veneers. (Courtesy Dr. Gary Radz.)
• Fig. 9.38 Scanning electron micrograph ( ×31, ) of feldspathic por -
celain etched with hydroluoric acid. (Courtesy Dr. Steven Bayne.)
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
desirable. Moreover, the reduction depth again can be v eriied by
viewing the tip of the diamond in proximity to the unprepared
tooth structure gingival to this reduced area when viewed from
the proximal, facial, and incisal aspects. Care also must be taken
to round the mesial and distal facial line angles during this reduction
sequence to ensure uniform facial reduction.
Reduction of the gingival one third is straightforward and simply
involves removal of the remaining “island” of unprepared tooth
structure to a level consistent with the surrounding previously
prepared tooth structure (see Fig. 9.39G and H ).
Incisal reduction is made by orienting the diamond pe rpendicular
to the incisal edge and then reducing the incisal edge to attain a viewed from the proximal, facial, and incisal aspects (see Fig. 9.39D
and E ). Care also must be taken to round the mesial and distal
facial line angles during this reduction sequence to ensure uniform
facial reduction.
he middle third is reduced in a similar manner. By carefully
watching the striations being created by the diamond mesiodistally
during the reduction of the middle third, it is easy to see when
the level of the previous incisal third reduction is reached (see Fig.
9.39F ). When a similar reduction level has been reached, the
striations in the middle one third will then extend into the area
previously reduced in the incisal third. Stop immediately. Do not
go deeper. Again, a reduction depth of approximately 0.6 mm is
A
B
D
E
F
CIncisal 1/3
3 zones of
reductionMiddle 1/3
Gingival 1/3
• Fig. 9.39 Intraenamel preparation for an etched porcelain veneer with a butt-joint incisal edge design.
A and B, The peripheral outline form is irst established using a rounded-end diamond instrument.
C–H, Facial reduction is achieved by irst identifying and then reducing three separate facial zones: the
incisal third, the middle third, and the gingival third (C), in that order.
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
the preparation of the lingual lap is made. Position the diamond
into the tooth to a depth of approximately 0.6 mm (less if remaining
faciolingual thickness of the incisal edge enamel is compromised)
and extend the preparation across the lingual surface from notch
to notch (see Fig. 9.40C ). he resulting sharp incisal angles must
then be rounded to finish the incisal-lapping portion of the
preparation. Care must be taken to include any desired lingual
defect. he gingival extent of the incisal lap is determined by the
extent of any lingual defect. he inal lapping portion of the
preparation is seen in Fig. 9.40D . he facial view of the completed
incisal-lapping preparation with a lingual lap of 0.5 mm is seen
in Fig. 9.40E .
Clinical Procedure
he case of a patient with generalized luorosis is used to illustrate
the clinical procedures involved ( Fig. 9.41A ). A consult appointment
is always recommended prior to initiating the veneer procedures.
At this appointment, the actual procedures are discussed in detail,
appropriate consents are obtained, and any needed records are
generated, including shade selection, intraoral photographs, and
impressions for diagnostic models and occlusal records. Laboratory
communications are greatly enhanced through the inclusion of
digital photographs. An excellent series of baseline photographs,
including some with shade tabs positioned in the photographic
ield to document the preoperative shapes and shades of the involved
teeth, should be made.
Although intraenamel preparations will be used, it is always
recommended that patients be anesthetized during the appointment minimum reduction of 1 mm or, more desirably, 1.5 mm (see Fig.
9.39I ). Clinically, this reduction in depth will be gauged using an
incisal reduction index. In this dentiform example, a minimum
1-mm incisal reduction depth was generated. Finally, round the
facioincisal line angle with the side of the diamond to reduce
internal stresses in the porcelain veneer. he inal intraenamel
preparation for an etched porcelain veneer using a butt-joint incisal
edge design is seen in Fig. 9.39J .
Frequently, an incisal-lapping preparation is indic ated if the
patient has worn or defective areas on the lingual aspect of the
incisal edge. Some operators also prefer this design because of
enhanced adaptation of the veneer to the lingual preparation margin
attributable to a “lap sliding” it.
he preparation steps for the incisal-lapping prepar ation are
identical to those for the butt-joint design, including the steps for
incisal reduction; however, additional steps are required to attain
the incisal-lapping feature. he irst step in achieving this preparation
design is to notch the mesial and distal incisal angles. he tip of
the same diamond instrument used for the earlier steps of the
veneer preparation is used to establish these notches. Using the
diamond, extend the notches completely through the incisal angles
faciolingually to a depth incisogingivally consistent with the desired
amount of lapping of the lingual surface ( Fig. 9.40A ). For example,
if a 0.5-mm lap of the lingual surface is desired, as in this example,
the notches are prepared to a depth of 0.5 mm each accordingly
(see Fig. 9.40B ).
Once the incisal notches have been generated incisogingivally
to a depth consistent with the desired amount of lingual lapping,
G
H
I
J
I, Incisal reduction is attained. J, The completed intraenamel preparation for an
etched porcelain veneer with a butt-joint incisal edge. • Fig. 9.39, cont’d
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
of the inal veneers will be diferent from the current teeth, the
incisal reduction index should be made using the diagnostic model
(see Fig. 9.42A and B ). As in this case, if no change in the incisal
edge positions of the involved teeth is desired, the reduction index
can be made directly in the patient’s mouth by recording the
existing contours of the involved teeth. Once the facial excess has
been trimmed away with a No. 12 surgical blade in a Bard-Parker
handle, the incisal reduction index should be tried in the mouth
to verify the accuracy of the index (see Fig. 9.41B ).
he patient in this case has a high smile line and generalized
defects that involve the entire facial surfaces of anterior teeth.
herefore a small diameter gingival retraction cord is placed in for tooth preparation to ensure maximum comfort for the patient
and the dentist. Once the anesthetic is administered, preoperative
records such as an incisal reduction index and those needed to
facilitate temporization are made. An incisal reduction index is
always recommended to accurately gauge the amount o f incisal
reduction during the preparation of teeth for etched porcelain
veneers ( Fig. 9.42 ; see also Fig. 9.41B–H ). An incisal reduction
index is made by recording the lingual and incisal contours of the
anterior teeth to be prepared or the contours generated in a
diagnostic wax-up. Typically a fast-setting silicone or polyvinyl
siloxane elastomeric material is used to generate this record. If a
diagnostic model has been made in which the incisal edge positions
A
B
C
D
E
• Fig. 9.40 Intraenamel preparation steps for an etched porcelain veneer with an incisal-lapping design.
A and B, Incisal notches. C, Preparing the lingual-lapping portion of the prep. D and E, The completed
intraenamel preparation viewed from the lingual and facial aspects for an etched porcelain veneer with
an incisal-lapping design.
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
• Fig. 9.41 Etched porcelain veneers using an intraenamel preparation. A, A patient with severe dental
luorosis. B, An incisal reduction index is made intraorally, since no signiicant change in incisal edge
position is desired. C, Retraction cord is placed. D, The outline form is irst established. E–G, Facial
reduction is attained by using three zones of facial reduction. H, Incisal reduction is veriied using the
incisal reduction index. Continued
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
I, Finished preparations for intraenamel preparations. Note the window preparations
on canines and premolars. J, Retraction cord is placed for isolation. K, The it of the veneer is assessed.
L and M, Etching of the prepared maxillary central incisors. N and O, Adhesive is applied to the etched
enamel and the tooth side of the porcelain veneer. P , The veneer is loaded with resin cement and seated
on the tooth. • Fig. 9.41, cont’d
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
S
T
U
V
W
X
Q
R
Q, Excess cement is removed with a microbrush. R, Excess cement is removed
interproximally through removal of polyester strip. S, Resin cement cured with intense curing light. T, No.
12 surgical blade in a Bard-Parker handle is used for removing excess cured resin cement. U and V,
Diamond instruments used to “dress” marginal areas. W and X, 30-luted carbide burs and diamond
impregnated polishing instruments used to inish and polish veneer margins. • Fig. 9.41, cont’d
Continued
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
reduction is attained by using three zones of facial reduction as
previously described (see Fig. 9.41E–G ). Veneer interproximal
margins should extend into the facial and gingival embrasures,
without engaging an undercut, and yet should be located just
facial to the proximal contacts.
Since this patient is young with beautifully shaped canines and
also exhibits a canine-guided occlusion, a window type of preparation
design was employed when preparing the maxillary canines. By
restricting the window prep veneers to the facial surface entirely,
functional contact will be maintained solely on tooth structure, anticipation of veneer margins that will be placed at the level of
the free gingival margins (see Fig. 9.41C ).
Incisal-lapping preparations for porcelain veneers are made on
the maxillary central and lateral incisors consistent with the sys -
tematic step-by-step preparation procedures described earlier. he
intraenamel preparations are made with a tapered, rounded-end
diamond instrument to a depth of approximately 0.5 to 0.75 mm
midfacially, diminishing to a depth of 0.3 to 0.5 mm along the
gingival margins, depending on enamel thickness. he outline
form is irst established as noted earlier (see Fig. 9.41D ). Facial
Y
Z
Y and Z, Finished etched porcelain veneers as viewed from the lingual and facial
aspects. • Fig. 9.41, cont’d
A
B
C
D
• Fig. 9.42 Incisal reduction index made from a diagnostic model. A and B, A fast-set elastomeric
material is used to record the lingual and incisal contours of the diagnostic model. C, Incisal reduction
index is used to verify proper incisal preparation of teeth. D, Finished etched porcelain veneers.
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
dual-cured versions. Shade selection of the bonding medium is
determined after the it of the individual veneers has been evaluated
and conirmed. Water can be used as an optical medium for try-in
to assess the appearance of the veneers. With this technique, water
is placed in a single central incisor veneer (or both central incisor
veneers); placed on clean, dry teeth; and the appearance assessed.
If the veneers are deemed acceptable in appearance, an untinted
shade of the bonding resin is indicated. For the vast majority of
etched porcelain veneers, an untinted shade of the bonding resin
is recommended. Because etched porcelain veneers can be fabricated
with inherent color gradients, characterizations, and even additional
opaques when further masking of stains is needed, it is unusual
that alternative shades or opaque resin bonding media are needed.
Nonetheless, alternative shades or opaque versions of resin bonding
cements are sometimes preferred by some dentists.
If alternative shades of resin cements are needed, shade selection
is made by irst placing a uniform layer of a selected shade of resin
cement, approximately 0.5 mm in thickness, on the tooth side of
a single veneer. Typically, a central incisor veneer is used to facilitate
shade determination of the cement. he operatory light is turned
away during shade assessment to prevent premature and inadvertent
curing of the resin cement. he veneer is seated on a clean, dry,
unetched tooth; the excess resin cement is removed with a brush;
and the overall shade of the veneer is evaluated. After try-in, the
veneer is removed quickly and stored in a container that is impervi -
ous to light to prevent curing of the cement. If the shade of the
cement is determined to be appropriate, more of the same shade
is added to the veneer just before bonding. If a diferent shade is
deemed necessary, the existing shade is wiped from the inner aspect
of the veneer with a disposable microbrush, and a new shade of
resin cement is placed in the veneer. In the meantime, the assistant
can remove residual cement of the previous shade from the tooth
with a cotton pellet or brush. he veneer loaded with the new
shade of cement is reseated and evaluated, as previously described.
Water-soluble try-in pastes that correspond to the same shades
of resin cements also are available with many veneer bonding kits.
hese try-in pastes allow shade assessment without the risk of
inadvertent premature curing of the cement because the try-in
pastes are not capable of setting. However, after the try-in process
with these try-in pastes, the veneers must be thoroughly cleaned,
according to the manufacturer’s instructions, to ensure that optimal
bonding occurs. A light-cured resin cement of the same shade is
used for inal cementation.
he inherent shade of the veneer, characterization, and internal
opaquing must be accomplished primarily during the fabrication
of the veneer itself in the laboratory. Some additional masking can
be accomplished chairside using an opaque resin-bonding medium
at the time of bonding. However, excess use of opaque bonding
resins also can reduce the “esthetic vitality” of t he veneer, resulting
in a poor esthetic outcome. Also, the overall shade of the veneer
can be modiied only slightly by the shade of cement selected.
Significant changes in shading or masking ability cannot be
accomplished chairside.
Prior to cementation of the veneers, the retraction cords are
evaluated to ensure that they are tucked adequately into the gingival
crevice. he tooth used for try-in to assess the shade of the resinbonding medium should be cleaned again with a slurry of pumice
to remove any residual resin or try-in paste that may preclude
proper acid etching of the enamel.
A technique recommended for applying the veneers one at a
time is presented here. Polyester strips are placed interproximally
to prevent inadvertent bonding to the adjacent tooth, followed by thereby preventing accelerated wear of opposing teeth. Adequate
incisal reduction is veriied using the incisal reduction index as
noted earlier (see Fig. 9.41H ). he inished preparations are shown
in Fig. 9.41I .
After the preparations are completed, an elastomeric impression
is made and appropriate occlusal records generated. Digital photos
of the prepared teeth (with and without appropriate shade tabs in
the photographic ield) also are recommended. In most cases,
provisionals are fabricated for the prepared teeth, as described in
the subsequent section on temporization (see Veneer Provisionaliza -
tion). If a diagnostic wax-up was generated, veneer provisionals
are necessary to assess the tooth contours generate d in the wax-up
intraorally. If no diagnostic wax-up was needed, occasionally
temporary restorations are not required if the patient consents,
because the preparations are shallow and involve only enamel. In
these cases, the patient should be instructed to avoid biting hard
foods and objects, to keep the areas clean with a soft bristled brush,
and to expect the possibility of some mild sensitivity to hot and
cold. It should be noted that the vast majority of veneer cases will
warrant temporization.
After they have been fabricated in the laboratory, the porcelain
veneers are returned to the dentist for cementation at the second
appointment. he completed veneers must be inspected for cracks,
overextended margins, and adequate internal etching (as evidenced
by a frosted appearance). Marginal areas in particular should be
inspected for proper etching so that an adequate seal occurs in
these areas. Overextended marginal areas interproximally may
preclude full seating of adjacent veneers. hese areas can be trimmed
carefully with a micron-inishing diamond instrument or lexible
abrasive disk. Unless severe or inaccessible, most minor overexten -
sions should be trimmed only after bonding the veneer to the
tooth because of the risk of fracturing the porcelain.
After the prepared teeth are cleaned with a pumice slurry, rinsed,
and dried, isolation is accomplished with a lip retractor (optional)
and cotton rolls. A 5-cm by 5-cm (2-inch by 2-inch) cotton gauze
is placed across the back of the patient’s mouth to protect against
aspiration or swallowing of an inadvertently dropped veneer. If
the veneer margins closely approximate the gingiva, a small diameter
retraction cord should be placed in the gingival crevice during
try-in and cementation to prevent inadvertent contamination of
the bonds from crevicular luids (see Fig. 9.41J ).
he it of each veneer is evaluated on the respective individual
tooth and adjusted if necessary. A No. 2 explorer should be used
to assess marginal it (see Fig. 9.41K ). All of the veneers should
be tried in place not only individually but also in adjacent pairs
to ensure the it of adjacent seated veneers. Veneers should be tried
in place only on clean, dry teeth to eliminate any potential for
contamination. If accidental contamination occurs, the veneer
should be cleaned thoroughly with alcohol or acid etchant, rinsed,
and dried before bonding.
Prior to cementation, a silane agent can optionally be applied
to the internal surfaces of the veneers. he silane acts as a coupling
agent, forming a chemical bond between the porcelain and the
resin that increases bond strength of the resin to the porcelain.42
It also improves the wettability of the porcelain. he primary
source of retention with porcelain veneers still remains the etched
porcelain surface itself. Only a modest increase in bond strength
results from silanation of the porcelain; however, it is recommended
because it also may reduce marginal leakage and discoloration.
A light-cured resin cement is recommended for bonding the
veneer to the tooth because light-cured resins are more color stable
and provide additional working time over the self-cured or
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
recontour and “dress” these areas (see Fig. 9.41U ). Marginal areas
should be conluent with the surrounding unprepared tooth surfaces
when assessed with a No. 2 explorer. he lingual areas are always
inished with an oval-shaped ine diamond instrument (see Fig.
9.41V ). Because the use of a diamond instrument breaks the glazed
surface, a series of appropriate instruments is used to restore a
smooth surface texture. First, a rounded-end or bullet-shaped (or
oval for lingual surfaces), 30-luted carbide inishing bur (Midwest
No. or Brasseler No. ) is used to plane the porcelain
surface and to remove the striations created by the diamond
instruments (see Fig. 9.41W ). Studies show that the best results
occur if the diamond instruments are used with air and water
coolant, whereas the 30-luted bur should be used dry.43 Second,
the porcelain is smoothed and polished with a series of abrasive
rubber, porcelain polishing cups, and points (Dialite Porcelain
Polishing Kit; Brasseler USA, Savannah, GA) (see Fig. 9.41X ).
Final surface luster is imparted by using a porcelain-polishing
paste, applied with either a rubber Prophy cup or a felt wheel.
his step is optional if a suitable polish has been attained with the
polishing points and cups. he completed veneers are shown from
incisal and facial views in Fig. 9.41Y and Z .
Etched porcelain veneers also can be used efectively to restore
malformed anterior teeth conservatively. Malformed lateral incisors
are shown in Fig. 9.43A . Incisal-lapping preparations that are
extended well onto the lingual surface are used (see Fig. 9.43B ).
he resulting restorations are virtually comparable with “threequarter crowns” in porcelain. he inal esthetic results are shown
in Fig. 9.43C .
Darkly discolored teeth are more diicult to treat with porcelain
veneers. Several modiications in the veneering technique can be
used to enhance the inal esthetic result. First, opaque porcelain
can be incorporated during the fabrication of the veneers to achieve
more inherent masking. If the veneers are not inherently opaque,
little chance exists for adequate masking of a darkly stained tooth.
Typically, 5% to 15% opaque porcelain is required to achieve
optimal masking. Exceeding 15% opaque porcelain dramatically
reduces light penetration and results in a signiicant loss of esthetic
vitality; the esthetic vitality or the realistic appearance of teeth
depends on light penetration (see section T ranslucency , under
Artistic Elements , earlier in the chapter). Second, a slightly deeper
tooth preparation can be used to allow greater veneer thickness.
he preparation should always be restricted to enamel, however,
to ensure optimal bonding of the veneer to the tooth. Even with
improved dentin-bonding agents, the bonds to dentin are less
predictable or durable than the bonds to enamel because of the
high variability and dynamic nature of dentin. Bonds to etched
enamel are highly predictable and very durable.
hird, the laboratory can be instructed to use several coats of
a die-spacing medium on the laboratory model to allow a slightly etching, rinsing, and drying procedures. It is recommended that
the two central incisors be etched and their veneers bonded irst
because of their critical importance esthetically. Etch the teeth to
be bonded with a 35% to 37% phosphoric acid gel (see Fig.
9.41L ). Following etching, rinsing, and drying, the preparations
should exhibit a frosted appearance as evidence of an appropriately
etched enamel surface (see Fig. 9.41M ). An adhesive is applied to
the etched enamel and the tooth side of the silane-primed porcelain
veneer (see Fig. 9.41N and O ). Next, a thin layer (0.5 mm) of
the selected shade of light-cured resin cement is placed on the
tooth side of the veneer, taking care not to entrap air. he irst
veneer is placed on the tooth and vibrated (carefully and lightly)
into position with a blunt instrument or light inger pressure (see
Fig. 9.41P ). he margins of the veneer are examined with a No.
2 explorer to verify accurate seating. Next, the excess resin cement
is removed with a disposable microbrush, always directing the
microbrush in a gingival direction to prevent displacement of the
veneer (see Fig. 9.41Q ). he second veneer is placed and cleaned
of excess cement in like manner. If a veneer cement with thick
viscosity is used, the polyester strips can be carefully removed to
facilitate removal of interproximal resin prior to curing (see Fig.
9.41R ). However, the resin cement should be cured only after
visual inspection reveals no excess resin remains in these critical
interproximal areas.
Veneer margins are evaluated again before the veneer is exposed
to the curing light. To ensure complete polymerization, the veneer
should be cured for a minimum of 20 to 40 seconds each from
the facial and lingual directions with a high-intensity, blue lightemitting diode (LED) light (see Fig. 9.41S ). A light stream of air
can be directed on the tooth during the curing sequence to prevent
overheating from the curing light. After positioning and bonding
of the irst two veneers on the central incisors, the remaining
veneers can be positioned carefully and bonded in like manner.
Following proper positioning and bonding of all the veneers, any
residual resin cement can be removed. A No. 12 surgical blade in
a Bard-Parker handle is ideal for removing excess cured resin cement
remaining around the margins (see Fig. 9.41T ). Care must be
exercised to ensure that the surgical blade is used only with a
secure inger rest and using short shaving strokes, always directed
parallel to the veneer margins. Removal of the retraction cord at
this time facilitates access and visibility to the subgingival areas.
If the marginal it of the porcelain veneers is deemed acceptable
and a favorable emergence proile exists, only removal of the excess
cement is required.
If the porcelain margins are overextended beyond the cavosurface
angles, an overhang is present, or the marginal area s are too bulbous,
recontouring of these areas is required (especially along the gingival
margins) to ensure proper physiologic contours and gingival health.
A lame-shaped ine diamond instrument is used to carefully
A
B
C
• Fig. 9.43 Treatment of malformed teeth with porcelain veneers. A, Malformed lateral incisors. B, An
incisal-lapping preparation similar to a three quarter crown in enamel is used. C, Final esthetic results.
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
discoloration. Because of the more translucent nature of pressed
ceramic veneers, however, dark discolorations are best treated with
etched porcelain veneers. he clinical technique for placing pressed
ceramic veneers (e.g., IPS Empress) is not markedly diferent from
that for feldspathic porcelain veneers, other than the need for a
slightly greater tooth reduction depth.
he procedures for tooth preparation, try-in, and bonding of
pressed veneers are the same as for etched porcelain veneers except
that the marginal it is superior. For that reason, often little margi nal
inishing is necessary. Only the excess bonding medium needs to
be removed. A typical case involving pressed ceramic veneers, with
before and after treatment views, is shown in Fig. 9.45 .
Veneer Proviionalization
Because intraenamel preparations for etched porcelain veneers are
by design very conservative, the resulting provisionals are inherently
thin. Furthermore, they cannot be bonded in a similar manner to
conventional provisionals for crowns, for example, because of the
lack of inherent retention form. Moreover, since they are very thin,
they cannot be made in the mouth and removed for trimming
and subsequent cementing because of the high probability of
fracture. herefore veneer provisionals must be made and placed
simultaneously intraorally.
Fig. 9.46 illustrates a typical case involving the fabrication of
provisionals for etched porcelain veneers for maxillary anterior
teeth. A clear polyvinyl siloxane material is used to make the greater thickness of the resin-bonding medium. he die-spacing
medium must not be extended closer than 1 mm to the margins
to ensure adequate positioning of the veneer to the preparation
during try-in and bonding and to provide for a slight internal
space. A typical case of darkly discolored teeth showing prepared
teeth and postoperative result is shown in Fig. 9.44 .
Patients who have darkly stained teeth always should be informed
that although porcelain (or composite) veneers can result in
improved esthetics, they may not entirely eliminate or mask
extremely dark stains. Because of the limited thickness of the veneers
and the absolute necessity of incorporating intrinsic opacity, the
realistic translucency or esthetic vitality of veneered teeth may
never be comparable with that of natural, unafected teeth (see
Fig. 9.9 ). Full porcelain coverage with all-ceramic crowns may be
indicated in some patients with severe discoloration because of
the crown’s greater capacity to restore esthetic vitality. Nonetheless,
porcelain veneers are a viable option in most cases for patients
who desire esthetic improvement without significant tooth
reduction.
Pressed Ceramic Veneers
Another esthetic alternative for veneering teeth is the use of pressed
ceramics (e.g., IPS Empress or e.max [Ivoclar Vivadent]). In contrast
to etched porcelain veneers that are fabricated by stacking and
iring feldspathic porcelain, pressed ceramic veneers are literally
cast using a lost wax technique. Excellent esthetics is possible using
pressed ceramic materials for most cases involving mild to moderate
A
B
• Fig. 9.44 Darkly stained teeth treated with porcelain veneers. A, Tetracycline-stained teeth seen after
preparation for porcelain veneers. B, After view of completed veneers.
A
B
C
D
E
F
• Fig. 9.45 Pressed ceramic veneers (IPS Empress). A–C, Before treatment, facial views. D–F, Esthetic
result after completed veneers. (Courtesy Dr. Luiz N. Baratieri.)
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
A B
C
D
E
F
• Fig. 9.46 Temporization for etched porcelain veneers. A and B, Diagnostic models in anticipation of
etched porcelain veneers. C, Clear polyvinyl siloxane (PVS) impression made from diagnostic model.
D–F, Spot-etched areas for retention of temporary veneers. preoperative impression from which the provisionals will be made.
If no diagnostic model is needed and the existing contours of the
teeth are to be replicated, the impression for the provisionals is
made directly in the mouth. However, as in this case, if a diagnostic
wax-up was generated (see Fig. 9.46A and B ), the clear polyvinyl
siloxane impression is made from this diagnostic model. Making
the temporary from the diagnostic wax-up enables the clinician
to see the contours of the wax-up manifested intraorally in the
resulting provisionals. As seen in Fig. 9.46C , the impression itself
is removed from the outer tray (no tray adhesive is used) and set
aside for future use.
Following the preparation and impression of the teeth for
porcelain veneers, the teeth to be temporized are “spot etched” with 35% to 37% phosphoric acid. Only a 2-mm circle of enamel
should be etched on the facial surface of each tooth to be veneered
(see Fig. 9.46D and E ). Because of the low viscosity of the bis-acryl
temporary material, no bonding agent is required for bonding.
he bis-acr yl material will iniltrate the etched areas for microme -
chanical bonding. hese spot-etched areas will be the only areas
to which the veneer provisionals will be bonded. If the entire tooth
were etched, the veneer provisionals could not be readily removed.
After spot etching, only small etched circles evidenced by a frosted
appearance should be present on the surface of each prepared tooth
(see Fig. 9.46F ).
he etched teeth must be kept clean and dry at this point. he
clear polyvinyl siloxane impression is quickly loaded with a
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
G
H
I
J
K
L
G and H, Clear PVS impression is quickly loaded with bis-acryl temporary material,
and positioned in the mouth. I and J, Impression is removed, and No. 12 blade in a Bard-Parker surgical
handle is used to remove excess material. K, Glazing agent placed and cured. L and M, Final facial and
lingual views of veneer provisionals. • Fig. 9.46, cont’d
Continued
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
As demonstrated in a diferent case, once the patient returns
for the inal try-in and cementation of the veneers, the provisionals
are carefully removed by prying them from each tooth u sing a
Black’s spoon (see Fig. 9.46N ). he provisionals can readily be
removed since the only area where they actually are bonde d to the
tooth is the very small spot-etched, 2-mm circle on the facial
surface of each prepared tooth. Once the veneer provisionals are
removed, the areas that had been spot etched and bonded need
to be lightly resurfaced with a lame-shaped diamond to ensure
no residual resin-bonding agent is present that could preclude
proper seating and bonding of the inal veneers (see Fig. 9.46O ).
Veneer for Metal Retoration
Esthetic inserts (i.e., partial or full veneers) of a tooth-colored
material can be placed on the facial surface of a tooth previously
restored with a metal restoration. For new castings, plans are made
at the time of tooth preparation and during laboratory development
of the wax pattern to incorporate a veneer into the cast restoration.
After such a casting has been cemented, the veneer can be inserted,
as described in the next section, except that the portion of mechani -
cal retention of the veneer into the casting has been provided in
the wax pattern stage.
Veneers for Existing Metal Restorations
Occasionally, the facial portion of an existing metal restoration
(amalgam or gold) is judged to be distracting ( Fig. 9.47A ). A
careful examination, including a radiograph, is required to determine self-curing bis-acryl temporary material and thereafter is immediately
positioned in the mouth (see Fig. 9.46G and H ). Once seated,
inger pressure is applied to the peripheral areas of the lexible
impression (since no outer hard tray is present) to express the
excess material and “thin out” the resulting resin “lash.”
When the bis-acryl temporary material has set, the clear impres -
sion is removed (see Fig. 9.46I ). he gross excess “lash” material
facially and lingually is removed with cotton pliers. hereafter, a
No. 12 blade held in a Bard-Parker surgical handle is us ed to
carefully trim the excess temporary material around the margins
of each tooth (see Fig. 9.46J ). he same No. 12 blade is used to
carefully trim excess material in the gingival embrasure areas as
well.
A sharp large discoid applied parallel to the lingual margins is
used to remove resin “lash” in the lingual concave areas. he
temporary veneers are all joined together interproximally, increasing
their collective strength and enhancing retention. A light-cured
resin glazing agent is applied and cured to generate a smooth
surface texture (see Fig. 9.46K ). Final views of the inished provision -
als are seen in Fig. 9.46L and M .
Appropriate adjustments can then be made intraorally in the
provisionals to optimize occlusion and esthetics. A digital photo -
graph of the inal provisionals should be shared with the laboratory
as a template for the inal veneers. Patients must be instructed that
they should not bite anything of any substance because of the
weak nature of these veneers. hese provisional veneer s literally
are more to accommodate esthetics and not function during the
interim time until delivery of the inal veneers.
N
M
O
N and O, At delivery appointment, temporary veneers are removed with Black’s
spoon, and the spot-etched and bonded areas are relieved with a diamond. • Fig. 9.46, cont’d
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
retention is placed in the gingival area with a No. 1/4 carbide
bur (using air coolant to enhance vision) 0.25 mm d eep along
the gingivoaxial and linguoaxial angles. Retention and esthet -
ics are enhanced by beveling the enamel cavosurface margin
(approximately 0.5 mm wide) with a coarse, flame-shaped
diamond instrument oriented at 45 degrees to the external tooth
surface (see Fig. 9.47B ). After it is etched, rinsed, and dried, the
preparation is complete (see Fig. 9.47C ). Adhesive resin liners
containing 4-methyloxy ethyl trimellitic anhydride (4-META),
capable of bonding composite to metal, also may be used but are
quite technique sensitive.44 Manufacturers’ instructions should be
followed strictly to ensure optimal results with these materials. he
composite material is inserted and inished in the usual manner (see
Fig. 9.47D ).
Repair of Veneer
Failures of esthetic veneers occur because of breakage, discoloration,
or wear. Consideration should be given to conservative repairs of
veneers if the examination reveals that the remaining tooth and
restoration are sound. It is not always necessary to remove all of
the old restoration. he material most commonly used for making
repairs is light-cured composite.
Small chipped areas on veneers often can be corrected by
recontouring and polishing. When a sizable area is broken, it that the existing restoration is sound before an esthetic correction
is made. he size of the unesthetic area determines the extent of
the preparation. Anesthesia is not usually required because the
preparation is in metal and enamel. Preliminary procedures consist
of cleaning the area with pumice, selecting the shade, and isolating
the site with a cotton roll. When the unesthetic metal extends
subgingivally, the level of the gingival tissue is marked on the
restoration with a sharp explorer and a retraction cord is placed
in the gingival crevice. Rubber dam isolation may be required in
some instances.
A No. 2 carbide bur rotating at high speed with an air-water
spray is used to remove the metal, starting at a point midway
between the gingival and occlusal margins. he preparation is
made perpendicular to the surface (a minimum of approximately
1 mm in depth), leaving a butt joint at the cavosurface margins.
he 1-mm depth and butt joint should be maintained as the
preparation is extended occlusally. All of the metal along the facial
enamel is removed, and the preparation is extended into the facial
and occlusal embrasures just enough for the veneer to hide the
metal. he contact areas on the proximal or occlusal surfaces must
not be included in the preparation. To complete the outline form,
the preparation is extended gingivally approximately 1 mm past
the mark indicating the clinical level of the gingival tissue.
he inal preparation should have the same features as those
described for veneers in new cast restorations. Mechanical
A
B
C
D
• Fig. 9.47 Veneer for existing cast restoration. A, Mesiofacial portion of onlay is distracting to patient.
B, Model of tooth and preparation. Note 90-degree cavosurface angle and retention prepared in gold
and the cavosurface bevel in enamel. C, Clinical preparation ready for composite resin. D, Completed
restoration.
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
A
B
C
D
E
• Fig. 9.48 Repairing a direct composite veneer. A, Fractured veneer on the maxillary canine. B, Prepa -
ration with rounded-end diamond instrument. C, Undercuts placed in existing veneer with a No. 1/4 bur.
D, Completed preparation is shown isolated and etched. E, Veneer restored to original color and contour.
usually can be repaired if the remaining portion is sound ( Fig.
9.48A ). For direct composite veneers, repairs ideally should be
made with the same material that was used originally. After cleaning
the area and selecting the shade, the operator should roughen the
damaged surface of the veneer or tooth (or both) with a coarse,
tapered, rounded-end diamond instrument to form a chamfered
cavosurface margin (see Fig. 9.48B ). Roughening with microetching
(i.e., sandblasting) also is efective. For more positive retention,
mechanical locks may be placed in the remaining composite material
with a small, round bur (see Fig. 9.48C ). Acid etchant is applied
to clean the prepared area and to etch any exposed enamel, which
is then rinsed and dried (see Fig. 9.48D ). Next, an adhesive is
applied to the preparation (i.e., existing composite and enamel)
and polymerized. Composite is added, cured, and inished in the
usual manner (see Fig. 9.48E ).
To repair porcelain veneers, a hydroluoric acid gel, suitable for
intraoral use (but only with a rubber dam in place), must be used
to etch the fractured porcelain. Hydroluoric acid gels are available
in approximately 10% bufered concentrations that can be used
for intraoral porcelain repairs if proper isolation with a rubber
dam is used. Although caution still must be taken when using
hydroluoric acid gels intraorally, the lower acid concentration
allows for relatively safe intraoral use. Full-strength hydroluoric
acid should never be used intraorally for etching porcelain. Isolation
of the porcelain veneer to be repaired should alway s be accomplished
with a rubber dam to protect gingival tissue from the irritating
efects of the hydroluoric acid. he manufacturer’s instructions
must be followed regarding application time for the hydroluoric
acid gel to ensure optimal porcelain etching. A lightly frosted
appearance, similar to that of etched enamel, should be seen if the
porcelain has been properly etched. A silane coupling agent may
be applied to the etched porcelain surface before the adhesive is
applied. Composite material is added, cured, and inished in the
usual manner. Large fractures are best treated by replacing the
entire porcelain veneer.Acknowledgment
Portions of the section on artistic elements were reprinted with
permission from Heymann HO: he artistry of conservative esthetic
dentistry, J Am Dent Assoc (12E; special issue):14, .
Reference
1. Goldstein RE: Esthetics in dentistry , Philadelphia, , JB
Lippincott.
2. Levin EI: Dental esthetics and the golden proportion. J Prosthet Dent
40: , .
3. Borissavlievitch M: he golden number , London, , Alec Tiranti.
4. Preston JD: he golden proportion revisited. J Esthet Dent 5: – ,
.
5. Ward DH: A study of dentists’ preferred maxillary anterior tooth
width proportions: comparing recurring esthetic dental proportions
to other mathematical and naturally occurring proportions. J Esthet
Restor Dent 19(6): – , .
6. Sterrett JD, Oliver T, Robinson F , et al: Width/length ratios of normal
clinical crowns of maxillary anterior teeth. J Clin Periodontol
26: – , .
7. Magne P , Gallucci GO, Belser UC: Anatomic crown width/length
ratios of unworn and worn maxillary teeth in white subjects. J Prosthet
Dent 89: – , .
8. Chiche GJ, Pinault A: Esthetics of anterior ixed prosthodontics , Chicago,
, Quintessence.
9. Sproull RC: Understanding color. In Goldstein RE, editor: Esthetics
in dentistry , Philadelphia, , JB Lippincott.
10. Dawson PE: Evaluation, diagnosis, and treatment of occlusal problems ,
ed 2, St. Louis, , Mosby.
11. Graber TM, Vanarsdall RL: Orthodontics: Current principles and
techniques , ed 3, St. Louis, , Mosby.
12. Hattab FN, Qudeimat MA, al-Rimawi HS: Dental discolorations:
an overview. J Esthet Dent 11: , .
13. Flynn M: Black teeth: a primitive method of caries prevention in
Southeast Asia. J Am Dent Assoc 95:96, .
CHAPTER 9 Additional Conervative Ethetic Procedure
30. American D ental Association Council on Scientiic Afairs: Report
on laser bleaching. J Am Dent Assoc : , .
31. Shethri SA, Matis BA, Cochran MA, et al: A clinical evaluation of
two in-oice bleaching products. Oper Dent 28: – , .
32. McCloskey RJ: A technique for removal of luorosis stains. J Am
Dent Assoc :63, .
33. Croll TP , Cavanaugh RR: Enamel color modiication by controlled
hydrochloric acid-pumice abrasion: Part 1. Technique and examples.
Quintessence Int 17:81, .
34. Croll TP: Enamel microabrasion for removal of supericial dysmin -
eralization and decalciication defects. J Am Dent Assoc : ,
.
35. Dumfahrt H, Schafer H: Porcelain laminate veneers: A retrospective
evaluation after 1-10 years of service. Int J Prosthodont 13:9–18,
.
36. Friedman MJ: A 15-year review of porcelain veneer failure: A clinician’s
observation. Compend Contin Educ Dent Suppl 19: – , .
37. Hashimoto M, Ohno H, Kaga M, et al: Resin-tooth interfaces after
long-term function. Am J Dent 14: – , .
38. Meiers JC, Young D: T wo-year composite/dentin durability. Am J
Dent 14: – , .
39. Calamia JR: Etched porcelain facial veneers: a ne w treatment modality
based on scientiic and clinical evidence. N Y J Dent 53: , .
40. Friedman MJ: he enamel ceramic alternative: porcelain veneers vs.
metal ceramic crowns. CDA J 20:27, .
41. Stangel I, Nathanson D, Hsu CS: Shear strength of the composite
bond to etched porcelain. J Dent Res 66: , .
42. Bayne SC, Taylor DF , Zardiackas LD: Biomaterials science , Chapel
Hill, NC, , Brightstar.
43. Haywood VB, Heymann HO, Kusy RP , et al: Polishing porcelain
veneers: an SEM and specular relectance analysis. Dent Mater 4: ,
.
44. Cooley RL, Burger KM, Chain MC: Evaluation of a 4-META
adhesive cement. J Esthet Dent 3:7, .14. Carver CC, Heymann HO: Dental and oral discolorations associated
with minocycline and other tetracycline analogs. J Esthet Dent 11:43,
.
15. Haywood VB: History, safety, and efectiveness of current bleaching
techniques and applications of the nightguard vital bleaching technique.
Quintessence Int 23: , .
16. Haywood VB: Nightguard vital bleaching: A history and products
update: Part 1. Esthetic Dent Update 2:63, .
17. Titley KC, Torneck CD, Ruse ND: he efect of carbamide-peroxide
gel on the shear bond strength of a microill resin to bovine enamel.
J Dent Res 71:20, .
18. Sorensen JA, Martinof JT: Intracoronal reinforcement and coronal
coverage: a study of endodontically treated teeth. J Prosthet Dent
51: , .
19. Harrington GW, Natkin E: External resorption associated with
bleaching of pulpless teeth. J Endod 5: , .
20. Madison S, Walton R: Cervical root resorption following bleaching
of endodontically treated teeth. J Endod 16: , .
21. Lado EA: Bleaching of endodontically treated teeth: an update on
cervical resorption. Gen Dent 36: , .
22. Haywood VB, Heymann HO: Nightguard vital bleaching: how safe
is it? Quintessence Int 22: , .
23. Lado EA, Stanley HR, Weisman MI: Cervical resorption in bleached
teeth. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 55:78, .
24. Holmstrup G, Palm AM, Lambjerg-Hansen H: Bleaching of discolored
root-illed teeth. Endod Dent Traumatol 4: , .
25. Feinman RA, Goldstein RL, Garber DA: Bleaching teeth , Chicago,
, Quintessence.
26. Haywood VB, Heymann HO: Nightguard vital bleaching. Quintessence
Int 20: , .
27. Sagel PA, Odioso LL, McMillan DA, et al: Vital tooth whitening
with a novel hydrogen peroxide strip system: design, kinetics, and
clinical response. Compend Contin Educ Dent Suppl (29):S10–S15,
.
28. Hall DA: Should etching be performed as a part of a vital bleaching
technique? Quintessence Int 22: , .
29. Papathanasiou A, Kastali S, Perry RD, et al: Clinical evaluation of
a 35% hydrogen peroxide in-oice whitening system. Compend
Contin Educ Dent Suppl 23: – , .
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
Clinical Technique for Amalgam
Restorations
LEE W. BOUSHELL, ALDRIDGE D. WILDER, JR., SUMITHA N. AHMED
Dental amalgam ( silver amalgam or simply amalgam ) is a
metallic, polycrystalline restorative material originally
composed of a mixture of silver–tin alloy and mercury.
Current alloys that are amalgamated with mercury are silver–tin–
copper . he unset silver-colored mixture is pressed (condensed)
into a tooth defect (cavitation) that has been speciically prepared
to retain the amalgam. he material is then contoured to restore
the tooth’s form so that, when the material hardens, the tooth is
returned to normal function ( Fig. 10.1 ). Amalgam has been the
primary direct restorative material in the United States for more
than years. It has been the subject of intense research and has
been found to be safe and beneicial as a direct restorative material
(see Chapter 13 ).1-3 he cost-efective nature of amalgam restorations
has beneited many people. According to the U.S. Public Health
Service, “hundreds of millions of teeth have been retained that
otherwise would have been sacriiced because restorative alternatives
would have been too expensive for many people.”4
In addition to being cost efective, amalgam has the unique
property of being “self-sealing.” Self-sealing occurs when percolation
of oral luids (i.e., microleakage) between the amalgam restoration
and the prepared cavity walls results in corrosion of the amalgam
and a subsequent accumulation of corrosion products in the
microscopic space. Microleakage between the restoration and
the adjacent tooth structure is reduced as corrosion products ill
the space. he self-sealing process is self-limiting and requires seve ral
months. Amalgam is the only restorative material with an interfacial
seal that improves over time.5-7
Amalgam was introduced to the United States in the 1830s.
Initially, amalgam restorations were made by dentists iling silver
coins and mixing the ilings with mercury, creating a puttylike
mass that was placed into the defective tooth. As knowledge
increased and research intensiied, major advancements in the
formulation and use of amalgam occurred. Concerns about mercury
toxicity in the use of amalgam were, however, expressed in many
countries; concerns reached major proportions in the early 1990s.
Today, the popularity of amalgam as a direct restor ative material
has decreased.8,9 he decline is attributed in part to increased
interest in tooth-colored composite resin restorations and the
minimally invasive nature of their preparation steps. Concerns
have been raised that the preparation used when planning for amalgam may result in unnecessary weakening of teeth because
of the demand for additional removal of tooth structure so as to
accommodate amalgam’s strength and retention requirements.
While it is true that preparations for composite resin restorations
may allow smaller, more conservative preparations for very early
caries lesions, treatment of more advanced lesions may result in
essentially the same amount of tooth structure loss regardless of
the type of restorative material being used. he choice of a composite
resin material over amalgam may be based on the assumption that
both materials will perform equally well over time for all patients.
However, a growing body of evidence suggests that the risk of
developing secondary caries adjacent to amalgam restorations is
at least two times less likely than that of composite resin restorations
in high caries risk patients, and therefore the reduction/phase-out
of dental amalgam may have been premature.10,11 he decline of
amalgam use is also due to perceived concerns over individual and
environmental safety relative to the presence of eleme ntal mercury
in amalgam restorations. Safe, professional handling of mercury
in mixing the amalgam mass, removal of old amalgam restorations,
and amalgam scrap disposal is certainly appropriate and absolutely
essential. Following best management practices for amalgam waste,
as presented by the American Dental Association, results in
appropriate amalgam use.12
Type of Amalgam Retorative Material
Low-Copper Amalgam
Low-copper amalgams were primarily used before the early 1960s.
When the setting reaction occurred, the material was subject to
corrosion because of the formation of a tin–mercury phase
(gamma-2). he corrosion led to the rapid breakdown of amalgam
restorations. Subsequent research led to the development of highcopper amalgam materials. Currently low-copper amalgams are
rarely used in the United States.
High-Copper Amalgam
High-copper amalgams are predominantly used today in the United
States. In this book, unless otherwise speciied, the term amalgam
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
amalgam restorative materials. Alloys with gallium or indium or
alloys using cold-welding techniques have been presented as
alternatives to mercury-containing amalgams. None of these new
alloys have sho wn suicient promise to become a universal replace -
ment for current amalgam materials.18-21
Important Amalgam Propertie
he linear coeicient of the thermal expansion of amalgam is 2.5
times greater than that of tooth structure, but it is closer to that of
tooth structure than the linear coeicient of thermal expansion of
composite.22-24 Although the compressive strength of high-copper
amalgam is similar to tooth structure, the tensile strength is lower,
making amalgam restorations prone to fracture during lexure.9,25,26
Usually, high-copper amalgam fracture is a bulk fra cture, not a
marginal fracture. All amalgams are brittle and have low edge strength.
As such, the amalgam restoration must have suicient bulk (usually
1.5–2 mm in any occlusally loaded area, depending on the position
within the tooth) and a 90-degree marginal coniguration.
Creep and low relate to the deformation of a material under
load over time. High-copper amalgams exhibit no clinically relevant
creep or low.27,28 Because amalgam is metallic in structure, it also
is a good thermal conductor. At minimum, a dentin desensitizer
should be used immediately prior to amalgam placement to limit
sensitivity secondary to rapid luid movement in the dentinal tubules
caused by thermal changes. A liner or base should be placed in
areas of deep caries removal prior to amalgam placement to limit
thermal sensitivity.
General Conideration for Amalgam
Retoration
Retoration With Amalgam
Amalgam is efective as a direct restorative material because of its
easy insertion into a tooth preparation and, when hardened, its
ability to restore the tooth to proper form and function. he tooth
preparation not only must remove the fault in the tooth and
remove weakened tooth structure, but its form must also allow
the amalgam material to function properly. he required tooth
preparation form must allow the amalgam to (1) possess a uniform
speciied minimum thickness for strength (so that it will not lex
and fracture under load), (2) produce a 90-degree amalgam angle
(butt-joint form for maximum edge thickness) at the margin, and
(3) be mechanically retained in the tooth ( Fig. 10.2A and B ).
Amalgam restorations initially leak and therefore require steps to
protect from pulpal sensitivity until self-sealing is able to occur
(Fig. 10.3A ).13 After desensitizing the prepared tooth structure,
mixing, inserting, carving, and inishing the amalgam are relatively
fast and easy. he placing and contouring of amalgam restorations
are generally easier than those for composite restorations.29 For
these reasons, it is considered a user-friendly material that is less
technique (i.e., operator) sensitive as compared with composite.
Some practitioners have continued to use bonded amalgam
restorations in their practice (see Fig. 10.3B ). As noted in Chapter
4, this book does not promote the use of bonded amalgams.30-33
he bonding of amalgam requires use of a dual-cure adhesive system
to form a hybrid layer with the dentin followed by condensation
of amalgam so that amalgam particles become intermingled with
the curing adhesive resin. A bonded amalgam restoration, done
properly, may seal the prepared tooth structure and may temporarily refers to high-copper dental amalgam. he increase in copper
content to 12% or greater designates an amalgam as a high-copper
type. he advantage of the added copper is that it preferentially
reacts with the tin and reduces the formation of the more corrosive
phase (gamma-2) within the amalgam mass. This change in
composition reduces the deleterious corrosion efects on the restora -
tion. However, enough corrosion occurs at the amalgam–tooth
interface to result in the sealing of the restoration, which reduces
microleakage.13,14 hese materials may provide satisfactory clinical
performance for more than 12 years.15,16 High-copper amalgams
are available with admixed or spherical alloy structure.
Admixed Amalgam
Admixed amalgam contains irregularly shaped and sized alloy
particles, sometimes combined with spherical shapes , which are
mixed to form a mass that is placed into the tooth preparation.
he irregular shape of many of the particles results in a mass that
requires greater condensation pressure (which many dentists prefer)
and permits the dentist to displace matrix bands to generate proximal
contacts more easily.
Spherical Amalgam
A spherical amalgam contains small, round alloy particles that are
mixed with mercury to form the mass that is placed into the tooth
preparation. Because of the shape of the particles, the material is
condensed into the tooth preparation with little condensation
pressure. his advantage is combined with its high early strength
to provide a material that is well suited for very large amalgam
restorations such as complex amalgams or foundations.17
New Amalgam Alloy
Because of the concern about mercury toxicity, new compositions
of amalgam have been promoted as mercury-free or low-mercury
• Fig. 10.1 Clinical example of an amalgam restoration. (From Hatrick
CD, Eakle WS, Bird WF: Dental materials: Clinical applications for dental
assistants and dental hygienists, ed 2, St. Louis, Saunders, .)
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
strengthen adjacent tooth structur e. he strengthening and retention
gained by bonding, however, is minimal and short term. Consequently,
bonded amalgam restorations still require the same tooth preparation
retention and resistance form as do nonbonded amalgam
restorations.34-35 Isolation requirements for a bonded amalgam
restoration are the same as for a composite restoration.
Another amalgam technique uses light-cured adhesive to seal
the dentin under the amalgam material (see Fig. 10.3C ). his
procedure, as is true of all procedures that use adhesive technology,
requires proper isolation. he prepared tooth structure is etched
(i.e., demineralized), primed, and sealed with adhesive. he adhesive
is polymerized before insertion of the amalgam. his technique
seals the dentinal tubules efectively.36,37
Ue of Amalgam
Amalgam is used for the restoration of many carious or fractured
posterior teeth and in the replacement of failed restorations.
Understanding the physical properties of amalgam and the principles
of tooth preparation is necessary to produce amalgam restorations
that provide optimal service. When properly placed, an amalgam
restoration is able to provide many years of service.38-43 Although
improved techniques and materials are available, amalgam failures
do occur. Much clinical time is spent replacing restorations that
fail as a result of recurrent caries lesions, marginal deterioration
(i.e., ditching), fractures, or poor contours.44,45 Attention to detail
throughout the procedure may signiicantly decrease the incidence
of failures, however, and extend the life of the restoration.46-48
Careful evaluation of existing amalgam restorations is important
because they have the potential to provide long-term clinical service
and should not be removed and replaced unless accurately identiied
to be defective or undermined by a secondary caries lesion.49
A
BPulpal floor
Axial wall90-degree
cavosurface
margins DEJ
• Fig. 10.2 A and B, Diagrams of Class II amalgam tooth preparations
illustrating uniform pulpal and axial wall depths, 90-degree cavosurface
margins, and occlusal convergence of walls.
CBAIntertubular
dentinDesensitizerAmalgam
Amalgam
Dentin tubuleHybrid
layerAmalgam intermingled
with adhesiveDual cured
adhesive
Amalgam
Peritubular
dentinHybrid
layerLight-cured
adhesive
• Fig. 10.3 Methods to limit initial pulpal sensitivity after amalgam place -
ment. A, Dentin desensitization. B, Amalgam bonding (amalgam inter -
mingled with adhesive resin). C, Dentin sealing (adhesive resin placed and
cured before amalgam placement).
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
may be more appropriate than composite resin when there is little
to no natural occlusal tooth structure remaining that requires the
restoration to restore most or all of the occlusal contacts.53
Iolation Factor
Isolation of the operating ield is important for moisture control,
access, and visibility, to protect the patient from aspirating or
ingesting foreign objects, protecting the pulp in the event of pulpal
exposure, and protecting the operator medicolegally. However,
minor moisture contamination of amalgam during the insertion
procedure may not have as adv erse an efect on the inal restoration
as the same contamination would for a composite restoration.
Operator Ability and Commitment Factor
he tooth preparation for an amalgam restoration is very exacting.
It requires a speciic design with depths that allow appropriate
amalgam thickness and a precise marginal form. he failure of
amalgam restorations is often related to inappropriate tooth
preparation. However, the insertion and inishing procedures for
amalgam are much easier than for composite.29
Advantage
Some of the advantages of amalgam restorations already have been
stated, but the following list presents the primary reasons for the
successful use of amalgam restorations over many years.
1. Ease of use
2. High compressive strength
3. Excellent wear resistance
4. Favorable long-term clinical research results
5. Lower cost than for composite restorationsBecause of its strength and ease of use, amalgam provides an
excellent means for restoring large defects in nonesthetic areas.50
A review of almost four-surface and ive-surface amalgams
revealed successful outcomes at 5 years for 72% of the four-surface
and 65% of the ive-surface amalgams. When considering complex
amalgam restorations and discussing treatment options with patients,
this result should be compared with the 5-year success rates for
gold and porcelain crowns, which were 84% and 85%,
respectively.51
Indication
Amalgam may be used for Class I, II, V, and VI restorations; for
foundations; and for caries-control restorations ( Figs. 10.4 and
10.5; see also Chapter 2 ). Occasionally amalgam may be utilized
for Class III areas if isolation problems exist. Likewise, Class V
amalgam restorations may be indicated in anterior areas where
esthetics is not an important consideration and the patient has
high caries risk.
Contraindication
Amalgams are contraindicated in patients who are allergic to alloy
components. he use of amalgam in more prominent esthetic areas
of the mouth may represent a relative contraindication. hese areas
include anterior teeth and, in some patients, premolars and molars.
Amalgam should not be used when composite resin would ofer
more conservation of tooth structure and equal clinical performance.
Occlual Factor
Amalgam generally has greater wear resistance than does composite
in patients that have heavy occlusal function.2,52,53 Amalgam also
A
B
C
D
E
• Fig. 10.4 Amalgam restorations. A–C, Class I. D, Complex. E, Class V. (Most practitioners would
restore all of these teeth with composite, except tooth No. 30.)
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
he following sections begin with the introduction of general
clinical techniques and associated concepts to be considered when
restoring caries lesions or defects with dental amalgam. he general
technique is then followed by speciic discussion addressing the
creation of Class I, II, III, V, VI, and Complex Amalgam restorations.
General Clinical Technique for
Amalgam Retoration
Initial Clinical Procedure
Complete examination, diagnosis, and treatment planning must
be completed before a patient is scheduled for operative Diadvantage
he primary disadvantages of amalgam restorations relate to esthetics
and increased tooth structure removal during tooth preparation.
he following is a list of these and other disadvantages of amalgam
restorations.
1. Noninsulating
2. Nonesthetic
3. Less conservative tooth preparation than for composite restora -
tions (more removal of tooth structure during tooth
preparation)
4. More difficult tooth preparation than for composite
restorations
5. Initial marginal leakage
A
CDB2 B1Caries
Fractured cuspSlot Pin
Slot Pin
PinPreparation
margin
Preparation
marginAmalgam
foundation
PinCrown
preparation
• Fig. 10.5 Amalgam foundation. A, Defective restoration (defective amalgam, mesiolingual fractured
cusp, distofaciocclusal caries). B, Tooth preparation with secondary retention, using slot (B1) and pin (B2).
C, Amalgam foundation placed. D, Tooth with amalgam foundation prepared for crown. Note that dashed
lines on the occlusal surface in B1 and B2 only indicate the position of the retention grooves on the facial
and lingual walls of the proximal preparation. The grooves do not extend onto the occlusal surface.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
as possible. Tooth preparation that conserves tooth structure is
strongly recommended because it limits pulpal irritation and
preserves the integrity of both the tooth and the subsequent
restoration.54-60
Discussion in this chapter will include principles, techniques,
and procedures using classic examples of amalgam preparations.
However, clinically, the outline form of the preparation should
always conform to the level of disease in the tooth and not necessarily
to the examples presented here. Making the tooth preparation form
appropriate for the use of amalgam as the restorative material is
equally impor tant. he physical properties of amalgam require that
it be placed into a tooth preparation that provides for an approximately
90-degree or slightly greater occlusal cavosurface margin and 90-degree
axial cavosurface margin (because of the amalgam’s limited edge
strength). he preparation must allow a minimum thickness of 1.5
to 2 mm so that the amalgam will not lex and fracture when under
occlusal load (most amalgams fail by bulk fracture). he amalgam appointments (except in emergencies). A brief review of patient’s
dental record (including medical factors), treatmen t plan, and
radiographs should precede each restorative procedure. At the
beginning of each appointment, the dentist should also carefully
examine the operating site to conirm the diagnosis of the tooth
or teeth scheduled for treatment.
Local Anetheia
Local anesthesia is recommended for most operative procedures.
Profound anesthesia contributes to comfortable and uninterrupted
operation and usually results in a marked reduction in
salivation.
Iolation of the Operating Site
Complete instructions for the control of moisture are given in
Online Chapter 15 . Isolation for amalgam restorations may be
accomplished with a rubber dam, cotton rolls, with or without a
retraction cord.
Other Preoperative Conideration
Preoperative assessment of the occlusion should be made. his
step should occur before rubber dam placement. he dentist should
identify not only the occlusal contacts of the tooth to be restored
but also the contacts on the opposing and adjacent teeth. Knowing
the preoperative location of occlusal contacts is important in
planning the restoration outline form and in establishing the proper
occlusal contacts on the restoration. Remembering the location
of the contacts on adjacent teeth provides guidance in determining
when the restoration contacts have been correctly positioned and
adjusted.
A wedge placed preoperatively in the gingival embrasure is
useful when restoring a proximal surface. his step causes slight
separation of the operated tooth from the adjacent tooth and may
help protect the adjacent proximal surface, the rubber dam, and
the interdental papilla.
It is important to preoperatively visualize the anticipated exten -
sion of the tooth preparation. Because the tooth preparation requires
speciic depths, extensions, and marginal forms, the connection
of the various parts of the tooth preparation should result in minimal
tooth structure removal (i.e., as little as is necessary), while maintain -
ing the strength of the cuspal and marginal ridge areas of the tooth
as much as possible ( Fig. 10.6 ). he projected facial and lingual
extensions of a proximal box should be visualized before preparing
the occlusal outline form through the marginal ridge of the tooth,
reducing the chance of overextension while maintaining a butt-joint
form of the facial or lingual proximal margins.
General Concept Guiding Preparation for
Amalgam Retoration
A solid comprehension of concepts presented in Chapter 4 is
essential prior to the learning of information presented in the
following sections. For an amalgam restoration to be successful,
numerous steps must be accomplished correctly. After an accurate
diagnosis is made, the dentist must create a tooth preparation that
not only removes the defect (e.g., caries lesion, old restorative
material, malformed structure) but also leaves remaining tooth
structure as strong as possible by leaving as much dentin support
A
B
C
• Fig. 10.6 Preoperative visualization of tooth preparation extensions
when a cavitated caries lesion is present gingival to the proximal contact
and in the central groove area. A, Rotated tooth (lingual extension owing
to faulty central groove). B, Open proximal contact (preparation extended
wider faciolingually to develop a proximal contact with appropriate physi -
ologic proximal contours). C, Normal relationship.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
Initial Tooth Preparation
All initial depths of a tooth preparation for amalgam relate to the
dentinoenamel junction (DEJ) except in the following two instances:
(1) when the occlusal enamel has become signiicantly thinner and
(2) when the preparation extends onto the root sur face. he initial
depth pulpally is 0.2 mm inside (internal to) the DEJ or 1.5 mm
as measured from the depth of the central groove ( Fig. 10.7 ), whichever
results in the greater thickness of amalgam. he initial depth of the
axial wall is 0.2 mm inside the DEJ when retention grooves are not
used and 0.5 mm inside the DEJ when retention grooves are used
(Fig. 10.8 ). he deeper extension allows placement of the retention must be placed into a prepared undercut form in the tooth so as to
be mechanically retained (amalgam does not bond to tooth structure).
After appropriate tooth preparation, the success of the inal restoration
depends on proper insertion, carving, and inishing of the amalgam
material.
Principle
he basic principles of tooth preparation must be followed for
amalgam tooth preparations to ensure clinical success. As presented
in Chapter 4 , the preparation for amalgam is discussed in two
stages, for academic purposes, to facilitate student understanding
of proper extension, form, and caries lesion removal. he initial
stage (1) places the tooth preparation extension into sound tooth
structure at the marginal areas (not pulpally or axially); (2) extends
the depth (pulpally, axially, or both) at the perip hery of the prepara -
tion to a prescribed, uniform dimension; (3) provides an initial
form consistent with amalgam retention in the tooth; and (4)
establishes the preparation external walls in a form that will result
in a 90-degree amalgam margin upon restoration. he inal stage
of tooth preparation removes any remaining defect (caries lesion
or old restorative material) and incorporates any additional prepara -
tion features (grooves, coves, slots, or pins) as needed to achieve
the appropriate retention and resistance forms.
In academic institutions, assessing the tooth preparation after
the initial preparation stage provides an opportunity to evaluate
a student’s knowledge and ability to extend the external walls
properly and establish proper initial depth. If the student were to
remove an extensive caries lesion in its entirety before any evaluation,
the attending faculty would not know whether the prepared depths
were obtained because of appropriate caries lesion removal or
inappropriate overcutting of the tooth.
AB C1.5 mm
0.8 mm3 mm
• Fig. 10.7 Pulpal loor depth. A, Pulpal depth measured from central groove. B, No. bur dimen -
sions. C, Guides to proper pulpal loor depth: (1) one half the length of the No. bur, (2) 1.5 mm, or
(3) 0.2 mm inside (internal to) the dentinoenamel junction (DEJ).
ABDEJ
Axial
wallPulpal
floorRetention
groove
• Fig. 10.8 Axial wall depth. A, If no retention grooves needed, axial
depth 0.2 mm inside (internal to) the dentinoenamel junction (DEJ). B, If
retention grooves needed (i.e., proximal divergence secondary to wide
faciolingual caries lesion extension), axial depth 0.5 mm inside (internal to)
the DEJ. Note that dashed lines on the occlusal surface only indicate the
position of the retention grooves associated with the facial and lingual
walls of the proximal preparation. The grooves do not extend onto the
occlusal surface.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
requirements for enamel strength must be combined with marginal
requirements for amalgam (90-degree butt joint) when establishing
the periphery of the tooth preparation ( Fig. 10.9 ).
he preparation extension is dictated primarily by the existing
caries lesion, old restorative material, or defect. Adequate extension
to provide access for tooth preparation, caries lesion removal, matrix
placement, and amalgam insertion also must be considered. When
making the preparation extensions, every efort should be made
to preserve the dentinal support (i.e., the strength) of cusps and
marginal ridges.
When viewed from the occlusal, the facial and lingual proximal
cavosurface margins of a Class II preparation should be 90 degrees
(i.e., perpendicular to a tangent drawn through the point of
extension facially and lingually) (see Fig. 10.9 ). In most instances,
proximal caries lesions severe enough to require surgical intervention
result in facial and lingual proximal walls that must be extended
into the facial or lingual embrasure. his extension provides adequat e
access for performing the preparation (with decreased risk of
damaging the adjacent tooth), easier placement of the matrix band,
and easier condensation and carving of the amalgam. Such extension
provides “clearance” between the cavosurface margin and the
adjacent tooth ( Fig. 10.10 ). Clearance also allows the operator to
conirm that no voids exist at the proximal margins of the inished
restoration. Occasionally the level of disease may not require
extension of the proximal margins beyond the proximal contact.
This is especially helpful in areas that are more esthetically
demanding.groove without undermining marginal enamel. Axial depths on the
root surface should be 0.75 to 1 mm deep so as to provide room
for placement of retention grooves or coves.
Outline Form
he initial extension of the tooth preparation should be visualized
preoperatively by estimating the extent of the defect, the preparation
form requirements of the amalgam, and the need for ad equate
access and visibility to place the amalgam into the tooth. Enamel
cavosurface margins must be left at 90 degrees or greater to limit
the potential for enamel fracture. For enamel strength, the marginal
enamel rods should be supported by sound dentin. These
A
B
CAmalgam90°
90°
• Fig. 10.9 Proximal cavosurface margins. A, Facial and lingual proximal
cavosurface margins prepared at 90-degree angles to a tangent drawn
through the point on the external tooth surface. B, A 90-degree proximal
cavosurface margin produces a 90-degree amalgam margin; C, 90-degree
amalgam margins.
A
BClearance
Clearance
Clearance
• Fig. 10.10 Proximal box preparation clearance of adjacent tooth. A,
Occlusal view. B, Lingual view of a cross section through the central
groove.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
90-degree enamel walls (representing a strong enamel margin) (see
Fig. 10.9 ) that meet the inserted amalgam at a butt joint (enamel
and amalgam both having 90-degree margins).
Reitance Form
Resistance form preparation features help the tooth and the restora -
tion resist fractures caused by occlusal forces. Resistance features
that assist in preventing the tooth from fracturing include (1)
maintaining as much tooth structure as possible (preserving the
dentin supporting cusps and marginal ridges); (2) having pulpal
and gingival walls prepared perpendicular to occlusal forces, when
possible; (3) having rounded internal preparation angles; (4) removing
unsupported or weakened tooth structure; and (5) placing slots
and pins into the tooth as part of the inal stage of tooth preparation,
when indicated. he placement of slots and pins is considered a
secondary resistance form feature and is discussed in the section
Clinical Technique for Complex Amalgam Restorations . Resistance
form features that assist in preventing the amalgam from fracturing
include (1) adequate thickness of amalgam (at least 1.5–2 mm in
areas of occlusal contact and 0.75 mm in axial areas); (2) amalgam
margin of 90 degrees; (3) boxlike preparation form, which provides
uniform amalgam thickness; and (4) rounded axiopulpal line angles
in Class II tooth preparations. Many of these resistance form features
may be achieved using the No. or No. bur.
Retention Form
Retention form preparation features retain (i.e., “lock”) the
restorative material in the tooth. For composite restorations,
adhesion (bonding) provides most of the needed retention. Amalgam
restorations must be mechanically retained in the tooth. Amalgam
retention form ( Fig. 10.13 ) is provided by (1) preparation of the Factors dictating the outline form are presented in greater detail
in Chapter 4 . hey include caries lesion, old restorative material,
inclusion of all of the defect, proximal or occlusal contact relation -
ship, and the need for convenience form.
Cavourface Margin
Enamel must have a marginal coniguration of approximately 90
degrees or greater, and amalgam must have a marginal coniguration
of approximately 90 degrees. Marginal wall conigurations with
angles less than 90 degrees in enamel or amalgam are subject to
fracture, as both of these materials are brittle. Preparation walls on
the occlusal surface usually have obtuse enamel mar gins (representing
the strongest enamel margin) and result in amalgam margins that
are slightly less than 90 degrees ( Figs. 10.11 and 10.12 ). Rounding
of the central groove area when carving the occlusal amalgam enables
the marginal coniguration to be closer to 90 degrees (see Fig.
10.12 ). Preparation walls on vertical aspect (in the occlusogingival
axis) of the tooth (facial, lingual, mesial, or distal) should result in
A
BEnamel
Dentina
b
• Fig. 10.11 Occlusal cavosurface margins. A, Tooth preparation.
B, Occlusal margin representing the strongest enamel margin. Full-length
enamel rods (a) and shorter enamel rods (b).
ABab
• Fig. 10.12 Amalgam form at occlusal cavosurface margins.
A, Amalgam carved too deep resulting in acute angles a and b and stress
concentrations within the amalgam, increasing the potential for fracture.
B, Amalgam carved with appropriate anatomy, resulting in an amalgam
margin close to 90 degrees, although the enamel cavosurface margin is
obtuse.
AB
Ca
bb /H11022 a
Retention
groove
DEJ
• Fig. 10.13 Typical amalgam tooth preparation retention form features.
A and B, Occlusal convergence of prepared walls (primary retention form).
C, Retention grooves in proximal box (secondary retention form) if the
proximal preparation is wide faciolingually.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
instrument and the same technique as described for the RMGI
liner. he calcium hydroxide liner should be placed only over the
deepest portion of the caries removal (nearest the pulp). A layer
of RMGI liner should be used to cover the calcium hydroxide.67
he entire dentin surface should not be covered (see Figs. 10.14
and 10.15 ). he RMGI liner is recommended to cover the calcium
hydroxide to resist the forces of condensation and to prevent
dissolution over time by sealing the deeply excavated area.64 Pulp
exposure will require a direct pulp cap with calcium hydroxide or
mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA), or endodontic treatment.68
Secondary Reitance and Retention Form
Adequate resistance and retention form may no longer be present
in the tooth preparation after caries lesion removal has resulted in
excessive loss of vertical wall height. herefore strategic features
(such as the placement of grooves, coves, slots, pins) that enhance
the resistance and retention form are added. Usually, the larger
the tooth preparation, the greater the need for secondary resistance
and retention forms.
Final Procedure :Debridement and Inpection
After the previous steps are performed, the completed tooth
preparation should be cleaned of all debris (debridement) so that
a careful inspection may be accomplished. he usual procedure
in cleaning is to free the preparation of visible debris using short
bursts of water spray from the air-water syringe followed by short
ABb
• Fig. 10.14 Liner/Base application. A, Inserting resin-modiied glass
ionomer (RMGI) with periodontal probe. B, In moderately deep caries
removal, a base (b) thickness of 0.5 to 0.75 mm is indicated.
Calcium hydroxide
linerRMGI base
• Fig. 10.15 Placement of calcium hydroxide liner and RMGI base. vertical walls (especially facial and lingual walls) that converge
occlusally (i.e., primary retention ); (2) retention features such as
grooves, coves, slots, and pins that are placed during the inal stage
of tooth preparation (i.e., secondary retention ), and (3) engagement
of the inserted amalgam into any surface irregularities in the
preparation that may exist. Primary retention form features are
achieved by the orientation and type of the preparation instrument
such as the No. or No. pear-shaped carbide bur or diamond
(see Fig. 10.7B ). Secondary retention form features are discussed
in subsequent sections.
Convenience Form
Convenience form includes features that allow adequate access
and visibility of the operating site to facilitate tooth preparation
and restoration. Convenience form includes extension of the outline
form so that (1) the caries lesion may be accessed for removal, (2)
the matrix may be placed, and (3) amalgam may be inserted,
carved, and inished—all while maintaining resistance form.
Final Tooth Preparation
Removal of Defective Retorative Material and/
or Soft Dentin
Any old restorative material or soft dentin remaining after the initial
preparation will be located in the axial or pulpal walls (the extension
of the peripheral preparation margins should have already been to
sound tooth structure). Chapters 2 and 4 discuss (1) when to leave
or remove old restorative material, (2) how to remove remaining
soft dentin, and (3) what should be done to protect the pulp.
he removal of remaining soft dentin should be accomplished
using the largest instrument that its the carious area because it is
least likely to penetrate the tooth in an uncontrolled manner. A
hand instrument is more reliable than a rotating bur for judging
the adequacy of removal of soft dentin. he removal of carious
dentin should be stopped when the tooth structure feels irm unless
exposure of the pulp becomes likely (see Chapter 2 ). his situation
often occurs before all lightly stained or discolored dentin is
removed.61
Pulp Protection
If the tooth preparation is of ideal or shallow depth, no liner or
base is indicated. In deeper caries removal (where the remaining
dentin thickness is judged to be 1–1.5 mm), a layer (i.e.,
0.5–0.75 mm) of a resin-modiied glass ionomer (RMGI) material
should be placed ( Fig. 10.14 ).62,63 he RMGI insulates the pulp
from thermal changes, bonds to dentin, releases luoride, is strong
enough to resist the forces of condensation, and reduces
microleakage.63-65 he RMGI is applied only over the deepest
portion of the caries removal. It should be placed in small increments
and should low when it is touched to the dentin surface. he
entire dentin surface should not be covered. Dentin peripheral to
the liner should be available for support of the restoration.66
For pulpal protection in very deep caries removal (where the
remaining dentin thickness is judged to be <0.5 mm and suspicion
of potential microscopic pulpal exposure is increased), a thin layer
(i.e., 0.5–0.75 mm) of a calcium hydroxide liner may be placed
(Fig. 10.15 ). he calcium hydroxide liner may elicit tertiary dentin
formation if the original odontoblasts are no longer vital. If the
calcium hydroxide liner is used, it is placed by using the same
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
cross-links tubular luid proteins and, in the presence of HEMA,
forms lamellar plugs in the dentinal tubules.72 hese plugs are
thought to be responsible for reducing the potential for rapid
tubular luid movement and, thereby, the sensitivity of dentin.
his step may occur before or after the matrix application.
Matrix Placement
A matrix primarily is used when a proximal surface is to be restored.
he objectives of a matrix are to provide proper contact, provide
proper contour, conine the restorative material, and reduce the
amount of excess material. For a matrix to be efective, it should
be easy to apply and remove, extend below the gingival margin
enough that it can be engaged by a wedge, extend above the
adjacent marginal ridge height so as to allow for proper condensa -
tion, and resist deformation during material insertion.
In some clinical circumstances, a matrix may be necessary for
Class I or V amalgam restorations. Matrix application, along with
wedging to increase interproximal space, may help protect the
adjacent tooth from being damaged during preparation.
Mixing (Triturating) the Amalgam
Because of its superior clinical performance, high-copper amalgam
is recommended. Preproportioned, disposable capsules are available
in sizes ranging from to mg. Some precapsulated brands
require activation of the capsules before trituration. he speed and
time of trituration are factors that impact the setting reaction of
the material. Alterations in either may cause changes in the proper -
ties of the inserted amalgam. Amalgam should be triturated (i.e.,
mixed) according to the manufacturer’s directions. Correctly mixed
amalgam should not be dry and crumbly; rather, it should retain
suicient “wetness” so as to aid in achieving a homogeneous and
well-adapted restoration.73 It is often necessary to make several
mixes to complete the restoration, particularly for large
preparations.
Inertion of the Amalgam
An amalgam carrier is used to transfer amalgam to the tooth
preparation. Increments extruded from the carrier should be smaller
(often only 50% or less of a full-carrier tip) for a small preparation,
particularly during the initial insertion. A lat-fa ced, circular or
elliptic condenser may be used to condense amalgam in the deeper
areas of the preparation. he principal objectives during the insertion
of amalgam are to condense the amalgam mass and to adapt it to
the preparation walls and the matrix (when used). horough
condensation is essential to produce a restoration free of voids,
and helps to reduce marginal leakage.74,75 Optimal condensation
is necessary to minimize the mercury content in the restoration,
which decreases corrosion and enhances restoration strength and
marginal integrity.75 Spherical amalgam is more easily condensed
than admixed (lathe-cut) amalgam, but some practitioners prefer
the handling properties of the admixed type. Condensation of
amalgam that contains spherical particles requires larger condensers
than are commonly used for admixed amalgam. Smaller condensers
tend to penetrate a mass of spherical amalgam, resulting in less
efective force to compact or adapt the amalgam within the prepara -
tion. In contrast, smaller condensers are indicated for the initial
increments of admixed amalgam because it is more resistant to
condensation pressure. his is because the area of a circular con -
denser face (nib) increases by the square of the diameter; doubling bursts with the air syringe. If debris still clings to the preparation,
it may be necessary to dislodge this material with an explorer, a
small damp cotton pellet, or a commercially available applicator
tip (i.e., a “microbrush”) moistened with water. Ex cess water should
be removed so as to allow a clear ield for inspection. However, it
is important not to desiccate the tooth by overuse of air as this
may damage the odontoblasts associated with the desiccated tubules.
he preparation should be viewed from all angles. Careful assessment
should be made to ensure that the depths are proper, the external
walls provide for enamel support and correct orientation for
amalgam (i.e., that the preparation is retentive and the resultant
restoration margins will not be prone to fracture), and the caries
lesion has been removed as indicated. Preparation walls should be
smooth and transitions should be gently rounded.69 he cavosurface
margin should be precise and clearly visualized.
Preparation Deign
Typical tooth preparation for amalgam has generally been referred
to as conventional tooth preparation . A “box-only” tooth preparation
is indicated if no occlusal caries lesion is present (i.e., only a proximal
caries lesion is present). Fig. 10.16 illustrates various preparation
designs. Appropriate details of speciic tooth preparations are
presented subsequently.
General Concept Guiding Retoration
With Amalgam
After tooth preparation, the tooth must be readied for the insertion
of amalgam. Disinfectants may be used, but are not considered
essential.70,71 However, it is highly recommended that a dentin
desensitizer (current commercial formulations contain 5% glutar -
aldehyde and 35% 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate [HEMA] and
water) be placed on the prepared dentin per manufacturer’s
instructions (see Fig. 10.3 ). This type of dentin desensitizer
AB
• Fig. 10.16 Types of amalgam tooth preparations. A, Conventional.
B, Box only.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
the primary groov es, fossae, and cuspal inclines. he Hollenback
carver is also useful for carving these areas.
he reproduction of grooves and fossae is necessary to provide
appropriate mastication and sluiceways for the escape of food from
the occlusal table. he mesial and distal fossae are carved to be
inferior to the marginal ridge height, helping limit the potential
for food to be wedged into the occlusal embrasure. Having rounded
and relatively shallow occlusal anatomy also helps achieve a 90-degree
amalgam margin on the occlusal surface and to ensure adequate
occlusogingival dimension of the inal amalgam restoration for
strength (see Fig. 10.12B ).
For multiple surface restorations (which require use of a matrix),
the initial carving of the occlusal surface should be rapid, concentrat -
ing primarily on the marginal ridge height and occlusal embrasure
areas. Occlusal embrasure areas are developed with a thin explorer
tip or carving instrument by mirroring the contours of the adjacent
tooth. he explorer tip is pulled along the inside of the matrix
band, creating the occlusal embrasure form. When viewed from
the facial or lingual direction, the embrasure form created should
be identical to that of the adjacent tooth, assuming that the adjacent
tooth has appropriate contour. Likewise, the height of the amalgam
marginal ridge should generally be the same as that of the adjacent
tooth ( Figs. 10.18 and 10.19 ). If both these areas are developed
properly, the potential for fracture of the marginal ridge area of
the restoration while checking the occlusion is signiicantly reduced.
Placing the initial carving emphasis on the occlusa l areas for a the diameter requires four times more force for the same pressure
per unit area. Each portion must be thoroughly condensed prior
to placement of the next increment. Each condensed increment
should ill only one third to one half the preparation depth. Each
condensing stroke should overlap the previous condensing stroke
to ensure that the entire mass is well condensed.
Lateral condensation (facially, lingually, and proximally directed
condensation) is important in the proximal box portions of prepara -
tions to ensure conluence of the amalgam with the margins, the
elimination of voids, and an adequate proximal contact. Generally,
smaller amalgam condensers are used irst, which allows the amalgam
to be properly condensed into the internal line angles and secondary
retention features. Subsequently, larger condensers are used.
Amalgam preparations should be somewhat overilled to ensure
adequate condensation on the occlusal surface. he condensation
of a mix should be completed within the time speciied by the
manufacturer (usually 2.5 to 3.5 minutes). Otherwise crystallization
of the unused portion will be too advanced to react properly with
the condensed portion. he mix should be discarded if it becomes
dry, and another mix quickly made to continue the insertion.
Precarve Burnihing
To ensure that the marginal amalgam is well condensed before
carving, the overpacked amalgam should be burnished im mediately
with a large burnisher, using heavy strokes mesiodistally and facio -
lingually, a procedure referred to as precarve burnishing . Precarve
burnishing is useful to inalize the condensation, remove excess
mercury-rich amalgam, and initiate the carving process. To maximize
its efectiveness, the burnisher head should be large enough that
in the inal strokes it contacts the cusp slopes but not the preparation
margins. Precarve burnishing produces denser amalgam at the
margins of the occlusal preparations restored with high-copper
amalgam alloys and initiates contouring of the restoration.76,77
Carving the Amalgam
he following discussion of carving (and shaping) of amalgam
assumes the use of sharp carving instruments. All carving instruments
dull with repeated use and sterilization cycles and, as a result, lose
their eiciency. Carving a freshly condensed amalgam, which is
setting and steadily getting harder, with a dull instrument requires
the use of ever-increasing pressure on the instrument and increases
the likelihood of losing control (slipping) and/or increasing the
amount of time required to complete the carving. Always use sharp
carving instruments!
he amalgam material selected for the restoration has a speciic
setting time. After precarve burnishing has been accomplished,
the remainder of the accessible restoration must be contoured to
achieve proper form and, as a result, function. he insertion
(condensation) and carving of the material must occur before the
material has hardened so much that it becomes uncarvable.
Occlual Area
A discoid–cleoid instrument may be used to carve the occlusal
surface of an amalgam restoration. he rounded end (discoid) is
positioned on the unprepared enamel adjacent to the amalgam
margin and pulled parallel to the margin ( Fig. 10.17 ). his removes
any excess at the margin while not allowing the marginal amalgam
to be carved below the preparation margins (i.e., “submarginated”).
he pointed end (cleoid) of the instrument may be used to deine
Discoid-cleoid
Amalgam
• Fig. 10.17 Carving the occlusal margins.
• Fig. 10.18 Deining the marginal ridge and the occlusal embrasure
with an explorer.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
10.22 ). he knife is positioned below the gingival margin and
drawn occlusally to carefully shave of excess, to reine the proximal
contour (below the contact) and the gingival embrasure form. he
sharp tip of the knife also is beneicial in developing the facial and
lingual embrasure forms. Care must be exercised in not carving
away any of the contour necessary to create the desired proximal
contact.
Development of proper proximal contour and contact is
important for the physiologic health of interproximal soft tissue.
Likewise, ensuring a smooth junction between the tooth and the
amalgam is important. An amalgam overhang (excess of amalgam)
may result in compromised gingival health. Voids at the cavosurface
margins may result in recurrent caries lesion formation.
he proximal portion of the carved amalgam is evaluated by
visual assessment (relecting light into the contact area from the
lingual and occlusal perspectives to conirm the dimensions and
location of the proximal contact) and placement of very thin dental
loss through the contact area. If dental loss is used, it must be
used judiciously, ensuring that amalgam in the contact area is not
inadvertently removed. A piece of loss may be inserted through
the contact and into the gingival embrasure area by initially wrapping
the loss around the adjacent tooth and exerting pressure on that
tooth rather than the restored tooth while moving the loss through
the contact area. When the loss is into the gingival embrasure
area, it is wrapped around the restored tooth and moved occlusally
and gingivally to determine whether excess exists and to smooth
the proximal amalgam material. If excess material is detected along
the gingival margin, the amalgam knife should again be used until
a smooth margin is created.
AB C
• Fig. 10.19 Proximal contour. A, Correct proximal contour. B, Incorrect marginal ridge height and
occlusal embrasure form. C, The occlusogingival proximal contour is too straight, the contact is too high,
and the occlusal embrasure form is incorrect.
• Fig. 10.20 Positioning of the carving instrument to prevent overcarving
amalgam and to develop the desired gingival contours.
BladeExcess
• Fig. 10.21 Gingival excess may be removed with amalgam knives.
large restoration permits the operator to remove the matrix more
quickly so as to carve any extensive axial surfaces of the restoration,
especially the proximal areas. Some of these areas may be relatively
inaccessible and must be carved while the amalgam m aterial is
still not fully set. Remaining necessary carving or contouring on
the occlusal surface may be done later, and if the amalgam is too
hard to carve, the use of rotary instruments in the handpiece may
be required.
Facial and Lingual Area
Most facial and lingual areas are accessible and may be carved
directly. he side of an explorer tine may be very efective in creating
correct contours when the amalgam is early in its setting reaction.
A Hollenbeck carver or base of the amalgam knife (scaler 34/35)
is also useful for carving these areas. With regard to the cervical
areas, it is important to remove any excess and develop the proper
contour of the restoration, which is usually convex. he convexity
is developed by using the occlusal and gingival unprepared tooth
structure as guides for initiating the carving ( Fig. 10.20 ). he
marginal areas are blended together, resulting in the desired convexity
and providing a physiologic contour that promotes the health of
adjacent gingival tissue.
Proximal Embraure Area
he initial development of the occlusal embrasure of the proximal
surface while the matrix is still in place has already been described.
After removal of the matrix, the amalgam knife (or scaler 34/35)
is an excellent instrument for removing proximal excess and
developing proximal contours and embrasures ( Figs. 10.21 and
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
(by visual estimation), the high spot(s) should be reduced by
appro ximately that amount. his observation may expedite the
occlusal adjustment compared with making an insuicient adjust -
ment and having to repeat closure-and-carving numerous times.
he sequence of closure, observation, and carving is repeated until
the appropriate surfaces of opposing teeth are touching.
Occlusal contacts on a cuspal incline or ridge slope are undesir -
able because they cause a delective lateral force on the tooth.
hese should be adjusted until the resulting contact is stable (i.e.,
the occlusal contact should be perpendicular to the occlusal load
where possible in maximum intercuspation, or, in other words,
the occlusal force should be parallel to the long axis of the tooth).
To this point in the procedure, the patient has been instructed
to close vertically into maximum intercuspation (i.e., “bite together
on your back teeth”). After replacing the articulating paper over
the tooth, the patient is asked to occlude lightly and to slide the
teeth lightly from “side to side” to identify excursive interferences
and “front to back” to identify protrusive interfer ences (see Chapter
1). Any additional occlusal marks are evaluated, and undesirable
contact areas (interferences) are eliminated. Note that amalgam
restorations carved completely out of occlusion (i.e., that are “overcarved”) may allow supraeruptive tooth movement resulting in
undesirable tooth contacts and this, too, should be avoided. Finally,
the patient should be cautioned to protect the newly condensed
restoration by not using it to chew irm food for 24 hours.
Finihing and Polihing of the Amalgam
Most amalgams do not require further inishing and polis hing.
hese procedures are occasionally necessary, however, to (1) reine
the anatomy, contours, and marginal integrity; and (2) reine the
surface texture of the restoration. Additional inishing and polishing
procedures for amalgam restorations are not attempted within 24
hours of insertion because crystallization of the restoration is
incomplete.73 If used, these procedures are often delayed until all
of the patient’s amalgam restorations have been placed, rather than
inishing and polishing periodically during the course of treatment.
An amalgam restoration is less prone to tarnish and corrosion if
a smooth, homogeneous surface is achieved.81-83 Polishing of highcopper amalgams is less important than it is for low-copper
amalgams because high-copper amalgams are less susceptible to
tarnishing and marginal breakdown.56,82-87
he inishing procedure may be initiated by use of a green
carborundum or white alumina stone. ( Fig. 10.24A ). he green Postcarve Burnishing
Some operators prefer to postcarve burnish the amalgam surface
by using a small burnisher. Postcarve burnishing is done by lightly
rubbing the carved surface with a burnisher of suitable size and
shape to improve smoothness and produce a satin (not shiny)
appearance. he surface should not be rubbed hard enough to
produce grooves in the amalgam. Postcarve burnishing may improve
the marginal integrity of lowand high-copper amalgams and may
improve the smoothness of the restoration.78-80 Postcarve burnishing
in conjunction with precarve burnishing may serve a s a substitute
for conventional polishing.80
Evaluation of Occlual Contact Area on
the Retoration
After completion of the carving and the removal of the rubber
dam, the occlusal contacts on the restoration must be evaluated.
Even if the carving has been carefully accomplished, the restoration
occasionally is “high,” indicating premature occlusal contact. A
piece of articulating paper is placed over the restoration and adjacent
teeth, and the patient is instructed to close gently into occlusion.
It is essential that the teeth be completely dry for proper marking with
articulating paper. he patient is advised not to bite irmly because
of the danger of fracturing the restoration, which is weak at this
stage. he operator should visually assess the contact potential of
the restored tooth and the extent of closure. If local anesthesia is
still present, it may be diicult for the patient to tell when the
teeth are in contact. After the patient has reopened the mouth
and the articulating paper is removed, the following two features
of the occlusal relationship suggest that the restoration is high: (1)
Cusp tips of adjacent teeth are not in occlusal contact when it is
known from the preoperative occlusal assessment that they should
be touching, and (2) an opposing cusp prematurely occludes with
the new restoration.
Contact areas on the amalgam should be assessed by the color
imparted by the articulating paper. Deeply colored areas (heavy
contacts) and those with light-colored centers (even heavier contacts)
are reduced until all markings are uniformly of a light hue, and
contacts are noted on adjacent teeth ( Fig. 10.23 ). Heavy occlusal
contacts are commonly referred to as “prematurities” or “high
spots.” Observing the bite opening between nearby teeth when
the restoration is in contact indicates how much occlusal adjustment
is indicated. For example, if the adjacent teeth are 0.5 mm apart
A
B
C
• Fig. 10.22 Removal of gingival excess of amalgam. A, Excess of amalgam (arrowhead) at the gingival
corner of the restoration. B, Use of the amalgam knife for removal of gingival excess. C, Gingival corner
of restoration with excess removed.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
disintegration (which may occur at high rotational speeds) and
the danger of frictional temperature elevation of the restoration
and the tooth. Temperature above °F [ >60°C] is able to cause
irreparable damage to the pulp, the restoration, or both. When
overheated, the amalgam surface appears cloudy, even though it
may hav e a high polish. his cloudy appearance indicates that
mercury has been brought to the surface, which results in increased
corrosion of the amalgam and loss of strength.73
Polishing with the coarse abrasive rubber point will result in a
moderately polished surface. No deep scratches should remain on
the amalgam surface. After the area is washed free of abrasive
particles and dried, a high polish may be imparted to the restoration
with a series of medium grit and ine-grit abrasive points (see Fig.
10.24F ). As with the more abrasive points, the iner abrasive points
must be used at a low speed. If a high luster does no t appear
within a few seconds, the restoration requires additional polishing
with the more abrasive points. he system illustrated in Fig. 10.24
includes coarse-grit, medium-grit, and ine-grit rubber abrasive
points. Using these points in sequence, from coarse to ine, produces
an amalgam surface with a brilliant luster (see Fig. 10.24G ). As
an alternative to rubber abrasive points, inal polishing may be
accomplished using a rubber cup with lour of pumice followed
by a high-luster agent such as precipitated chalk. Finishing and
polishing of older, existing restorations may be performed to improve
their contour, margins, surface, or anatomy, when indicated ( Fig.
10.25 ).
hese procedures should not leave the restoration un dercontoured
and should not alter the carefully designed occlusal contacts. he
tip of an explorer should pass from the tooth surface to the restora -
tion surface (and vice versa), without jumping or catching, thus stone is more abrasive than the white stone; the tip of either stone
may be blunted on a diamond wheel before use. his helps prevent
marring the center of the restoration while the margins are being
adjusted. During the surfacing of amalgam, the stone’s long axis is
held at a 90-degree angle to the margins. Reduction of any occlusal
contact should be avoided. After the stone is used, the margins
should be reevaluated with the tine of an explorer a nd any additional
discrepancies removed. he surface may be smoothed further using
light pressure with an appropriate inishing bur (see Fig. 10.24B ).
A large, round inishing bur is generally used for this inishing step.
If the groove and fossa features are not suiciently deined, a small
round inishing bur also may accentuate them without eliminating
the occlusal contact areas. he long axis of the bur or stone should
be at a ~45-degree angle to the margin to allow the unprepared
tooth structure to guide the bur and prevent unnecessary removal
of amalgam (see Fig. 10.24C ). A smooth surface should be achieved
before the polishing procedure is initiated. he inishing bur should
remove the minor scratches that resulted from use of the green or
white stone. Often, however, these scratches can be removed only
with the use of rubber abrasive points.
he polishing procedure is initiated by using a coarse, rubber
abrasive point at low speed and air-water spray to produce an
amalgam surface with a smooth, satin appearance (see Fig. 10.24D
and E ). If the amalgam surface does not exhibit this appearance
after only a few seconds of polishing, the surface was too rough
at the start. In this instance, resurfacing with a inishing bur is
necessary, followed by the coarse, rubber abrasive point to develop
the satiny appearance. It is important that the rubber points be
used at low speed ( ≤ revolutions per minute [rpm]) or just
above “stall out” speed so as to limit the danger of point
A
B
• Fig. 10.23 Occluding the restoration. A, Heavy occlusal contacts on new amalgam should be
adjusted. Articulating paper marks heavy contacts as dark areas, and it marks very heavy contacts as
dark areas with light-colored, potentially shiny, centers. B, Amalgam should not be carved out of occlu -
sion. Rather, it should have light occlusal contact or contacts, as indicated by faint markings.
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
• Fig. 10.24 Polishing the amalgam. A, When necessary, a carborundum or ine-grit alumina stone is
used to develop continuity of surface from the tooth to the restoration. B, The restoration is surfaced with
a round inishing bur. C, The stone’s long axis or the bur’s long axis is held at a right angle to the margin.
D, Polishing is initiated with a coarse rubber abrasive point at low speed. E, The point should produce a
smooth, satin appearance. F, A high polish is obtained with medium-grit and ine-grit abrasive points.
G, Polished restoration. (Courtesy Aldridge D. Wilder, DDS.)
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
entirely within the existing amalgam restoration. If necessary, another
matrix must be placed. A new mix of amalgam may be condensed
directly into the defect.
Clinical Technique for Cla I
Amalgam Retoration
his section describes the use of amalgam for Class I restorations.
Class I restorations restore defects on the occlusal surfaces of
posterior teeth, the occlusal thirds of the facial and lingual surfaces
of molars, and the lingual surfaces of maxillary anterior teeth
(Fig. 10.26 ).
he procedural description for a small (i.e., “conservative”) Class
I amalgam restoration simply and clearly presents the basic informa -
tion relating to the entire amalgam restoration technique, including
tooth preparation and placement and contouring of the restoration.
his basic procedural information may be expanded to describe
Class I amalgam restoration of lesions/defects of a ll sizes. he maxillary
irst premolar is used for illustration in this section.verifying continuity of contour across the margin. Every efort to
avoid removal of adjacent tooth structure should be made.
Repairing an Amalgam Retoration
If an amalgam restoration fractures during insertion, generally all
of the inserted amalgam must be removed and new amalgam
condensed. If a small portion of amalgam fractures during insertion
and the amalgam is still carvable, it may be possible to apply and
condense newly triturated amalgam to repair the afected area. If
a small void in the amalgam is discovered after the matrix is removed,
for example, and if the amalgam is still carvable and the area is
accessible, any poorly condensed amalgam in the void should be
removed with an explorer or other instrument, and t he void repaired
with newly triturated amalgam. In cases where a new mix of
amalgam is added to carvable existing amalgam, the “new” amalgam
will adhere to the “old.”
If a repair needs to be made to set, uncarvable amalgam, the
defective area may be re-prepared as if it were a small restoration.
Appropriate depth and retention form must be generat ed, sometimes
A
B
• Fig. 10.25 A, Existing amalgam restoration exhibiting marginal deterioration and surface roughness.
B, Same restoration after inishing and polishing.
C
B A
• Fig. 10.26 Clinical examples of Class I, II, and VI amalgam restorations. A, Class I amalgam in the
occlusal surface of the irst molar. B, Class II amalgams in a premolar and molar. C, Class VI amalgams
in premolars.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
form principles that are basic to all amalgam tooth preparations
of occlusal surfaces ( Fig. 10.27A ). hese principles allow margins
to be positioned in areas that are sound and subject to minimal
occlusal loading while maintaining the strength and health of the
tooth by conserving uncompromised tooth structure. he resistance
principles are as follows:
1. Extending around the cusps to conserve tooth structure and
prevent the internal line angles from approaching the pulp horns
2. Keeping the facial and lingual margin extensions as minimal
as possible between the central carious issure and the cusp tips
3. Extending the outline to include issures, placing the margins
on relatively smooth, sound tooth structure
4. Minimally extending into the marginal ridges (only enough to
include the defect) without removing dentinal support
5. Eliminating a weak wall of enamel by joining two outlines that
come close together (i.e., <0.5 mm apart)
6. Extending the outline form to include enamel undermined by
the caries lesion
7. Using enameloplasty on the terminal ends of shallow issures
to conserve tooth structure
8. Establishing an optimal, conservative depth of the pulpal wall
A No. bur, with a head length of 3 mm and a tip diameter
of 0.8 mm, or a smaller No. bur is recommended to prepare
the Class I tooth preparation (see Fig. 10.27B and C ). he silhouette
of the No. bur reveals sides slightly convergent toward the
shank. his produces an occlusal convergence of the facial and
lingual preparation walls, providing adequate retention form for
the tooth preparation. he slightly rounded corners of the end of
the No. bur produce slightly rounded internal line angles that
render the tooth more resistant to fracture from occlusal force.89
he No. bur is a smaller and pear-shaped version of the
No. bur and is also indicated for amalgam preparations (see
Fig. 10.27C ).
Class I occlusal tooth preparation is begun by entering the
deepest or most carious pit with a “punch cut” using the No.
carbide bur at high speed with air-water spray. A punch cut is
performed by orienting the bur such that its long axis parallels Initial Clinical Procedures
A preoperative assessment of the occlusal relationship of the involved
and adjacent teeth is necessary. After administration of local
anesthetic, isolation of the operating ield with the rubber dam is
recommended.73,88 he rubber dam may be applied in the few
minutes necessary for onset of profound anesthesia before initiating
the tooth preparation. Rubber dam isolation is especially indicated
when removing deep caries (judged to be <1 mm from the pulp),
during amalgam condensation, and for mercury hygiene . he rubber
dam should be used for isolation of the operating site when a
caries lesion is extensive. If caries removal exposes the pulp, pulp
capping may be more successful if the site is isolated with a properly
applied rubber dam. In addition, the dam prevents moisture
contamination of the amalgam mix during insertion.60 For a single
maxillary tooth, where caries is not extensive, adequate control of
the operating ield may also be achieved with cotton rolls and
high-volume evacuation.
Tooth Preparation for Cla I Amalgam
Retoration
his section describes the speciic technique for preparing the
tooth for a Class I amalgam restoration. It is divided into initial
and inal stages.
Initial Tooth Preparation
Initial tooth preparation is deined as establishing the outline form
by extension of the external walls to sound tooth structure while
maintaining a speciied, limited depth (usually just inside the DEJ)
and providing resistance and retention forms. he outline form
for the Class I occlusal amalgam tooth preparation should include
only the defective occlusal pits and issures (in a way that sharp,
angular, abrupt transitions in the marginal outline are avoided).
Commonly, but not always, the marginal outline for maxillary
premolars is butterly shaped because of extension to include the
developmental issures facially and lingually. he ideal outline form
for an amalgam restoration incorporates the following resistance
A
3 mm
0.8 mm B
C
• Fig. 10.27 Class I preparation outline. A, Ideal outline includes all carious occlusal pits and issures.
B, Dimensions of head of a No. bur. C, No. and No. burs compared.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
central issure (see Fig. 10.28D and E ). he depth of the preparation
is modiied as needed so that the pulpal wall is established 0.1 to
0.2 mm into dentin. In other words, the depth of the prepared
external walls should be 1.5 to 2 mm (“just inside the DEJ”) (see
Fig. 10.28D and E ), depending on the cuspal incline. he length
of the blades of an unfamiliar bur should be measured before it
is used as a depth gauge.
Distal extension into the distal marginal ridge to include a
issure or caries occasionally requires a slight tilting of the bur
distally (≤10 degrees). his creates a slight occlusal divergence to
the distal wall to prevent undermining the marginal ridge of its
dentin support ( Fig. 10.29A–C ). Because the facial and lingual
prepared walls converge, this slight divergence does not compromise the long axis of the tooth crown ( Fig. 10.28A and B ). he bur is
inserted directly into the defective pit. When the pits are equally
defective, the distal pit should be entered as illustrated. Entering
the distal pit irst provides increased visibility for the mesial exten -
sion. he bur should be positioned such that its dis tal aspect is
directly over the distal pit, minimizing extension into the marginal
ridge (see Fig. 10.28C ). he bur should be rotating when it is
applied to the tooth and should not stop rotating until it is removed
from the tooth. On posterior teeth, the approximate depth of the
DEJ is located at 1.5 to 2 mm from the occlusal surface. As the
bur enters the pit, an initial target depth of 1.5 mm should be
established. his is one half the length of the cutting portion of
the No. bur. he 1.5-mm pulpal depth is measured at the
A
B
CDE
Facial
cavosurface
margin
Excised central grooveBur blade depth in
relation to central fissure
(1.5 mm, or 1/2 length
of bur head); in relation
to cavosurface margin
(may be 2 mm, or 2/3
length of bur head)Facial
wall
• Fig. 10.28 A, No. bur oriented parallel to long axis of tooth crown for entry as viewed from lingual
aspect. B, The bur positioned for entry as viewed from the distal aspect. C, The bur is positioned over
the most carious pit (distal) for entry. The distal aspect of the bur is positioned over the distal pit.
D, Mesiodistal longitudinal section. Relationship of head of No. bur to excised central issure and
cavosurface margin at ideal pulpal loor depth, which is just inside the DEJ. E, Faciolingual longitudinal
section. Dotted line indicates the long axis of tooth crown and the direction of the bur.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
however, consideration should be given to changing to a bur of
smaller diameter or to using enameloplasty. Both of these approaches
conserve the tooth structure and therefore minimize weakening
of the tooth.
he bur’s orientation and depth are maintained while extending
along the central issure toward the mesial pit, following the DEJ
(see Fig. 10.29D and E ). When the central issure has minimal
caries, one pass through the issure at the prescribed depth provides
the desired minimal width to the isthmus. Ideally the width of
the isthmus should be just wider than the diameter of the bur. It
is well established that a tooth preparation with a narrow occlusal
isthmus is less prone to fracture.90,91 As previously described for
the distal margin, the orientation of the bur should not change
as it approaches the mesial pit if the mesial extension is minimal.
If the issure extends farther onto the marginal ridge, the long axis the overall retention form. For premolars, the distance from the
margin of such an extension to the proximal surface usually should
not be less than ~1.6 mm, or two diameters of the end of the No.
bur (see Fig. 10.29B ) measured from a tangent to the proximal
surface (i.e., the proximal surface height of contour). For molars,
this minimal distance is ~2 mm.
Minimal distal (or mesial) extension often does not require
changing the orientation of the bur’s axis from being parallel to
the long axis of the tooth crown. In this case, the mesial and distal
walls are parallel to the long axis of the tooth crown (or slightly
convergent occlusally) (see Fig. 10.29D and E ).
While maintaining the bur’s orientation and depth, the prepara -
tion is extended distofacially or distolingually to include any issures
that radiate from the pit (see Fig. 10.29D ). When these issures
require extensions of more than a few tenths of a millimeter,
AB
E1.6 mm
C D
• Fig. 10.29 A, Enter the pit with a punch cut to just inside the DEJ (depth of 1.5–2 mm or one half
to two thirds the head length of the No. bur). The 1.5-mm depth is measured at central issure; the
measurement of same entry cut at the prepared external wall is 2 mm. B, Incline the bur distally to
establish proper occlusal divergence to distal wall to prevent removal of the dentin supporting the marginal
ridge enamel when the pulpal loor is in dentin, and distal extension is necessary to include a issure or
caries lesion. For such an extension on premolars, the distance from the margin to the proximal surface
(i.e., imaginary projection) must not be less than 1.6 mm (i.e., two diameters of bur end). C, Occlusal
view of the initial tooth preparation that has mesial and distal walls that diverge occlusally. D, Distofacial
and distolingual issures that radiate from the pit are included before extending along the central issure.
E, Mesiodistal longitudinal section. The pulpal loors are generally lat but may follow the rise and fall of
the occlusal surface.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
his completes the initial amalgam preparation for a Class I
caries lesion. he initial preparation should ensure that all the
caries lesion is removed from the DEJ, resulting in a very narrow
peripheral seat of healthy dentin on the pulpal wall surrounding
any remaining caries located in the center of the pulpal wall. For
the initial tooth preparation, the pulpal wall should remain at the
initial ideal depth, even if any restorative material or soft caries
lesion remains in the pulpal wall ( Fig. 10.32 ). Remaining caries
(and, if present, old restorative material) is removed during the
inal tooth preparation.of the bur should be changed to establish a slight occlusal divergence
to the mesial wall if the marginal ridge would be otherwise
undermined of its dentinal support. Fig. 10.30 illustrates the correct
and incorrect preparation of the mesial and distal walls. he
remainder of any occlusal enamel defects is included in the outline,
and the facial and lingual walls are extended, if n ecessary, to remove
enamel undermined by the caries lesion.92 he strongest and ideal
enamel margin should be composed of full-length enamel rods
attached to sound dentin, supported on the preparation side by
shorter rods that are also attached to sound dentin ( Fig. 10.31 ).
he Class I tooth preparation should have an outline form with
gently lowing curves and distinct cavosurface margins. A faciolingual
width of no more than 1 to 1.5 mm and a depth of 1.5 to 2 mm
are considered ideal, but this goal is subject to t he extension of
the caries lesion. he pulpal loor, depending on the enamel thick -
ness, is almost always in dentin (see Fig. 10.29C and E ). Although
conservation of the tooth structure is important, the convenience
form requires that the extent of the preparation be adjusted to
provide adequate access and visibility.
AB CCorrectNo. bur
1.6
mm
Incorrect Correct/H110221.6
mm
Contact
areab a
• Fig. 10.30 The direction of the mesial and distal walls is inluenced by the remaining thickness of the
marginal ridge as measured from the mesial or distal margin (a) to the proximal surface (i.e., imaginary
projection of proximal surface) (b). A, Mesial and distal walls should converge occlusally when the distance
from a to b is greater than 1.6 mm. B, When the operator judges that the extension will leave only 1.6-mm
thickness (two diameters of No. bur) of marginal ridge (i.e., premolars), the mesial and distal walls
must diverge occlusally to conserve ridge-supporting dentin. C, Extending the mesial or distal walls to a
two-diameter limit without diverging the wall occlusally undermines the marginal ridge enamel.
ABEnamel
Dentina
b
• Fig. 10.31 A and B, The ideal and strongest enamel margin is formed
by full-length enamel rods (a) resting on sound dentin supported on the
preparation side by shorter rods, also resting on sound dentin (b).
• Fig. 10.32 Mesiodistal longitudinal section showing example of the
pulpal loor in dentin and the caries lesion that is exposed after the initial
tooth preparation. The caries lesion is surrounded by sound dentin on the
pulpal loor for the resistance form.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
A tooth may be found to have a large or “extensive” Class I caries
lesion. A lesion is considered extensive if the distance between soft
dentin and the pulp is judged to be less than 1 mm or when the
faciolingual extent of the defect has involved much of the cuspal
inclines. In this case, selective removal of soft dentin and insertion
of a liner, if needed, may precede the establishment of outline,
resistance, and r etention forms. his approach protects the pulp as
early as possible from any additional insult that may occur during
tooth preparation. Normally, however, the outline, primary resistance,
and primary retention forms are established through proper orientation
of the No. bur and appropriate extension of the preparation.
As is the case for smaller caries lesions, an initial depth to reach the
DEJ (measured approximately 1.5 mm at any pit or iss ure and
2 mm on the prepared external walls) should still be established and
maintained. he preparation is extended laterally at the DEJ to
remove all enamel undermined by the caries lesion by alternately
cutting and examining the lateral extension of the lesion. For a caries
lesion extending up the cuspal inclines, it may be necessary to alter
the bur’s long axis to prepare a 90to -degree cavosurface angle
while maintaining the initial depth ( Fig. 10.35 ). If not, an obtuse
cavosurface angle may remain (resulting in an acute, or weak, amalgam
margin), or the pulpal loor (over the pulp horns) may be prepared
A
D80° °e
B
C
• Fig. 10.33 Enameloplasty. A, Developmental defect at terminal end of issure. B, Fine-grit diamond
inishing instrument in position to remove the defect. C, Smooth surface after enameloplasty. D, The
cavosurface angle should not exceed degrees, and the margin–amalgam angle should not be less
than 80 degrees. Enamel external surface (e) before enameloplasty.
• Fig. 10.34 Mesial issure that cannot be eliminated by enameloplasty
may be included in the preparation if the margins are able to be lingual of
the occlusal contact. Primary resistance form is provided by the following:
1. Suicient area of relatively lat pulpal loor in sound tooth
structure (i.e., the “peripheral seat”) to resist forces directed in
the long axis of the tooth and to provide a horizontal area for
the restoration
2. Minimal extension of external walls (to conserve tooth strength)
3. Strong, ideal enamel margins
4. Suicient depth (i.e., 1.5 mm) for adequate thickness of the
restoration, providing resistance to fracture
he slight occlusal convergence of two or more opposing, e xternal
walls provides the primary retention form.
Usually, the No. bur is used for extensions into the mesial
and distal issures. During such extensions, the remaining depth
of the issure may be viewed in cross section by looking at the
wall being extended. When the remaining issure is no deeper than
one quarter to one third the thickness of enamel, enameloplasty
is indicated. Enameloplasty refers to eliminating the developmental
fault by removing it with the side of an appropriately shaped rotary
inishing instrument, leaving a smooth surface ( Fig. 10.33A–C ).
his procedure frequently reduces the need for further extension.
he extent to which enameloplasty should be used cannot be
determined exactly until the process of extending into the issured
area occurs, at which time the depth of the issure into enamel
may be observed. he surface left by enameloplasty should meet
the tooth preparation wall, preferably with a cavosurface angle no
greater than approximately degrees; this would produce a
distinct margin for amalgam of no less than 80 degrees (see Fig.
10.33D ). If enameloplasty is unsuccessful in eliminating a mesial
(or distal) issure that extends to the crest of a marginal ridge or
beyond, three alternatives exist:
1. Make no further change in the outline form.
2. Extend through the marginal ridge when margins would be
lingual to the contact ( Fig. 10.34 ).
3. Include the fissure in a conservative Class II tooth
preparation.
he irst alternative usually should be strongly considered except
in patients at high risk for caries. Enameloplasty is not indicated
if an area of occlusal contact is involved. In this case, the choices
are either to consider the preparation completed (an option for
patients at low risk for caries) or to extend the preparation to
include the issure as previously described.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
retention form may result from undercut areas that are occasionally
left in dentin (and that are not illed in by a liner or base) after
peripheral removal of soft dentin. When extending the outline form,
enameloplasty should be used in any indicated area (as described
previously and in detail in Chapter 4 ).
When the defect extends to more than one half the distance
between the primary groove and a cusp tip, reducing the cuspal
tooth structure and restoring it with amalgam (also referred to as
“capping the cusp”) may be indicated as discussed in Clinical
Technique for Complex Amalgam Restorations . When the distance
is two thirds, cusp reduction and coverage is usually required because
of the risk of cusp fracture during subsequent functional occlusal
loading. Fig. 10.36 illustrates examples of large (extensive) Class
I amalgam preparation outlines.
Final Tooth Preparation
he inal tooth preparation includes (1) removal of remaining
defective enamel and soft dentin on the pulpal loor as indicated;
(2) pulp protection, where indicated; (3) procedures for inishing
the external walls; and (4) inal procedures of debridement (cleaning)
and inspecting the preparation.
If several enamel pit-and-issure remnants remain in the loor,
or if a central issure remnant extends over most of the loor, the
loor should be deepened with the No. bur to eliminate the
defect or to uncover the caries lesion to a maximum preparation
depth of 2 mm ( Fig. 10.37 ). If these remnants are few and small,
they may be removed with an appropriate carbide bur ( Fig. 10.38 ).
Removal of the remaining lesion (i.e., caries lesion that extends
pulpally from the established pulpal loor) is best accomplished too deeply. Primary resistance form is obtained by extending the
outline of the tooth preparation to include only undermined and
defective tooth structure while preparing strong enamel walls and
allowing strong cuspal areas to remain. Primary retention form is
obtained by the occlusal convergence of the enamel walls. S econdary
80°
• Fig. 10.35 Initial tooth preparation with an extensive caries lesion.
When extending laterally to remove enamel undermined by the caries
lesion, the bur’s long axis is altered to prepare a 90to -degree cavo -
surface angle. A -degree cavosurface angle on the cuspal incline
results in an 80-degree marginal amalgam angle.
AB C
• Fig. 10.36 Examples of more extensive Class I amalgam tooth preparation outline forms. A, Occlusal
outline form in the mandibular second premolar. B, Occlusolingual outline form in the maxillary irst molar.
C, Occlusofacial outline form in the mandibular irst molar.
A
BC
• Fig. 10.37 Removal of enamel issure extending over most of the pulpal loor. A, Full-length occlusal
issure remnant remaining on the pulpal loor after the initial tooth preparation. B and C, The pulpal loor
is deepened to a maximum depth of 2 mm to eliminate the issure or uncover dentin caries lesion.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
A
B
• Fig. 10.38 Removal of enamel pit and issure and dentin caries lesion that is limited to a few small
pit-and-issure remnants. A, Two pit remnants remain on the pulpal loor after the initial tooth preparation.
B, Carious enamel and dentin caries lesion have been removed.
AB C D13-7-14
Peripheral
seat
Section of
peripheral
seat
• Fig. 10.39 A and B, Removal of dentin caries lesion is accomplished with round burs (A) or spoon
excavators (B). C and D, The resistance form may be improved with a lat loor peripheral to the excavated
area(s).
using a discoid-type spoon excavator or a slowly revolving round
carbide bur of appropriate size ( Fig. 10.39A and B ).
he removal of carious dentin will not afect the resistance form
of the tooth because the periphery would not need further extension.
In addition, it will not afect the resistance form of the restoration
as it will rest on the pulpal wall peripheral to the excavated area
or areas. he peripheral pulpal loor should be at the previously
described initial pulpal loor depth just inside the DEJ (see Fig.
10.39C and D ). Usually, no secondary resistance or retention form
features are necessary Class I amalgam preparations.
External walls may already have been inished during initial
preparation steps; however, operator assessment of the external
walls of the preparation is accomplished at this point, and any
additional inish is accomplished as described previously and in
Chapter 4 . An occlusal cavosurface bevel is contraindicated in the
tooth preparation for an amalgam restoration.92 It is important to
provide an approximate 90to -degree cavosurface angle, which
should result in 80to 90-degree amalgam at the margins.92 his
butt-joint marginal area (which approximates 90-degree cavosurface
marginal angles for both enamel and amalgam) allows strength for both. Amalgam is a brittle material with low edge strength
and tends to chip under occlusal stress if its angle at the margins
is less than 80 degrees. he transition between the external and
internal walls should be gently rounded.93 he preparation should
then be cleaned, carefully inspected as indicated previously in
General Concepts Guiding Preparation for Amalgam Restorations,
and any inal modiications completed.
Other Class I Amalgam Preparations
Class I preparations, especially those in esthetically important areas,
may be restored with composite because of their small size and
the maximal thickness of enamel available for bonding. However,
the following preparations may also be restored with
amalgam:
1. Facial pit of the mandibular molar.
2. Lingual pit of the maxillary lateral incisor.
3. Occlusal pits of the mandibular irst premolar.
4. Occlusal pits and issures of the maxillary irst molar.
5. Occlusal pits and fissures of the mandibular second
premolar.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
the cavosurface margins are completely covered with well-condensed
amalgam. Final condensation over cavosurface margins should be
done perpendicular to the external enamel surface adjacent to the
margins. The overpacked amalgam should then be precarve
burnished.
Finishing and Polishing of the Amalgam
With care, carving may begin immediately after condensation.
Sharp discoid-cleoid carvers of suitable sizes are useful for this.
he larger end of the discoid-cleoid instrument (No. 3/6) is used
irst, followed by the smaller instrument (No. 4/5) in regions not
accessible to the larger instrument. Alternatively, the Hollenback
carver may be used, with care not to overcarve the groove or fossa
areas. All carving should be done with the edge of the blade
perpendicular to the margins as the instrument is moved parallel
to the margins. Part of the edge of the carving blade should rest
on the unprepared tooth surface adjacent to the preparation margin
(see Fig. 10.47F ). Using this surface as a guide helps prevent
overcarving amalgam at the margins and produces a continuity of
surface contour across the preparation margins. During carving,
thin amalgam should be removed from areas of enamelop lasty.
hin amalgam left in these areas may fracture because of its low
edge strength. Deep occlusal anatomy should not be carved into
the restoration because these may thin the amalgam at the margins
and weaken the restoration (see Fig. 10.47G ). Undercarving leaves
thin portions of amalgam (subject to fracture) on the unprepared
tooth surface. he thin portion of amalgam extending beyond the
margin is referred to as lash. he mesial and distal fossae should
be carved slightly deeper than the proximal marginal ridges (see
Fig. 10.47H ).
After carving is completed, the outline of the amalgam margin
should relect the contour and location of the prepared cavosurface
margin, revealing a regular (i.e., not ragged) outline with gentle
curves. An amalgam outline that is larger or irregular is undercarved
and requires further carving or inishing ( Fig. 10.48 ). An amalgam
restoration that is more than minimally overcarved (i.e., a sub -
marginal defect >0.2 mm) should be replaced.94 If the total carving
time is short enough, the smoothness of the carved surface may
be improved by wiping with a small, damp ball of cotton held
with the cotton pliers. Alternatively, postcarve burnishing may be Examples of some of these types of preparations and restorations
are provided in Figs. 10.40, 10.41, 10.42, 10.43, 10.44, and 10.45 .
Retorative Technique for Cla I Amalgam
Preparation
Desensitizer Placement
A dentin desensitizer is placed in the preparation according to
manufacturer recommendations before amalgam condens ation
(Fig. 10.46 ).72
Matrix Placement
Generally matrices are unnecessary for a conservative Class I
amalgam restoration except as speciied in later sections.
Insertion and Carving of the Amalgam
he triturated amalgam ( Fig. 10.47A ) is placed into an amalgam
well. he outline of the tooth preparation should be reviewed
before inserting amalgam to establish a mental image that will
later aid in carving amalgam to the cavosurface margin. Preoperative
occlusal contact locations should be recalled (see Fig. 10.47B ).
Amalgam should be carefully condensed into the pulpal line angles
(see Fig. 10.47C ). he preparation should be overpacked 1 mm
or more using heavy pressure (see Fig. 10.47D ). his ensures that
A B
C
• Fig. 10.40 Mandibular molar. A, Facial pit with a caries lesion. B, The bur positioned perpendicular
to the tooth surface for entry. C, Outline of restoration.
• Fig. 10.41 Carious lingual pit and issure and restoration on the maxil -
lary lateral incisor.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
A
B
• Fig. 10.42 Maxillary lateral incisor. A, Preoperative radiograph of dens in dente. B, Radiograph of
restoration after 13 years. (Courtesy Dr. Ludwig Scott.)
90P
E
IAB
CDL
A
C B
• Fig. 10.43 A, Preparation design and restoration of carious occlusal pits on the mandibular irst
premolar. B, Bur tilt for entry. The cutting instrument is held such that its long axis (broken line, CI) is
parallel with the bisector (B) of the angle formed by the long axis of the tooth (LA) and the line (P) that
is perpendicular to the plane (DE) drawn through the facial and lingual cusp points. This dotted line
(CI) is the bur position for entry. C, Conventional outline, including occlusal pits and central issure.
A
B
C
• Fig. 10.44 Maxillary irst molar. A, Outline necessary to include the carious mesial and central pits
connected by the issure. B, Preparation outline extended from outline in A to include distal pit and con -
necting deep issure in oblique ridge. C, Preparation outline extended from outline in B to include distal
oblique and lingual issures.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
issure and distal pit on the occlusal surface ( Fig. 10.49 ). Composite
may also be used as the restorative material in smaller lesions.
After local anesthesia and evaluation of the occlusal contacts,
the use of a rubber dam is generally recommended for isolation
of the operating ield. Alternatively, typical Class I preparations
may be adequately isolated with cotton rolls.
Tooth Preparation
he initial tooth preparation involves the establishment of the
outline, primary resistance, and primary retention forms, as well
as initial preparation depth. he accepted principles of the outline
form (previously presented) should be observed with spec ial attention
to the following:
1. he tooth preparation should be no wider than necessary; ideally,
the mesiodistal width of the lingual extension should not exceed
1 mm except for extension necessary to remove carious or
undermined enamel or to include unusual issuring.
2. When indicated, the tooth preparation should be more at the
expense of the oblique ridge, rather than centering over the
issure (weakening the small distolingual cusp).
3. Especially on smaller teeth, the occlusal portion may have a
slight distal tilt to conserve the dentin support of the distal
marginal ridge ( Fig. 10.50 ).
4. he margins should extend as little as possible onto the oblique
ridge, distolingual cusp, and distal marginal ridge.
hese objectives help conserve the dentinal support (i.e., strength
of the tooth) and aid in establishing an enamel cavosurface angle
as close to 90 degrees as possible ( Fig. 10.51 ). hey also help to
minimize deterioration of the restoration margins by locating the
margins away from enamel eminences where occlusal forces may
be concentrated.
he distal pit is identiied with indirect vision and entered with
the end of the No. bur ( Fig. 10.52A ). he long axis of the
bur usually should be parallel to the long axis of the tooth crown.
he dentinal support and strength of the distal marginal ridge and
the distolingual cusp should be conserved by positioning the bur
such that it cuts more of the tooth structure mesial to the pit
rather than distal to the pit (e.g., 70 : 30 rather than 50 : 50), if
needed. he initial cut is to the level of the DEJ (a depth of
1.5–2 mm) (see Fig. 10.52B ). At this depth, the pulpal loor is
usually in dentin. When the entry cut is made (see Fig. 10.52C ),
the bur (maintaining the initial established depth) is moved to
include any remaining issures facial to the point of entry (see Fig.
10.52D ). he bur is then moved along the issure toward the
lingual surface (see Fig. 10.52E ). As with Class I occlusal prepara -
tions, a slight distal inclination of the bur is indicated occasionally
(particularly in smaller teeth) to conserve the dentinal support
and strength of the marginal ridge and the distolingual cusp. To
ensure adequate strength for the marginal ridge, the distopulpal
line angle should not approach the distal surface of the tooth closer
than 2 mm. On large molars, the bur position should remain
parallel to the long axis of the tooth, particularl y if the bur is ofset
slightly mesial to the center of the issure. Keeping the bur parallel
to the long axis of the tooth creates a distal wall with slight occlusal
convergence, providing favorable enamel and amalgam angles. he
bur is moved lingually along the issure, maintaining a uniform
depth until the preparation is extended onto the lingual surface
(see Fig. 10.52F ). he pulpal loor should follow the contour of
the occlusal surface and the DEJ, which usually rises occlusally as
the bur moves lingually.
he mesial and distal walls of the occlusal portion of the
preparation should converge occlusally because of the shape of the utilized to reine the anatomy and leave a smooth, satin inish. All
shavings from the carving procedure should be removed from the
mouth with the aid of the oral evacuator.
he occlusion on the restoration is then evaluated and adjusted
so that all markings on the restoration and adjacent teeth are
uniform (see Fig. 10.23 ).
Extensive caries lesions require a more extensive restoration
(which is a clear indication for amalgam as compared with composite
resin). Use of amalgam in large Class I restorations provides good
wear resistance and stable occlusal contact relationships. For very
large Class I restorations, a bonding system may be used, although
this book does not promote such use. he perceived beneits of
bonded amalgams have not been substantiated.85,95-99 Bonded
amalgams have no advantage as compared with the conventional
technique described above. Carving the extensive Class I restoration
is often more complex because more cuspal inclines are included
in the preparation. Appropriate contours, occlusal contacts, and
groove/fossa anatomy must be provided. Finishing and polishing
indications and techniques are as described previously.
Tooth Preparation for Cla I Occluolingual and
Occluofacial Amalgam Retoration
Occlusolingual amalgam restorations may be used on maxillary
molars when a lingual issure connects with the distal oblique
A
B
• Fig. 10.45 Mandibular second premolar. A, Typical occlusal outline.
B, Extension through the lingual ridge enamel is necessary when enamelo -
plasty does not eliminate the lingual issure.
• Fig. 10.46 Use of microbrush to apply the dentin desensitizer in the
tooth preparation. (Courtesy Aldridge D. Wilder, DDS.)
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
he lingual portion is prepared at this point by using one of
two techniques. In one technique, the lingual surface is prepared
with the bur’s long axis parallel with the lingual surface ( Fig. 10.53A
and B ). he tip of the bur should be located at the gingival extent
of the lingual issure. he bur should be controlled so that it does bur. If the slight distal bur tilt was required, the mesial and distal
walls still should converge relative to each other (although the
distal wall may be divergent occlusally, relative to the tooth’s long
axis). Convergence of the mesial and distal walls ensures occlusal
retention form is adequate.
C
F
GHB
E
D
A
• Fig. 10.47 Restoration of occlusal tooth preparation. A, Properly triturated amalgam is a homoge -
neous mass with slightly relective surface. A properly mixed mass will latten slightly if dropped on a
tabletop. B, The operator should have a mental image of the outline form of the preparation before
condensing amalgam to aid in locating the cavosurface margins during the carving procedure.
C, Amalgam should be inserted incrementally and condensed with overlapping strokes. D and E, The
tooth preparation should be overpacked to ensure well-condensed marginal amalgam that is not mercury
rich. F, The carver should rest partially on the external tooth surface adjacent to the margins to prevent
overcarving. G, Deep occlusal grooves invite chipping of amalgam at the margins. Thin portions of
amalgam left on the external surfaces soon break away, giving the appearance that amalgam has grown
out of the preparation. H, Carve fossae slightly deeper than the proximal marginal ridges. (A, From Darby
ML, Walsh MM: Dental hygiene: theory and practice , ed 3, St. Louis, Saunders, . B, D, and E,
Courtesy Aldridge D. Wilder, DDS.)
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
afecting the lingual surface is wide mesiodistally, the resultant
mesial and distal external walls may diverge to the lingual. In this
case the amalgam will require retention grooves to prevent lingual
displacement. An axial depth of 0.5 mm inside the DEJ is indicated
if retentive grooves are required. A second, alternate approach to
preparing the lingual aspect of the preparation may also be con -
sidered. In this case, the No. bur is held perpendicular to the
cusp ridge and then the lingual surface, as it extends the preparation
from the occlusal surface gingivally (to include the entire defect).
his technique also results in opposing preparation walls that
converge lingually.
he No. bur may be used with its long axis perpendicular
to the axial wall to accentuate (i.e., reine) the mesioaxial and
distoaxial line angles; this also results in the mesial and distal walls
converging lingually because of the shape of the bur (see Fig.
10.53D and E ). During this step, the axial wall depth is not altered
(see Fig. 10.53F ). he occlusal and lingual convergences usually
provide a suicient preparation retention form, and retention
grooves are not needed.
he axiopulpal line angle must be rounded to limit the areas
of stress concentration and ensure adequate preparation depth and
amalgam thickness ( Fig. 10.54 ). Initial tooth preparation of the
occlusolingual preparation is now complete. As mentioned previ -
ously, enameloplasty may be performed to conserve the tooth
structure and limit extension.
Additional retention in the lingual extension may be required
if the extension is wide mesiodistally or if it was prepared without
a lingual convergence. If additional retention is required, the No. not “roll out” onto the lingual surface, which may “round over”
or damage the cavosurface margin. he facial inclination of the
bur must be altered as the cutting progresses to establish the axial
wall of the lingual portion at a uniform depth of 0.5 mm inside
the DEJ (see Fig. 10.53C ). he axial wall should follow the contour
of the lingual surface of the tooth with an axial depth of 0.2 mm
inside the DEJ at the preparation periphery. When the caries lesion
AB
• Fig. 10.48 A, Undercarved amalgam with lash beyond the margins. The restoration outline is irregular
and larger than the preparation outline in Fig. 10.36B . B, Correctly carved amalgam restoration. (Courtesy
Aldridge D. Wilder, DDS.)
• Fig. 10.49 Outline of margins for occlusolingual tooth preparation.
• Fig. 10.50 Small distal inclination of the bur on smaller teeth may be
indicated to conserve the dentinal support and the strength of the marginal
ridge.
90° °
• Fig. 10.51 Enamel cavosurface angles of 90 to degrees are ideal.
A
B
C
D
E
F
• Fig. 10.52 Occlusolingual tooth preparation. A, No. bur positioned for entry. B, Penetration to a
minimal depth of 1.5 to 2 mm. C, Entry cut. D, The remaining issures facial to the point of entry are
removed with the same bur. E and F, A cut lingually along the issure until the bur has extended the
preparation onto the lingual surface.
A
B
D
E
F
C
• Fig. 10.53 Occlusolingual tooth preparation. A, Position of bur to cut the lingual portion. B, Initial entry
of the bur for cutting the lingual portion. C, The inclination of the bur is altered to establish the correct
axial wall depth. D and E, The bur is directed perpendicular to the axial wall to accentuate the mesioaxial
and distoaxial line angles. F, The axial wall depth should be 0.2 to 0.5 mm inside the DEJ.
A
B
• Fig. 10.54 A, Bur position for rounding the axiopulpal line angle. B, Axiopulpal line angle rounded.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
prepare this cove. Care should be taken so as not to undermine
the occlusal enamel. his retentive cove is recommended only if
occlusal convergence of the mesial and distal walls of the occlusal
portion is absent or inadequate.
he inal tooth preparation is accomplished by removal of the
remaining caries lesion on the pulpal and axial walls ( Fig. 10.56 )
with an appropriate round bur, a discoid-type spoon excavator, or
both. A RMGI is placed in areas of deep caries removal for pulpal
protection. he external walls are inished. Any irregularities at
the margins may indicate weak enamel that may be removed by
the side of the No. bur rotating at low speed. he preparation
should then be cleaned, carefully inspected as indicated in General
Concepts Guiding Preparation for Amalgam Restorations, and
any inal modiications completed.
Retorative Technique for Cla I Occluolingual
or Occluofacial Amalgam Preparation
Desensitizer Placement
A dentin desensitizer is placed over the prepared tooth structure
and rinsed per manufacturer instructions. Excess moisture is removed
using air stream without desiccating the dentin.14 or No. bur may be used to prepare grooves into the mesioaxial
and distoaxial line angles ( Fig. 10.55A ). If these angles are in enamel,
the axial wall must be deepened to 0.5 mm axially of the DEJ to
allow the grooves to be prepared in dentin and to not undermine
enamel. he depth of the grooves at the gingival loor is one half
the diameter of the No. 14 bur. he cutting direction for each groove
is the bisector of the respective line angle. he grooves are prepared
in the mesioaxial and distoaxial line angles of the ideally positioned
axial wall and 0.2 mm axial to the DEJ. he grooves should diminish
in depth toward the occlusal surface, terminating midway along
the axial wall (see Fig. 10.55B ). he adequacy of the groove should
be tested by inserting the tine of an explorer into the groove and
detecting resistance to lingual movement. he depth of the groove
should prevent the explorer from being withdrawn lingually. (See
Secondary Resistance and Retention Forms for a description of
placing retentive grooves in the proximal boxes of Class II amalgam
preparations; the techniques are similar.)
Extension of a facial occlusal issure may have required a slight
divergence occlusally to the facial wall to conserve support of the
facial ridge. If so, and if deemed necessary, the No. 14 round bur
may be used to prepare a retention cove in the faciopulpal line
angle (see Fig. 10.55C and D ). he tip of the No. bur held
parallel to the long axis of the tooth crown also might be used to
A
B
C
D
• Fig. 10.55 Secondary retention form. A, Bur position for preparing groove in mesioaxial line angle.
B, Completed groove is internal to the DEJ. C, Bur position for the retention cove in the faciopulpal line
angle. D, Completed cove is internal to the DEJ.
A
B
• Fig. 10.56 A, Any remaining pit and issure in enamel and soft dentin on established pulpal and axial
walls are removed. B, Completed tooth preparation.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
lingual portion of the tooth preparation. If so, a piece of stainless
steel matrix material (0.05 mm thick and 8 mm wide) is cut to
it between the lingual surface of the tooth and the band already
in place (see Fig. 10.57B ). he gingival edge of this segment of
matrix material is placed slightly gingival to the gingival edge of
the band to help secure the band segment. A quick-setting, rigid
polyvinyl siloxane (PVS)–based material may be used between the
sectional matrix and the Tolemire matrix band, to prevent lingual
displacement of the sectional matrix during condensation of the
amalgam. Alternatively, green stick compound may be used. In Matrix Placement (If Necessary)
Using a matrix to support the lingual portion of the restoration
during condensation is occasionally necessary. A matrix is helpful
to prevent “land sliding” during condensation and to ensure marginal
adaptation and strength of the restoration. he Tolemire matrix
retainer is used to secure a matrix band to the tooth (as described
later). Because this type of matrix band does not intimately adapt
to the lingual groove area of the tooth ( Fig. 10.57A ), an additional
step may be necessary to provide a matrix that is rigid on the
A
B C
D E
G HF
Matrix strip
Tofflemire
retainer
Tooth
preparation Wedge
• Fig. 10.57 Matrix for occlusolingual tooth preparation. A, Matrix band secured to the tooth with
Toflemire retainer. B, Positioning a small strip of stainless steel matrix material between the tooth and the
band already in place. C, Inserting the wedge and the rigid supporting material. D, Compressing the rigid
supporting material gingivally (or holding the steel strip in correct position while the material sets), which
adapts the steel strip to the lingual surface. E, Cross section of the tooth preparation and the matrix
construction. F, Using the explorer to remove excess amalgam adjacent to the lingual matrix. G, Carving
completed. H, Polished restoration.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
Clinical Technique for Cla II
Amalgam Retoration
Class II restorations restor e defects that afect one or both of the
proximal surfaces of posterior teeth (see Fig. 10.26B ). Amalgam
restorations that restore one or both of the proximal surfaces of
the tooth may provide years of service to the patient when (1) the
operating ield is isolated, (2) the tooth preparation is correct, (3)
the matrix is suitable, and (4) the restorative material is manipulated
properly. Application of the principles discussed here will result
in high-quality, durable Class II amalgam restorations.
Initial Clinical Procedures
Occlusal contacts should be marked with articulating paper before
tooth preparation. A mental image of these contacts will serve as
a guide in tooth preparation and restoration. Any opposing “plung -
ing cusp” (that is not aligned well with the occlusal plane) or other
sharply pointed cusp may need to be recontoured to reduce the
risk of fracture of the new restoration. Before tooth preparation
for amalgam, the placement of a rubber dam is generally recom -
mended. It is especially beneicial when the caries lesion is extensiv e.
If an existing defective restoration has rough proximal contacts,
the restoration may be removed before rubber dam application.
Soft dentin should be removed with the rubber dam in place,
especially if pulpal exposure is a possibility. Insertion of an inter -
proximal wedge or wedges is useful to depress and protect the
rubber dam and underlying soft tissue, separate tee th slightly, and
may serve as a guide to prevent gingival overextension of the
proximal boxes.
Tooth Preparation for Cla II Amalgam
Retoration That Involve Only One Proximal
Surface
his section introduces the principles and techniques of a Class
II tooth preparation for an amalgam restoration involving a caries
lesion on one proximal surface. A small, conservative mesio cclusal
tooth preparation on the mandibular second premolar is presented
to illustrate basic concepts. Composite may also be an acceptable
restorative material for this preparation. Preoperative placement
of a wedge (“pre-wedging”) in the space adjacent to the proximal
surface with the caries lesion will create space between the teeth.
his lowers the risk of iatrogenic damage to the adjacent tooth
during preparation.
Initial Tooth Preparation
Occlusal Outline Form (Occlusal Step)
he occlusal outline form of a Class II tooth preparation for
amalgam is similar to that for a Class I tooth preparation. Using
high speed with air-water spray, the operator enters the pit nearest
the involved proximal surface with a punch cut using a No.
bur oriented as illustrated in Fig. 10.59A and B . he bur should
be rotating when it is applied to the tooth and should not stop
rotating until removed. Viewed from the proximal and lingual
(facial) aspects, the long axis of the bur and the long axis of the
tooth crown should remain parallel during the cutting procedures.
he dentin caries lesion initially spreads at the DEJ; therefore the
goal of the initial cut is to reach the DEJ. he DEJ location in
posterior teeth is approximately 1.5 to 2.0 mm from the occlusal this case, the end of a toothpick wedge is covered with softened
(heated) compound. he compound-coated wedge is then imme -
diately inserted between the Tolemire band and the cut piece of
matrix material (see Fig. 10.57C ). While the compound is still
soft, a suitable burnisher is used to press the compound gingivally,
securing the matrix tightly against the gingival cavosurface margin
and the lingual surface of the tooth to provide a rigid, lingual
matrix (see Fig. 10.57D and E ). his matrix for the occlusolingual
amalgam restoration is referred to as the Barton matrix . Occasionally
the piece of strip matrix may be positioned appropriately by using
only the wedge (without the rigid PVS or compound
support).
Insertion of the Amalgam
Insertion of amalgam is accomplished as previously described
in General Concepts Guiding Restoration with Amalgam and
for the Class I occlusal tooth preparation. Condensation is begun
at the gingival wall at the lingual component of the preparation.
If a matrix is not used, care must be taken to ensure that “land
sliding” of the amalgam does not occur because two adjoining
surfaces of the tooth are being restored. For this technique, the
last increments of amalgam may be condensed on the lingual
surface with the side of a large condenser. Its long, broadly
rounded contour approximates the rectangular shape of the
lingual groove preparation. Appropriate care should be taken
(when condensing the occlusal surface) to prevent fracturing the
lingual amalgam. Another technique is to have the assistant secure
the condensed lingual surface with a broad condenser nib, while
the operator completes the condensation of the occlusal surface.
Regardless of the technique used, the amalgam must be well
condensed.
Contouring and Finishing of the Amalgam Restoration
When the preparation is suiciently overilled, carvi ng of the
occlusal surface may begin immediately with a sharp discoid-cleoid
instrument or a Hollenback carver. All carving should be done
with the edge of the blade perpendicular to the margin and the
blade moving parallel to the margin. To prevent overcarving, the
blade edge should be guided by the unprepared tooth surface
adjacent to the margin. An explorer is used to remove excess
amalgam adjacent to the lingual matrix before matrix removal
(see Fig. 10.57F ). After the occlusal carving is complete, the
Tolemire retainer is loosened from the band, and the band is
removed with No. pliers. The free ends of the band are
pushed one at a time, lingually and occlusally, through the proximal
contacts. After the lingual carving is complete (see Fig. 10.57G ),
the rubber dam is removed and the restoration is adjusted to
ensure proper occlusion. Most amalgams do not require inishing
and polishing. Fig. 10.57H illustrates a polished occlusolingual
restoration.
Class I Occlusofacial Amalgam Restorations
Occasionally, mandibular molars exhibit issures that extend from
the occlusal surface through the facial cusp ridge and onto the
facial surface. he preparation and restoration of these defects
are very similar to those described for Class I occlusolingual
amalgam restorations. Although these may be restored with
composite, an illustration of preparation and restoration with
amalgam is provided in Fig. 10.58 . he amalgam restoration
may be polished after it is completely set. he shape of abrasive
points may need to be modiied to allow optimal polishing (see
Fig. 10.58I and J ).
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
opposite carious pit (see Fig. 10.59C and D ). he isthmus width
should be as narrow as possible, preferably no wider than one
quarter the intercuspal distance.54,55, , Ideally the preparation
should be the width of the No. bur. Narrow restorations
provide a greater length of clinical service.57,60 Generally the amount
of remaining tooth structure is more important to restoration
longevity than is the restorative material used. Ultimately, the surface. As the bur enters the pit, a target depth of 0.1 to 0.2 mm
into dentin (i.e., just into dentin) should be established. his depth
is one half to two thirds the length of the cutting portion of a No.
bur, or approximately 1.5 mm as measured from the central
fissure and 2 mm from the preparation external wall. While
maintaining the same depth and bur orientation, the bur is moved
to extend the outline to include the carious central issure and the
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
IJ
• Fig. 10.58 Fissure extension. A, Facial occlusal issure continuous with the issure on the facial
surface. B, Extension through the facial ridge onto the facial surface. C, Appearance of the tooth prepara -
tion after extension through the ridge. D, The facial surface portion of the extension is cut with the side
of the bur. E, The line angles are sharpened by directing the bur from the facial aspect. F, Sharpening the
line angles from the occlusal direction with a No. L bur. G, Ensuring the retention form by preparing
retention grooves with a No. 14 round bur. H, Completed tooth preparation. I, The rubber polishing point
may be reshaped (blunted as indicated) on a coarse diamond wheel. J, Proper orientation of the rubber
point when polishing the facial surface groove area.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
extension of the central issure preparation that is not in a straight
direction from pit to pit (see Fig. 10.59E ). A dovetail outline form
in the distal pit is not required if radiating fissures are not
present. , Enameloplasty should be performed, where indicated,
to conserve the tooth structure.
Before extending into the involved proximal marginal ridge
(the mesial ridge, in this example), the inal locations of the facial
and lingual walls of the proximal box are estimated visually. Visual
assessment prevents overextension of the occlusal outline form
(i.e., occlusal step) where it joins the proximal outline form (i.e.,
proximal box). Fig. 10.60 illustrates visualization of the inal location
of the proximoocclusal margins before preparing the proximal box.
Showing the view from the occlusal aspect, Fig. 10.61 illustrates
a reverse curve in the occlusal outline of a Class II preparation,
which often results when developing the mesiofacial wall perpen -
dicular to the enamel rod direction while, at the same time, conserv -
ing as much of the facial cusp structure as possible. he extension
into the mesiofacial cusp is limited to that amount required to
permit a 90-degree mesiofacial margin. Lingually, the reverse curve
usually is minimal (if necessary at all) because of the relationship
of the central issure relative to the faciolingual position of the
proximal contact.extension of the caries lesion at the DEJ will determine the amount
of preparation extension and resultant width. he pulpal loor of
the preparation should follow the slight rise and fall of the DEJ
along the central issure in teeth with prominent triangular ridges.
Maintaining the bur parallel to the long axis of the tooth crown
creates facial, lingual, and distal walls with a slight occlusal con -
vergence as well as external wall orientation favorable for amalgam
use. he facial, lingual, and distal walls should be extended until
a sound DEJ is reached. Proper extension will result in the formation
of the peripheral seat, which aids in the primary resistance form.
It may be necessary to tilt the bur to diverge occlusally at the distal
wall if further distal extension would undermine the marginal
ridge of its dentinal support. During development of the distal
pit area of the preparation, extension to include any distofa cial
and distolingual developmental issures radiating from the pit may
be indicated. he distal pit area (in this example) provides a dovetail
retention form, which will prevent mesial displacement of t he
completed Class II restoration. However, the dovetail feature is
not required in the occlusal step of a single proximal surface
preparation unless a issure emanating from an occlusal pit indicates
it. his type of retention form (i.e., form that provides resistance
to mesial displacement of the restoration) also is provided by any
C245
CA B
D E245
• Fig. 10.59 Entry and occlusal step. A, Bur position for entry, as viewed proximally. Note the slight
lingual tilt of the bur. B, Bur position as viewed lingually. C, The tooth is entered with a punch cut, and
extension is done distally along central issure at a uniform depth of 1.5 to 2 mm (1.5 mm at issure;
because of the inclination of the unprepared tooth surface, the corresponding measurement on the pre -
pared wall is greater). D, Occlusal view of C. E, Completed occlusal step.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
10.62A ). he end of the bur is allowed to cut a ditch gingivally
along the exposed proximal DEJ, two thirds at the expense of
enamel and one third at the expense of dentin. he 0.8-m m-diameter
bur end cuts approximately 0.5 to 0.6 mm into enamel and 0.2
to 0.3 mm into dentin. Pressure is directed gingivally and lightly
toward the mesial surface to keep the bur against the proximal
enamel, while the bur is moved facially and lingually along the
DEJ. he ditch is extended gingivally just beyond the caries lesion
or the proximal contact, whichever is greater (see Fig. 10.62B ).
Axial wall dentinal depths will vary based on the gingival extension
of the preparation (see Fig. 10.62C ). he axial wall follows the
faciolingual contour of the proximal surface and the DEJ (see Fig.
10.62D ).
It is necessary to visualize the completed mesiofacial and
mesiolingual margins as right-angle projections of the facial and
lingual limits of the ditch to establish the proper faciolingual ditch
extension (see Fig. 10.62E ). When preparing a tooth with a small
lesion, these margins may clear the adjacent tooth by only 0.2 to
0.3 mm. A guide for the gingival extension is the visualization
that the inished gingival margin will be only slightly gingival to
the gingival limit of the ditch. his gingival margin will likely
clear the adjacent tooth by only 0.5 mm when treating an early
cavitated proximal lesion (see Fig. 10.62F ). Recall that the caries
lesion develops immediately gingival to the proximal contact and
therefore the preparation will always result in gingival clearance,
and that the amount of clearance will depend on the size of the
caries lesion. Clearance of the proximal margins (i.e., mesiofacial,
mesiolingual, gingival) greater than 0.5 mm is excessive, unless
indicated to include the caries lesion, undermined enamel, or
existing restorative material. he location of the inal proximal
margins (i.e., facial, lingual, gingival) should be established with
hand instruments (i.e., chisels, hatchets, trimmers) and not the
No. bur, so as to prevent unnecessary overextension (see Fig.
10.62E ). Extending gingival margins into the gingival sulcus should
be avoided, where possible, because subgingival margins are more
diicult to restore and may be a contributing factor to periodontal
disease. -
he depth of the axial dentinal wall should be adjusted to
approximately 0.5 mm if retention grooves are deemed necessary
(i.e., if caries lesion removal requires placement/orientation of
facial and lingual walls that are very divergent). his will allow
the grooves to be prepared into the axiolingual and axiofacial line
angles without undermining the proximal wall enamel. If the
proximal ditch cut is entirely in dentin, the initial axial wall is too
deep. Because the proximal enamel becomes thinner from the
occlusal to the gingival aspect, the end of the bur comes closer to
the external tooth surface as the cutting progresses gingivally (see
Fig. 10.62B, C, and I ). Premolars may have proximal boxes that
are shallower pulpally than are molars because premolars typically
have thinner enamel. In the tooth crown, the ideal dentinal depth
of the axial wall of the proximal boxes of premolars and molars
should be the same (two thirds to three fourths the diameter of
the No. bur [or 0.5–0.6 mm]). When the extension places
the gingival margin in cementum, the initial pulpal depth of the
axiogingival line angle should be 0.7 to 0.8 mm (the diameter of
the tip end of the No. bur is 0.8 mm). he bur may shave
the side of the wedge that is protecting the rubber dam and the
underlying gingiva (see Fig. 10.62C ).
he gingival extension of the proximal ditch may be measured
by irst noting the depth of the nonrotating bur in the ditch. he
dentist removes the bur from the preparation and holds it in the
facial embrasure at the same level to observe the relationship of While maintaining the established pulpal depth and with the
bur parallel to the long axis of the tooth crown, the preparation
is extended mesially, stopping approximately 0.8 mm short of
cutting through the marginal ridge into the contact area. he
occlusal step in this region is made slightly wider faciolingually
than in the Class I preparation because additional width is necessary
for the proximal box. he proper depth of the occlusal portion of
the preparation increases the strength of the restoration however,
more than does faciolingual width (see Fig. 10.59C and E ). Although
this extension includes part of the mesial marginal ridge, it also
exposes the marginal ridge DEJ. he location of the DEJ is an
important guide in the development of the proximal
preparation.
Proximal Outline Form (the Proximal “Box”)
Before initiating the proximal outline form (i.e., the proximal
“box”), the operator should visualize the desired inal location of
the facial and lingual walls relative to the contact. he objectives
for the extension of the proximal margins are to (1) include all
caries lesion, defects, or existing restorative material; (2) create
approximately 90-degree cavosurface margins (i.e., butt-joint
margins); and (3) establish (ideally) not more than 0.5-mm clearance
with the adjacent proximal surface facially, lingually, and
gingivally.
he initial procedure in preparing the outline form of the
proximal box is the isolation of the proximal (i.e., in this case,
mesial) enamel by the proximal ditch cut. While maintaining the
same orientation of the bur, it is positioned over the DEJ in the
pulpal loor next to the remaining mesial marginal ridge ( Fig.
• Fig. 10.60 Visualize inal location of proximoocclusal margins (dotted
lines) before preparing the proximal box.
90°
• Fig. 10.61 The reverse curve in the occlusal outline usually is created
when the mesiofacial enamel wall is parallel to the enamel rod direction.
Lingually, the reverse curve is very slight, often unnecessary.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
AB
C
E D F
G HIa
bAxial wall
dentinal depths:
crown, 0.5-0.6 mm
root, 0.75-0.8 mm
c
1/4"0.5 mm
Bur
LingualBurRemaining
spurs of
enamelFacial
• Fig. 10.62 Isolation of proximal enamel. A, Bur position to begin the proximal ditch cut. B, The proxi -
mal ditch is extended gingivally to the desired level of the gingival wall (i.e., loor). C, Variance in the pulpal
depth of the axiogingival line angle as the extension of the gingival wall varies: (a) at minimal gingival
extension; (b) at moderate extension; (c) at extension that places gingival margin in cementum, whereupon
the pulpal depth is 0.75 to 0.8 mm and the bur may shave the side of wedge. D, The proximal ditch cut
results in the axial wall that follows the outside contour of the proximal surface. E, The position of the
proximal walls (i.e., facial, lingual, gingival) should not be overextended with the No. bur, considering
additional extension will occur when the remaining spurs of enamel are removed. F, When a small lesion
is prepared, the gingival margin should clear the adjacent tooth by only 0.5 mm. This clearance may be
measured with the side of the explorer. The diameter of the tine of a No. 23 explorer is ~0.5 mm at 6 mm
from its tip. G, The faciolingual dimension of the proximal ditch is greater at the gingival level than at the
occlusal level to provide occlusal convergence of the facial and lingual proximal box walls. H, To isolate
and weaken the proximal enamel further, the bur is moved toward and perpendicular to the proximal
surface. I, The side of the bur may emerge slightly through the proximal surface at the level of the gingival
loor (arrow).
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
will rapidly cut through any matrix material and damage the adjacent
proximal sur face. he isolated enamel, if still in place, may be
fractured with a spoon excavator ( Fig. 10.63 ) or by mesial movement
with the side of the nonrotating bur.
To protect the gingiva and the rubber dam when extending
the gingival wall apically, a wooden wedge should already be in
place in the gingival embrasure to depress soft tissue and the rubber
dam.55 A round toothpick wedge is preferred unless a deep gingival
extension is anticipated ( Fig. 10.64A ). A triangular (i.e., anatomic)
wedge is more appropriate for deep gingival extensions because
the greatest cross-sectional dimension of the wedge is at its base;
as the gingival wall is cut, the bur’s end corner may shave the
wedge slightly (see Fig. 10.64B ). With a sharp enamel hatchet
(10-7-14), bin-angle chisel (12-7-8), or both, the dentist cleaves
away any remaining undermined proximal enamel ( Fig. 10.65 ),
establishing the proper orientation of the mesiolingual and mesio -
facial walls. Proximal walls that result in cavosurface angles of 90
degrees are desired.55 Cavosurface angles of 90 degrees ensure that
no undermined enamel rods remain on the proximal margins and the end of the bur to the proximal contact. A periodontal probe
also may be used.
he proximal ditch cut may diverge gingivally (i.e., converge
occlusally) to ensure that the faciolingual dimension at the gingival
aspect is greater than at the occlusal aspect (see Fig. 10.62G ). he
shape of the No. bur will provide this divergence. he gingival
divergence contributes to the retention form and provides for the
desirable extension of the facial and lingual proximal margins to
include defective tooth structure or old restorative material at the
gingival level, while conserving the marginal ridge and providing
for 90-degree amalgam at the margins on this ridge.55
Occasionally it is permissible not to extend the outline of the
proximal box facially or lingually beyond the proximal contact to
conserve the tooth structure. An example of this modiication
is a narrow proximal lesion where broad proximal contact is present
in a patient with low risk for caries. If it is nec essary to extend
1 mm or more just to arbitrarily create clearance (i.e., to “break
the contact”), the proximal margin is left in contact with the
adjacent proximal surface. It is usually the facial margins that
remain in contact as proximal caries lesions tend t o develop slightly
more toward the lingual.
he proximal extensions are completed when two cuts, one
starting at the facial limit of the proximal ditch and the other
starting at the lingual limit, extending toward and perpendicular
to the proximal surface (until the bur is nearly through enamel at
the contact level), are made (see Fig. 10.62H ). he side of the bur
may emerge slightly through the surface at the level of the gingival
loor (see Fig. 10.62I ); this weakens the remaining enamel by
which the isolated portion is held. If this level is judged to be
insuiciently gingival, additional gingival extension should be
accomplished using the isolated proximal enamel, that is still in
place, as a mental barrier to help the operator guide the bur.
Ensuring the presence of the proximal enamel surface helps to
limit the likelihood of iatrogenically damaging the proximal surface
of the adjacent tooth. At this stage, however, the remaining wall
of enamel often breaks away during cutting, especially when high
speed is used. At such times, if additional use of the bur is indicated,
a matrix band may be used around the adjacent tooth to limit
potential marring of its proximal surface; however, the relative
amount of protection aforded by the metal matrix material is very
limited and serves more as a visual guide than an actual physical
barrier. A No. bur, rotating between , and , rpm,
A
B
C
• Fig. 10.63 Removing isolated enamel. A, Using a spoon excavator to fracture the weakened proximal
enamel. B, Occlusal view with the proximal enamel removed. C, Proximal view with the proximal enamel
removed.
AB
• Fig. 10.64 Wedging. A, A round toothpick wedge placed in the gin -
gival embrasure protects the gingiva and the rubber dam during prepara -
tion of the proximal box. B, A triangular wedge is indicated when a deep
gingival extension of the proximal box is anticipated because the wedge’s
greatest cross-sectional dimension is at its base. Consequently it more
readily engages the remaining clinical tooth surface. Wedging increases
the interproximal space and limits the potential for iatrogenic damage of
adjacent tooth (or restoration) surfaces.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
by using a rotary instrument, intermittent application of the bur
along with air coolant alone (i.e., no water spray) is used to improve
visualization and precision.
he primary resistance form is provided by (1) the pulpal and
gingival walls being relatively level (i.e., perpendicular to forces
directed along the long axis of the tooth); (2) restricting the exten -
sion of the walls to allow suicient dentin support to remain (and
therefore strong cusps and ridge areas) while at the same time
establishing the peripheral seat; (3) restricting the occlusal outline
form (where possible) to areas receiving minimal occlusal c ontact;57
(4) use of a reverse curve to optimize the strength of the amalgam
and tooth structure at the junction of the occlusal step and proximal
box; (5) slight rounding of the internal line angles to reduce stress
concentration in the tooth structure (automatically created by bur
design except for the axiopulpal line angle); and (6) providing
enough thickness of the restorative material to prevent its lexure
and resultant fracture from the forces of mastication. he primary
retention form is provided by the occlusal convergence of the facial
and lingual walls and by the dovetail design of the occlusal step,
if present.
After completing the initial tooth preparation, the adjacent
proximal surface should be evaluated. An adjacent proximal restora -
tion may require recontouring to reestablish the normal anatomic
convex shape; this may be done with abrasive inishing strips,
disks, inishing burs, or a combination of these. Any iatrogenic
A
B
C
• Fig. 10.65 Removing the remaining undermined proximal enamel with an enamel hatchet on the facial
proximal wall (A), the lingual proximal wall (B), and the gingival wall (C).
AB C
• Fig. 10.66 Direction of mesiofacial and mesiolingual walls. A, Failure caused by a weak enamel margin.
B, Failure caused by a weak amalgam margin. C, Proper direction to the proximal walls results in fulllength enamel rods and 90-degree amalgam at the preparation margin. Retention grooves have been cut
0.2 mm inside the DEJ, and their direction of depth is parallel to the DEJ.
that the maximal edge strength of amalgam is maintained. he
cutting edge of the instrument should not be aggressively forced
against the gingival wall because this may cause a craze line (i.e.,
fracture) that extends gingivally in enamel, perhaps to the cervical
line. Fig. 10.66 shows the importance of the correct direction of
the mesiofacial and mesiolingual walls, dictated by enamel rod
direction and the physical properties of amalgam. If hand instru -
ments were not used to remove the remaining spurs of enamel ,
the proximal margins would have undermined enamel. To create
90-degree facial and lingual proximal margins with the No.
bur, the proximal margins would have to be signiicantly overex -
tended for an otherwise conservative preparation. he weakened
enamel along the gingival wall is removed by using the enamel
hatchet in a scraping motion (see Fig. 10.65C ).
When the isolation of the proximal enamel has been executed
properly, the proximal box may be completed easily with handcutting instruments. Otherwise more cutting with rotary instruments
is indicated. When a rotary instrument is used in a proximal box
after the proximal enamel is removed, there is increased risk that
the instrument may either mar the adjacent proximal surface or
“crawl out” of the box into the gingiva or across the proximal
margins. he latter mishap produces a rounded cavosurface angle,
which results in a weak amalgam margin of less than 90 degrees
if not corrected. he risk of this occurring is markedly reduced
when high-speed operation is used. When inishing enamel margins
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
should be taken as indicated in General Concepts Guiding Prepara -
tion for Amalgam Restorations.
After completion of the minimal gingival extension (i.e., the
gingivoaxial line angle is in sound dentin), a remnant of the enamel
portion of a caries lesion may remain on the gingiv al loor (wall),
seen in the form of a decalciied (i.e., white, chalky) or faulty area
bordering the margin ( Fig. 10.69 ). his situation dictates further
extension of a part or all of the gingival loor to place it in sound
tooth structure. Extension of the entire gingival wall to include a
large caries lesion may place the gingival margin so deep that
proper matrix application and wedging become extremely diicult.
Fig. 10.70A illustrates an outline form that extends gingivally in
the central portion of the gingival wall to include a caries lesion
that is deep gingivally, although leaving the facial and lingual
gingival corners at a more occlusal position. his partial extension
of the gingival wall permits wedging of the matrix band where
otherwise it may be diicult and damaging to soft tissue. In this
instance, the gingival wedge may not tightly support a small portion
of the band. Special care must be exercised by placing small amounts
of amalgam in this area irst and thoroughly condensing with light
pressure. In addition, care is exercised in carving the restoration
in this area to remove any excess that may have extruded gingivally
during condensation.
Fig. 10.70B illustrates removal of a caries lesion facially and
gingivally beyond the conventional margin position. Such minor
variations from the ideal preparation form permit conservation of
healthy tooth structure. A partial extension of a facial or lingual
wall is permissible if (1) the entire wall is not weakened, (2) the damage that compromises the convex adjacent proximal surface
should be corrected by recontouring or restoration.
Final Tooth Preparation
Removing enamel pit-and-issure remnants and soft dentin on the
pulpal wall in Class II preparations is accomplished in the same
manner as in the Class I preparation. Soft dentin is removed with
a slowly revolving round bur of appropriate size, a discoid-type
spoon excavator, or both. In general, the caries lesion removal
should stop when a hard or irm feel, with an explorer or small
spoon excavator, is achieved; this often occurs before all of the
stained or discolored dentin is removed. he exception to this is
when using the selective caries removal protocol (see Chapter 2 ).
Removing enamel pit-and-issure remnants and carious dentin
should not afect the resistance form. To achieve an enhanced
resistance form, the occlusal step should have pulpal seats at the
initial preparation depth, perpendicular to the long axis of the
tooth in sound tooth structure and peripheral to the excavated
area ( Fig. 10.67 ). Carious dentin in the axial wall is removed with
appropriate round burs, spoon excavators, or both so as to conserve
as much tooth structure as possible ( Fig. 10.68 ).
Any remaining old restorative material (including b ase and
liner) may be left if no evidence of a recurrent caries lesion exists,
if its periphery is intact, and if the tooth has been asymptomatic
(assuming the pulp is vital). his concept is particularly i mportant
if removal of all remaining restorative material may increase the
risk of pulpal exposure. Appropriate steps to protect the pulp
AB C
• Fig. 10.67 Management of smallto moderate-sized caries lesion on the pulpal wall. A, Soft dentin
extending beyond the ideal pulpal wall position. B, Incorrect lowering of the pulpal wall to include soft
dentin. C, Correct extension facially and lingually beyond the soft dentin. Note the caries removal below
the ideal pulpal wall level and the facial and lingual seats at the ideal pulpal wall level.
A B C
• Fig. 10.68 Management of a moderate to extensive caries lesion. A and B, Soft dentin on the axial
wall does not call for the preparation of the whole axial wall toward the pulp (dotted lines). C, Soft dentin
extending pulpally from the ideal axial wall position is conservatively removed with a round bur.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
Proximal Retention Grooves
To enhance the retention form of the proximal portion, proximal
grooves may be indicated to counter proximal displacement of the
amalgam restoration.55, - he use of retention grooves in proximal
boxes is controversial. It has been reported that proximal retention
grooves in the axiofacial and axiolingual line angles may increase
the fracture resistance and signiicantly strengthen the isthmus of
a Class II amalgam restoration and that these grooves are signiican tly
superior to the axiogingival grooves in increasing the restoration’s
fracture strength. - Other investigators have suggested, however,
that retention grooves located occlusal to the axiopulpal line angle
provide more resistance than do conventional grooves. It also
has been reported that proximal retention grooves are unnecessary
in preparations that include dovetails, as part of the occlusal
preparation, when high-copper amalgam is used. , Evidence
suggests that retentive grooves may not be needed in conservative,
narrow proximal boxes. he use of retention grooves is recom -
mended in tooth preparations with extensive proximal boxes.
Generally the depth of the grooves should be approximately half
of the diameter of the tip of the No. or No. 14 round bur
(i.e., ~0.25–0.5 mm). he depth of retention grooves in extensively
wide proximal boxes may need to be 0.5 mm or greater at the
gingival aspect.extension remains accessible and visible, (3) suicient gingival seats
remain to support the restoration, and (4) a butt-joint it at the
amalgam–enamel margin (90-degree amalgam angle and 90-degree
cavosurface angle) is possible.
Conserving as much tooth structure as possible by limiting the
extensions of external walls helps to provide secondary resistance
by limiting the risk of future tooth fracture from oblique forces.
Ensuring that all internal line angles are rounded is necessary to
limit areas of stress concentration in the remaining tooth structure
and in the new restoration and improves secondary resistance of
both. Use of the gingival margin trimmer or a bur to round the
axiopulpal line angle ( Fig. 10.71 ) helps to increase the bulk of
restorative material and decrease the stress concentration within
the restorative material.
he secondary retention forms for the occlusal and proximal
portions of the preparation should be independent of each other.
he occlusal convergence of the facial and lingual walls provide a
suicient retention form to the occlusal portion of the tooth
preparation.
• Fig. 10.69 Remnant of caries lesion bordering the enamel margin after
insuficient gingival extension. Such a lesion indicates extending part or all
of the gingival loor to place it in sound tooth structure. (Courtesy Dr.
C. L. Sockwell.)
A
B
• Fig. 10.70 A, Outline form that permits extension of the center portion of the gingival wall to facilitate
proper matrix construction and wedging in situations where the caries lesion extends deep gingivally.
B, Outline form that permits partial wall extension facially and gingivally to conserve the tooth structure.
• Fig. 10.71 Rounding the axiopulpal line angle.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
the bur . he tilt dictates the occlusal height of the groove, given
a constant depth. When using the No. 14 bur to prepare the
proximal groove, the rotating bur is carried into the axiolinguo -
gingival (or axiofaciogingival) point angle, then moved parallel to
the DEJ to the depth of ~0.25 to 0.5 mm. It is then drawn occlusally
along the axiolingual (or axiofacial) line angle, allowing the groove
to become shallower and to terminate at the axiolinguopulpal (or
axiofaciopulpal) point angle (or more occlusally if the line angles
are <2 mm in length) (see Fig. 10.72D and E ).
Regardless of the method used in placing the grooves, extreme
care is necessary to prevent the removal of dentin that immediately
supports the proximal enamel. In addition, it is essential that the
grooves are not prepared entirely in the axial wall (i.e., incorrect
translation [moving the bur only in an axial direction]) because
groove placement in this area will not afect any res istance to
proximal displacement of the amalgam (i.e., will not increase
retention) and will increase the risk of iatrogenic pulpal
involvement.
An improperly positioned axiofacial or axiolingual line angle
must not be used as a positional guide for the proximal groove.
If the axial line angle is too shallow, the groove may remove the
necessary dentinal support of enamel. If the line angle is too deep,
preparation of the groove may result in exposure of the pulp.
Retention grooves, when used, always should be placed 0.2 mm inside Retention grooves are prepared with a No. L or No. 14
round bur with air coolant only (to improve visualization) and
reduced speed (to improve tactile “feel” and control). he bur is
placed in the properly positioned axiolingual line angle and directed
(i.e., translated) to bisect the angle ( Fig. 10.72 ) approximately
parallel to the DEJ ( Fig. 10.73 ). his positions the retention groove
0.2 mm inside the DEJ, maintaining the enamel support. he bur
is tilted to allow cutting to the depth of the diameter of the end
of the bur (which is initially positioned at the axiolinguogingival
point angle) and to permit the groove to diminish in depth occlus -
ally. he facial groove in the axiofacial line angle is prepared in a
similar manner. When the axiofacial and axiolingual line angles
are less than 2 mm in length, the tilt of the bur is reduced slightly
so that the proximal grooves are extended occlusally to disappear
midway between the DEJ and the enamel margin (see Fig. 10.72B
and C ).
he four characteristics or determinants of proximal grooves
are (1) position, (2) translation, (3) depth, and (4) occlusogingival
orientation (see Fig. 10.73 ). Position refers to the axiofacial and
axiolingual line angles of initial tooth preparation (0.5 mm axial
to the DEJ). Translation refers to the direction of movement of
the axis of the bur. Depth refers to the extent of translation (i.e.,
depth of the retention groove). Occlusogingival orientation is
considered when using the No. L bur and refers to the tilt of
A
B
C
D
E
• Fig. 10.72 Proximal retention grooves. A, Position of the No. L bur to prepare the retention groove
as the bur is moved lingually and pulpally. B, Lingual groove. Note the dentin support of the proximal
enamel. C, Completed grooves. D, Grooves prepared with a No. 14 round bur. E, Completed grooves.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
root), the gingival cavosurface coniguration is 90 degrees to the
external surface of the root.55 A sharp distal gingival margin trimmer
(13-95-10-14, R and L) is similarly used for distal proximal
preparations. Alternatively, the side of an explorer tine may be
used to remove any friable enamel at the gingiv al margin. he tine
is placed in the gingival embrasure apical to the gingival margin.
With some pressure against the prepared tooth, the tine is moved
occlusally across the gingival margin to “trim” the margin of friable,
unsupported enamel.
Variation of Proximal Surface Tooth
Preparation
his section describes variations in tooth preparation for some
small Class II amalgam restorations. In most clinical situations,
the restoration of these preparations would likely be with composite
unless the patient has high caries risk. If amalgam is used, the
features presented should be considered in the tooth preparation
portion of the procedure.
Mandibular First Premolar
he technique of the Class II tooth preparation for amalgam for
the mandibular irst premolar must be modiied because the the DEJ of the facial and lingual proximal walls regardless of the
depth of the axial wall and associated line angles.
Proximal Walls
he preparation walls and margins should not have unsupported
enamel and marginal irregularities. No occlusal cavosurface bevel
is indicated in the tooth preparation for amalgam. Ideally, a
90-degree cavosurface angle (maximum of degrees) should be
present at the proximal margin. he occlusal line angle may be
90 to degrees. his angle aids in obtaining a marginal amalgam
angle of 90 degrees ( ≥80 degrees). Clinical experience has established
that this “butt-joint” relationship of enamel and amalgam creates
the strongest margin.55 Amalgam is a brittle material and may
fracture under occlusal load if its angle at the margin is less than
80 degrees .
A sharp mesial gingival margin trimmer (13-85-10-14, R and
L) is used to remove unsupported gingival enamel by the establish -
ment of a 90-degree gingival cavosurface angle at the gingival
margin ( Fig. 10.74 ). he resulting enamel gingival margin has a
6-centigrade (20-degree) gingival declination. he marginal con -
iguration is angled no more than necessary to ensure that full-length
enamel rods form the gingival margin and is no wider than the
enamel (see Fig. 10.74 ). When the gingival margin is positioned
gingival to the cementoenamel junction (CEJ) (i.e., on the tooth
ABC
DE
FDEJ169L
If groove is to fade out at
occlusal DEJ, ( c), bur is tilted
at start of cutting to clear
(c) 0.5 mmc0.5 mm depth of translation of
tip of 169L bur (0.5 mm diam.)
at gingival floor level
Groove is
0.2 mm
from DEJ
Translation
directionViewDEJ
• Fig. 10.73 Four characteristics of retentive grooves. A, Occlusal view of the mesioocclusal preparation
before placement of the retention grooves. B, Proximal view of the mesioocclusal preparation. C and D,
Position, translation, and depth. E and F, Occlusogingival orientation.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
20°Approximately 20°
to the internal
dentin wall ABC
• Fig. 10.74 A, The marginal coniguration of the enamel portion of the gingival wall is established with
a gingival margin trimmer to ensure full-length enamel rods forming the gingival margin. B and C, The
sharp angles at the linguogingival and faciogingival corners are rounded by rotational sweeping with a
gingival margin trimmer.
• Fig. 10.75 The mandibular irst and second premolars are compared.
Note differences in the sizes of the pulp chambers, lingual cusps, and
direction of pulpal walls.
morphologic structur e of this tooth is diferent from other posterior
teeth. he relationship of the pulp chamber to the DEJ and the
relatively small size of the lingual cusp are illustrated in Fig. 10.75 .
(his igure also illustrates the correct position of the pulpal wall
and how it difers in position and orientation compared with the
second premolar.) Incorrect preparation of the central groove area
may weaken the lingual cusp, and excessive extension in a facial
direction may approach or expose the facial pulp horn. When
preparing the occlusal portion, the bur is tilted slightly lingually
to establish the correct pulpal wall direction (see Fig. 10.43B ).
he mandibular irst premolar presents with unique occlusal
morphology, most notably the presence of a large transverse ridge
of enamel. Most often the coalescence of the enamel lobes is
complete and no caries-prone central issure results. herefore a
caries lesion in the mesial pit or distal pit may be included as part
of the Class II preparation, but with an outline form that does
not extend to or across the transverse ridge ( Fig. 10.76A ). he
level of divergence of the facial and lingual proximal walls (see
Fig. 10.76B ) is such that secondary retention grooves are indicated
(see Fig. 10.76C ). If the opposite pit or proximal surface is faulty,
it is restored with a separate restoration so as to not compromise
the resistance form of the tooth.
For a preparation that does not cross the transverse ridge, the
proximal box is prepared before the occlusal portion to prevent
removing the tooth structure that will form the isthmus between
the occlusal dovetail and the proximal box. he pit adjacent to the involved proximal surface is entered with the N o. bur.
Immediately after the entry, the bur is directed into the proximal
marginal ridge and then gingivally until the proximal DEJ is visible.
he bur axis for the proximal ditch cut should be parallel to the
tooth crown, which is tilted slightly lingually for mandibular
posterior teeth (see Fig. 10.76C ). he proximal enamel is isolated
and the proximal box completed as previously described for the
mandibular second premolar. he bur is then returned to the area
of entry, and the occlusal step is prepared with a dovetail, if needed.
When preparing the occlusal portion, the bur is tilted slightly
lingual to establish the correct pulpal wall direction (which maintains
the dentin support for the small lingual cusp and prevents encroach -
ment on the facial pulp horn). he primary diference in tooth
preparation on this tooth, compared with the preparation on other
posterior teeth, is the facial inclination of the pulpal wall. he
isthmus is broadened as necessary, but maintains the dovetail
retention form. Fig. 10.76B illustrates the correct occlusal outline
form. Removing any remaining caries lesion (if present) and inserting
necessary liners, bases, or both precede the placement of proximal
grooves and the inishing of the enamel margins (see Fig. 10.76C ).
Maxillary First Molar
When mesial and distal proximal surface amalgam restorations are
indicated on the maxillary irst molar that has an unafected oblique
ridge, separate two-surface tooth preparations are indicated (rather
than a mesioocclusodistal preparation). he use of t wo preparations
is preferred because the strength of the tooth crown is signiicantly
greater when the oblique ridge is intact.55 he mesioocclusal tooth
preparation is generally uncomplicated ( Fig. 10.77A ). Occasionally,
extension through the oblique ridge and into the dis tal pit is
necessary because of the extent of the caries lesion. he outline of
the occlusolingual pit-and-issure portion is similar to that of the
Class I occlusolingual preparation. Fig. 10.77B and C illustrates
a mesioocclusal preparation extended to include the distal pit and
the outline form that includes the distal oblique and lingual
issures.
When the occlusal issure extends into the facial cusp ridge and
cannot be removed by enameloplasty, the defect shoul d be eliminated
by extension of the tooth preparation. Occasionally this may be
accomplished by tilting the bur to create an occlusal divergence
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
he distoocclusal tooth preparation may take one of several
outlines, depending on the occlusal anatomy. he occlusal outline
is determined by the pit-and-issure pattern and by the amount
and extension of the caries lesion. An extension onto the lingual
surface to include a lingual issure should be prepared only after
the distolingual proximal margin is established. his approach may
allow conservation of more tooth structure between the distolingual
wall and the lingual issure extension, resulting in more strength
of the distolingual cusp. It is accomplished by preparing the lingual
issure extension more at the expense of the mesiolingual cusp
than the distolingual cusp. Nevertheless, the distolingual cusp on
many maxillary molars may be weakened during the distoocclu -
solingual tooth preparation because of the small cuspal portion
remaining between the lingual issure preparation and the disto -
lingual proximal wall. In addition, removal of the caries lesion
may reveal a weakened distolingual cusp. Reduction of the disto -
lingual cusp and coverage with amalgam is often necessary to
provide the proper resistance form (see the mesioocclusodistolingual
[MODL] example in Clinical Technique for Complex Amalgam
Restorations ).
Maxillary First Premolar
A Class II amalgam tooth preparation involving the mesial surface
of a maxillary irst premolar requires special attention because the
mesiofacial embrasure is esthetically prominent. he occlusogingival
preparation of the facial wall of the mesial box should be parallel
to the long axis of the tooth instead of converging occlusally to
minimize an unesthetic display of amalgam in the faciogingival
corner of the restoration. In addition, the facial extension of the
mesiofacial proximal wall should be minimal so that the mesiofacial
proximal margin of the preparation only minimally clears the
contact as the margin is inished with an appropriate enamel hatchet
or chisel ( Fig. 10.78 ).
If the mesial proximal involvement (1) is limited to a issure
in the marginal ridge that is at risk for caries, (2) is not treatable
by enameloplasty, and (3) does not involve the proximal contact,
then the proximal portion of the tooth preparation is prepared by
extending through the fault with the No. bur so that the
margins are lingual to the contact. Often this means that the
proximal box is the faciolingual width of the bur, and the gingival of the facial wall while maintaining the dentin support of the
ridge. If it is not possible to eliminate this fault without extending
the margin to the height of the cusp ridge or underminin g the
enamel margin, the preparation should be extended facially through
the ridge (see Fig. 10.77D ). he pulpal wall of this facial extension
may have remaining enamel, but a depth of 1.5 to 2 mm is necessary
to provide suicient bulk of amalgam material for adequate strength
(adequate resistance to lexure under load). For the best esthetic
results, minimal extension of the proximal mesiofacial margin is
indicated.
A B C
• Fig. 10.76 The mandibular irst premolar with a sound transverse ridge. A, A two-surface tooth
preparation that does not include the opposite pit. B, Occlusal outline form. C, Proximal view of the
completed preparation.
A B
C D
• Fig. 10.77 Maxillary irst molar. A, Conventional mesioocclusal prepa -
ration. B, Mesioocclusal preparation extended to include the distal pit.
C, Mesioocclusolingual preparation, including the distal pit and the distal
oblique and lingual issures. D, Mesioocclusal preparation with facial
issure extension.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
Tooth Preparation for Cla II Amalgam
Retoration Involving Both Proximal Surface
Perhaps the best indications for the use of amalgam restorations
are moderate and large Class II defects that include both proximal
surfaces and much of the occlusal surface. his section describes
factors to consider when amalgam is used for moderate and large
Class II restorations. he tooth preparation techniques presented
for a two-surface Class II restoration apply to larger Class II restora -
tions as well. When the defect is large, however, certain modiications
in tooth preparation may be necessary.
Occlusal Extensions
Larger Class II defects may require greater extensi on of the occlusal
surface outline form. his may require extending into grooves that
are issured, extending the outline form up the cuspal inclines, or
reducing and covering the cusps that have inadequate dentin
support. hese alterations may be accomplished easily by following
the principles presented previously. he depth and extension of
the initial preparation of issures occur at the same initial pulpal
loor depth (i.e., at the level of the DEJ) and follow the DEJ as
the preparation is extended in a facial or lingual direction.
If an occlusal outline form extends up a cuspal incline, the
extension also should maintain the pulpal loor at the level of the
DEJ. his extension usually requires some alteration in the orienta -
tion of the No. bur—a slight lingual tilt when extending in
a facial direction and a slight facial tilt when extending in a lingual
direction (see Fig. 10.35 ). Maintaining the correct pulpal loor
depth preserves tooth structure and reduces the potential for pulpal
encroachment. he prepared facial (or lingual) cavosurface margin
still should result in a 90-degree amalgam margin. If it is necessary
to extend through the cusp ridge onto the facial or lingual surface,
the preparation is accomplished as described for the occlusolingual
Class I restoration.
When the occlusal outline form extends from a primary issure
to within two thirds of the distance to a cusp tip, that cusp is
usually suiciently weakened so as to require reduction and coverage
with the restoration. Leaving the cusp in a weakened state may
be acceptable if the cusp is very large. Routine preparations in
some teeth may predispose some cusps for reduction and coverage
with amalgam. he small distal cusp of the mandibular irst molars,
the distolingual cusp of maxillary molars, and the lingual cusp of
some mandibular premolars (especially irst premolars) may be
weakened when normal preparations of surrounding areas of the
tooth are included. See the section Clinical Technique for Complex loor may be at the same depth as the pulpal loor. he retention
form for this extension is provided by the slight occlusal convergence
of the facial and lingual walls (see Fig. 10.34 ).
If the proximal caries lesion is limited to the mesiolingual
embrasure, the mesial proximal contact should not be included
in the tooth preparation. If only the lingual aspect of the mesial
proximal contact is carious, the mesiofacial wall may be left in
contact with the adjacent tooth (reducing the display of amalgam).
A Class II tooth preparation involving the distal surface of the
maxillary irst premolar is similar to the preparation of the man -
dibular second premolar described earlier.
Box-Only Preparation
When restoring a small, cavitated proximal lesion in a tooth with
neither occlusal issures nor a previously inserted occlusal restoration,
a proximal box preparation without an occlusal step has been
recommended.54,55 his preparation should be limited to a proximal
surface with a narrow proximal contact (allowing minimal facial
and lingual extensions) and a marginal ridge with no occlusal
contact. To maximize retention, preparations with facial and lingual
walls that almost oppose each other are recommended. As in the
typical preparation, the facial and lingual proximal walls converge
occlusally. Retention grooves are mandatory in box-only prepara -
tions. he proximal retention grooves should have a 0.5-mm
depth at the gingival point angle and extend occlusally to be visible
in the occlusal outline form ( Fig. 10.79 ).
A
B
• Fig. 10.78 To produce an inconspicuous margin on the maxillary irst premolar, the mesiofacial wall
does not diverge gingivally, and facial extension with a No. bur should be minimal so that the mesio -
facial proximal margin of the preparation minimally clears the contact as the margin is inished. A, Occlusal
view. B, Facial view.
• Fig. 10.79 A simple box restoration without the occlusal step is per -
missible when restoring a small proximal lesion in the tooth without either
occlusal issures or previously inserted occlusal restoration and when the
involved marginal ridge does not support occlusal contact. The proximal
grooves extend to the occlusal surface.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
Mandibular First Premolar
When a mesioocclusodistal amalgam tooth preparation is needed
for the mandibular irst premolar, the support of the s mall lingual
cusp may be conserved by preparing the occlusal step more at the
expense of tooth structure facial to the central groove than lingual.
In addition, the bur is tilted slightly lingually to establish the
correct pulpal wall direction. Despite these precautions, the lin gual
cusp may need to be reduced for coverage with amalgam if the
lingual margin of the occlusal step extends more than two thirds
the distance from the central issure to the cuspal eminence (see
Clinical Technique for Complex Amalgam Restorations ).
Maxillary First Molar
he mesioocclusodistal tooth preparation of the maxillary irst
molar may require extending through the oblique ridge to unite
the proximal preparations with the occlusal step. Extending the
preparation through the oblique ridge is indicated only if (1) the
ridge is undermined by a caries lesion, (2) it is crossed by a deep
issure, or (3) occlusal portions of the separate mesioocclusal and
distoocclusal outline forms leave less than 0.5 mm of the tooth
structure between them. he remainder of the outline form is
similar to the two-surface outline forms described previously in
this chapter. Fig. 10.81 illustrates typical three-surface and foursurface restorations for this tooth.
Maxillary Second Molar With a Caries Lesion on the
Distal Portion of the Facial Surface
Close examination of the distal portion of the facial surface of the
maxillary second molar may reveal decalciication, cavitation, or
both. When enamel is only slightly demineralized (i.e., softened
and rough), polishing with sandpaper disks may eliminate the
supericial fault. Careful brushing technique, daily use of luoride
(i.e., rinses, toothpaste), and periodic applications of a luoride
varnish may prevent further mineral loss. When decalciication is
as deep as the DEJ and a distal proximal caries lesion is also present, Amalgam Restorations for information on when and how to reduce
and cover cusps with amalgam.
Proximal Extensions
Larger Class II caries lesions often require larger proximal box
preparations. hese may include not only increased faciolingual
or gingival extensions but also extension around a facial or lingual
line angle. Large proximal box preparations may also need sec -
ondary retention features (i.e., retention grooves) for adequate
retention form because the proximal external walls are excessively
divergent. Extensive proximal boxes are usually prepared in the
same fashion as more conservative proximal boxes but may
require modiications. For increased faciolingual ex tensions, it
may be necessary to tilt the No. bur to include extensive
proximal faults that are gingival to the contact area. Tilting the
bur lingually when extending a facial proximal wall, or facially
when extending a lingual proximal wall, conserves more of the
marginal ridge and cuspal tooth structure. Although this action
enhances preservation of some tooth structure strength, it results
in a more occlusally convergent wall, which increases the dif -
iculty of amalgam condensation in the gingival corners of the
preparation.
When proximal extension around a line angle is necessary, it
usually is associated with a reduction of the involved cusp (see
Clinical Technique for Complex Amalgam Restorations ). Such
proximal extension is necessary because of a severely defective (or
fractured) cusp or a cervical lesion that extends from the facial
(or lingual) surface into the proximal area. Often these areas are
included in the preparation by extending the gingival loor of the
proximal box around the line angle, using the same criteria for
preparation as the typical proximal box: (1) Facial (or lingual)
extension results in an occlusogingival wall that has a 90-degree
cavosurface margin, and (2) the axial depth is 0.5 mm inside
the DEJ.
When the proximal defect is extensive gingivally, isolation of
the area, tooth preparation, matrix placement, and condensation
and carving of amalgam are more diicult. If the proximal box is
extended onto the root surface, the axial wall depth is no longer
dictated by the DEJ. Any root-surface preparation for amalgam
should result in an initial axial wall depth of approximately 0.8 mm.
his axial depth provides appropriate strength for amalgam, limits
any potential pulp compromise, and creates enough dimension
for the placement of ~0.25 to 0.5 mm deep retention grooves
while preserving the strength of the adjacent, remaining marginal
dentin and cementum. he extent of the preparation onto the
root surface, the contour of the tooth, or both may require that
the bur be tilted toward the adjacent tooth when preparing the
gingival loor of the proximal box. his tilting may result in an
axial wall that has two planes, the more gingival plane angled
slightly internally. It also may cause more diiculty in retention
groove placement. he more occlusal part of the axial wall may
be overreduced if the bur is not tilted.
Example of Moderate Cla II Amalgam Tooth
Preparation That Involve Both Proximal
Surface
Mandibular Second Premolar
A moderate mesioocclusodistal tooth preparation in a mandibular
second premolar is illustrated in Fig. 10.80 . Note the similarity
with the two-surface mesioocclusal preparation.
• Fig. 10.80 Mesioocclusodistal (MOD) preparation on the mandibular
second premolar that had a moderately sized MOD caries lesion.
• Fig. 10.81 Typical threeand four-surface restorations for the maxillary
irst molar. (See Fig. 10. for preparation of the distolingual cusp for
coverage with amalgam.)
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
distofacial groove. Fig. 10.83 illustrates the ideal distofacial extension
and a preparation design that includes the distal cusp.
Modiications in Tooth Preparation for
Proximal Surfaces
Slot Preparation for Root Caries
Older patients who have gingival recession that exposes cementum
(or dentin) may experience caries lesion development on the
proximal root surface that is appreciably gingival to the proximal
contact ( Fig. 10.84A ). Assuming that the contact does not need
restoring, the tooth preparation usually is approached from the
facial direction and has the form of a slot (see Fig. 10.84B and
E). A lingual approach is used when the caries is limited to the
linguoproximal surface. Amalgam is particularly indicated for slot
preparations if isolation is diicult.5
he initial outline form is prepared from a facial approach with
a No. 2 or No. 4 bur using high speed and air-water spray. Outline
form extension to sound tooth structure is at a limited depth
axially (i.e., 0.75–1 mm at the gingival aspect [if no enamel is
present], increasing to 1–1.25 mm at the occlusal wall [if the
margin is in enamel]) (see Fig. 10.84B ). If the occlusal margin is
in enamel, the axial depth should be 0.5 mm inside the DEJ.
During this extension, the bur should not remove any soft dentin
from the axial wall deeper than the outline form initial depth. he
remaining soft dentin (if any) is removed during inal tooth
preparation (see Fig. 10.84C ). he external walls should form a
90-degree cavosurface angle. With a facial approach, the lingual
wall should face facially as much as possible; this aids condensation
of amalgam during insertion. he facial wall must be extended to
provide access and visibility (convenience form) (see Fig. 10.84D ).
In the inal tooth preparation, the No. 2 or No. 4 bur should be
used to remove any remaining soft dentin on the axial wall. A
liner or base (or both) is applied, as indicated.
A No. 14 bur is used to create retention grooves in the occlu -
soaxial and gingivoaxial line angles, 0.2 mm inside the DEJ or
0.3 to 0.5 mm inside the cemental cavosurface margin (see Fig.
10.84D and E ). he depth of these grooves is ~0.25 to 0.5 mm
and the bur is directed to bisect the angle formed by the junction
of the occlusal (or gingival) and axial walls. Ideally, the direction
of the occlusal groove is slightly more occlusal than axial, and the
direction of the gingival groove would be slightly more gingival
than axial. A dentin desensitizer may be placed before or after
application of the matrix. he matrix for the slot preparation is
illustrated in Fig. 10.84F .
Rotated Teeth
Tooth preparation for rotated teeth follows the same principles as
for normally aligned teeth. he outline form for a mesioocclusal
tooth preparation on the rotated mandibular second premolar however, the entire distofacial cusp may need to be reduced and
included in a mesioocclusodistofacial tooth preparation. he facial
lesion may be restored separately if it is judged that the distofacial
cusp would not be signiicantly weakened if left unres tored by
amalgam. In that case the mesioocclusodistal preparation would
be restored irst, followed by preparation and restoration of the
facial lesion. When such sequential preparations ar e contraindicated,
the preparation outline is extended gingivally to include the
distofacial cusp (just beyond the caries lesion) and mesially to
include the facial groove ( Fig. 10.82 ). he No. bur should be
used to create a gingival loor (i.e., shoulder) perpendicular to the
occlusal force when extending the distal gingival loor to include
the afected facial surface. Inclusion of distofacial caries often
indicates a gingival margin that follows the gingival tissue level.
he width of the shoulder should be approximately 1 mm (or
0.5 mm inside the DEJ), whichever is greater. Some resistance
form is provided by the shoulder. A retention groove should be
placed in the axiofacial line angle of this distofacial extension,
similar to the grooves placed in the proximal boxes. For additional
retention a slot may be placed, as discussed in the section on
Clinical Technique for Complex Amalgam Restorations .
Mandibular First Molar
he distal cusp on the mandibular irst molar may be weakened
when positioning the distofacial wall and margin. Facial extension
of the distofacial margin to clear the distal contact often places the
occlusal outline in the center of the cusp; this dictates relocation
of the margin to provide a sound enamel wall and 90-degree amalgam
that is not on a cuspal eminence. When the distal cusp is small or
weakened or both, extension of the distal gingival loor and distofacial
wall to include the distal cusp places the margin just mesial to the
A B
• Fig. 10.83 Mandibular irst molar. A, Ideal distofacial extension. B, Entire distal cusp included in
preparation outline form.
• Fig. 10.82 Mesioocclusodistofacial preparation of the maxillary
second molar showing extension to include moderate to extensive caries
lesion in the distal half of the facial surface. The outline includes the disto -
facial cusp and the facial groove. The dotted line represents the soft tissue
level.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
separated by approximately 0.5 mm or more of sound tooth
structure ( Fig. 10.86 ).54,
Adjoining Restorations
It is permissible to repair or replace a defective portion of an
existing amalgam restoration if the remaining portion of the original
restoration has adequate resistance and retention forms. Adjoining
restorations on the occlusal surface occur more often in molars
because the dovetail of the new restoration usually may be prepared
without eliminating the dovetail of the existing restoration. Where
the two restorations adjoin, care should be taken to ensure that
the outline of the second restoration does not weaken the amalgam
margin of the irst ( Fig. 10.87A ). he intersecting margins of the
two restorations should be at a 90-degree angle as much as possible.
he decision to join two restorations is based on the assumption
that the irst restoration, or a part of it, does not need to be replaced
and that the procedure for the single proximal restoration (compared
with a mesioocclusodistal restoration) is less complicated and
conserves tooth structure.
Occasionally, preparing an amalgam restoration in two or more
phases is indicated, such as for a Class II lesion that is contiguous (Fig. 10.85A ) difers from normal in that its proximal box is
displaced facially because the proximal caries lesion involves the
mesiofacial line angle of the tooth crown. When the tooth is rotated
90 degrees and the “proximal” lesion is on the facial or lingual
surface, and orthodontic correction is declined or ruled out, the
preparation may require an isthmus that includes the cuspa l
eminence (see Fig. 10.85B ). If the lesion is small, consideration
should be given to slot preparation. In this instance, the occlusal
margin may be in the contact area or slightly occlusal to it (see
Fig. 10.85C ).
Unusual Outline Forms
Outline forms should conform to the restoration requirements of
the tooth and not to the classic example of a Class II tooth prepara -
tion. As mentioned earlier, a dovetail feature is not required in
the occlusal step of a single proximal surface preparation unless a
issure emanating from the occlusal step is involved in the prepara -
tion. Another example is an occlusal issure that is segmented by
coalesced enamel (as illustrated previously for mandibular premolars
and the maxillary irst molars). his condition should be treated
with individual amalgam restorations if the preparations are
AB CD
E
F1-1.25 mm
0.75-0.8 mm
Optional
wrap-around matrixCementoenamel
junctionRubber dam
xa
y
Rigid supporting materialInsert wedge from facial to
lingual if facial embrasure is
larger; and vice versa
Lingual
Facialc
cbd
• Fig. 10.84 Slot preparation. A, Mesiodistal longitudinal section illustrating a caries lesion. The proximal
contact is not involved. B, Initial tooth preparation. C, Tooth preparation with soft carious dentin removed.
D, The retention grooves are shown in longitudinal section, and the transverse section through plane cd
illustrates the contour of the axial wall and the direction of the facial and lingual walls. E, Preparing the
retention form to complete the tooth preparation. F, Matrix for slot preparation: (a) facial view of wedged
matrix; (b) wedged matrix as viewed in transverse cross section (x), gingival to gingival loor; (c) wedged
matrix as viewed in transverse cross section (y), occlusal to gingival loor.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
in General Concepts Guiding Preparation for Amalgam Restorations,
and any inal modiications completed.
Retorative Technique for Cla II Amalgam
Preparation
Desensitizer Placement
A dentin desensitizer is placed on the prepared tooth structure per
manufacturer instructions. Excess moisture is removed without
desiccating the dentin.
Matrix Placement
he primary function of the matrix is to enable proper restoration
of anatomic contours and contact areas. he qualities of a good
matrix include (1) rigidity, (2) establishment of proper anatomic
contour, (3) restoration of correct proximal contact relationships,
(4) prevention of gingival excess, (5) convenient application, and
(6) ease of removal. The following information presents th e
technique of placement for the universal (Tolemire) and precon -
toured matrix systems.
Universal Matrix
he universal matrix system (designed by B.R. Tolemire) is ideally
indicated when three surfaces (i.e., mesial, occlusal, distal) of a
posterior tooth have been prepared ( Fig. 10.89 ). his system is
also commonly used for the two-surface Class II restoration. A
deinite advantage of the Tolemire matrix retainer is that it may
be positioned on the facial or lingual aspect of the tooth. However,
lingual positioning requires the contra-angled design of the retainer
(which may be used on the facial aspect as well) ( Fig. 10.90 ; also
see Fig. 10.89 ). he retainer and the band are generally stable
when in place. he retainer is separated easily from the band to
expedite removal of the matrix system from the tooth. Matrix
bands of various occlusogingival widths are available (see Fig. 10.89 ).
A small Tolemire retainer is available for use with the primary
dentition.
he universal matrix band itself does not meet all the require -
ments of an ideal matrix band. he conventional, lat universal
matrix band must be shaped (i.e., burnished) to reproduce natural
anatomic contour and resultant proximal contact. Uncontoured
bands are available in two thicknesses, 0.05 mm and 0. mm.
Burnishing the thinner band to create contour is more diicult,
and the band is less likely to retain its contour when tightened
around the tooth. he uncontoured band must be burnished before
assembling the matrix band and the retainer. Burnishing must with a Class V lesion. Preparing both lesions befor e placing amalgam
introduces condensation problems that may be eliminated by
preparing and restoring the Class II lesion before preparing and
restoring the Class V lesion (see Fig. 10.87B ). It is better to condense
amalgam against a carious wall of the irst preparation than to
attempt condensation where no wall exists.
Abutment Teeth for a Removable Partial Denture
When the tooth is an abutment for a removable partial denture
(RPD), the occlusoproximal outline form adjacent to the edentulous
region may need additional extension if a rest seat is planned.
Additional extension must be suicient facially, lingually, and axially
to allow for the rest seat to be in the proximoocclusal restoration
without jeopardizing its strength. he facial and lingual proximal
walls and the respective occlusal margins must be extended so that
the entire rest seat may be prepared in the amalgam without
encroaching on the restoration margins. If the rest seat is to be
within the amalgam, it is recommended that a minimum of 0.5 mm
of amalgam be present between the rest seat and the margins ( Fig.
10.88A ). he portion of the pulpal wall apical to the planned rest
seat is deepened 0.5 mm so that the total depth of the axiopulpal
line angle measured on the faciolingual wall is 2.5 mm (see Fig.
10.88B ). A rest seat used for a tissue-borne (i.e., distal extension)
partial denture may involve amalgam and enamel (see Fig. 10.88C ).
In this case, no modiication of the outline form of the tooth
preparation is indicated (see Fig. 10.88C ). Note Fig. 10.88D
illustrates the relationship of the tissue-borne RPD with the abut -
ment tooth (see Fig. 10.88C ).
All aspects of the Class II preparation, regardless of various
levels of complexity, should be accomplished with precision. he
preparation should then be cleaned, carefully inspe cted as indicated
A
B
C
• Fig. 10.85 Restoration outlines for rotated teeth. A, Mesioocclusal outline for the mandibular premolar
with 45-degree rotation. B, Mesioocclusal outline for the mandibular premolar with 90-degree rotation.
C, Slot preparation outline for the restoration of a small mesial lesion involving the proximal contact of
the mandibular premolar with 90-degree rotation.
• Fig. 10.86 Restoration of the mesioocclusal tooth preparation, with
the central issure segmented by coalesced enamel.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
A
B
• Fig. 10.87 Adjoining restorations. A, Adjoining mesioocclusal tooth preparation with distoocclusal
restoration so that the new preparation does not weaken the amalgam margin of the existing restoration.
B, Preparing and restoring a Class II lesion before preparing and restoring a Class V lesion contiguous
with it eliminates condensation problems that occur when both lesions are prepared before either is
restored.
A B
CDrsrs
gp
RPD framework
RPD framework RPD distal extensionmrsgp
gp Tooth-borne RPD Pontic
• Fig. 10.88 Abutment teeth with Class II restorations designed for a removable partial denture (RPD).
A, Occlusal view showing the location of the rest seat (rs) and the guide plane (gp) for a tooth-borne
RPD. B, Cross-sectional view illustrating deepened pulpal wall in the area of the rest seat (rs) to provide
adequate thickness of amalgam. Note the relationship of the guide planes (gp) to the tooth-borne RPD.
C, Occlusal view showing the mesial rest seat (mrs) for the tissue-borne (i.e., distal extension) RPD pre -
pared partly in a previous MOD amalgam restoration and partly in natural tooth structure. D, Lingual view
of a distal extension RPD showing the relationship of the RPD to the Class II restoration and the guide
plan ( gp). Note that the igure shows a M-D cross section through the MOD amalgam and the occlusal
portion of the facial aspect of the distal marginal ridge is visible.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
may be justiied as less chair time is required during the restorative
phase. When cotton roll isolation is used, the Tolemire retainer
helps hold the cotton roll in place ( Fig. 10.92 ).
“Burnishing the matrix band” means that the metal band is
intentionally deformed occlusogingivally with a suitable hand
instrument to produce a rounded or convex surface that (when
in place around the tooth) produces a restoration that is symmetric
in contour with the adjacent proximal surface ( Fig. 10.93 ). he
No. 26-28 burnisher is generally recommended for burnishing the
band. he band should be placed on a resilient paper pad becaus e
distortion of the metal matrix will not occur on a hard, nonresilient
surface. he smaller round burnisher tip should irst be used with
irm pressure in back-and-forth, overlapping strokes along the
length of the band until the band is deformed occlusogingivally
in the appropriate areas. When the band is deformed, the larger
egg-shaped end may be used to smooth the distorted band. If a
convex surface is not obvious in the burnished areas w hen the
band is removed from the pad, it has not been adequately burnished.
he band may be burnished with the larger egg-shaped burnisher
only, but more work is required to do so. It is not necessary to
burnish the entire length of the band; focus efort only on distorting occur in the areas corresponding to the proximal surface to be
restored after the band is positioned around the tooth.
Precontoured bands for the universal retainer are commercially
available and need little or no adjustment before being placed in
the retainer or after being positioned around the tooth ( Fig. 10.91 ).
Although precontoured bands are more expensive, they generally
are preferred over the uncontoured bands. he diference in cost
AB
• Fig. 10.89 Straight (A) and contra-angled (B) universal (Toflemire) retainers. Bands with varying
occlusogingival widths are available.
• Fig. 10.90 Lingual positioning requires a contra-angled universal
retainer.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
• Fig. 10.91 Precontoured bands for a universal retainer. Pictured:
Waterpik Getz Contour Matrix Bands. (Courtesy Water Pik Inc., Fort
Collins, CO.)
• Fig. 10.92 Toflemire retainer maintaining a cotton roll in the maxillary
vestibule during condensation.
A
B
C
• Fig. 10.93 Burnishing the matrix band. A, With the band on the pad, a small burnisher is used to
deform the band. B, A large burnisher used to smooth the band contour. C, Burnished matrix band for
mesioocclusodistal tooth preparation. (Courtesy Aldridge D. Wilder, DDS.)
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
avoided. Care should be taken not to trap the rubber dam between
the band and the gingival margin. If the dam material is trapped
between the band and the tooth, the septum of the dam should
be stretched and depressed gingivally to reposition the dam material.
Once the matrix band is in place, the larger knurled nut is rotated
clockwise to tighten the band slightly . he explorer should be used
along the gingival margin to determine that the gingival edge of
the band extends beyond the preparation margins. When the band
is correctly positioned, the band is securely tightened around the
tooth.
When one of the proximal margins is deeper gingivally, the
Tolemire mesioocclusodistal band may be modiied to prevent
damage to the gingival tissue or attachment on the more shallow
side. he band may be trimmed for the shallow gingival margin,
permitting the matrix to extend farther gingivally for the deeper
gingival margin ( Fig. 10.95 ).
he mouth mirror is positioned lingually to observe the proximal
contours of the matrix through the interproximal space ( Fig. 10.96 ).
he occlusogingival contour should be convex, with the height of
contour at proper contact level such that the metal band is touching
the adjacent proximal surface in the precise location where the
contact should occur. he matrix is also observed from an occlusal
aspect allowing evaluation of the position of the contact area in a
faciolingual direction. If proper proximal contour and contact is
not observed, it may be necessary to remove the retainer and
reburnish the band. Minor alterations in contour and contact may
be accomplished without removal from the tooth. he backside
of the blade of the 15-8-14 spoon excavator (i.e., Black spoon) is the matrix where the proximal contact areas are planned
to occur.
To prepare the retainer to receive the band, the larger of the
knurled nuts is turned counterclockwise until the locking vise is
positioned adjacent to the guide channel on the end of the retainer
(Fig. 10.94A ). Next, while holding the large nut, the dentist turns
the smaller knurled nut counterclockwise until the pointed spindle
is free of the slot in the locking vise (see Fig. 10.94B ). he matrix
band is folded end to end, forming a loop (see Fig. 10.94C ). When
the band is folded, the gingival edge has a smaller circumference
as compared with the occlusal edge so as to accommodate the
diference in tooth circumferences at the gingival and, the more
occlusal, contact levels. he band is positioned in the retainer so
that the slotted side of the retainer is directed gingivally to permit
easy subsequent separation (in an occlusal direction) of the retainer
from the band after the restoration has been inserted. his is
accomplished by placing the occlusal edge of the band in the
correct guide channel (i.e., right, left, or parallel to the long axis
of the retainer), depending on the location of the tooth. he two
ends of the band are placed in the slot of the locking vise so that
the ends are aligned with the edge of the vice, and the smaller of
the knurled nuts is turned clockwise to tighten the pointed spindle
against the band within the locking vice (see Fig. 10.94D ). If
proximal wedges were used during tooth preparation, the wedges
are removed at this point and the matrix band is itted around the
tooth (allowing the gingival edge of the band to be positioned at
least 1 mm apical to the gingival margin). Damaging the gingival
attachment with the sharp edge of the matrix band should be
B
AGuide channel
D
C
• Fig. 10.94 Positioning the band in a universal retainer. A, Explorer pointing to the locking vise located
immediately adjacent to the guide channel. B, The pointed spindle is released from the locking vise when
the small knurled nut is turned counterclockwise. C, The band is folded to form a loop and to be posi -
tioned in the retainer (occlusal edge of band irst). The gingival aspect of the vise is shown in this view.
D, The spindle is tightened against the band in the locking vise. (From Daniel SJ, Harfst SA, Wilder RS:
Mosby’s dental hygiene: Concepts, cases, and competencies , ed 2, St. Louis, Mosby, .)
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
After the matrix contour and extension are evaluated, a wedge
is placed in the gingival embrasure(s) using the following technique:
(1) Br eak of approximately 1.2 cm of a round toothpick; (2) grasp
the broken end of the wedge with the No. pliers; (3) insert
the pointed tip from the lingual or facial embrasure (whichever is
larger), slightly gingival to the gingival margin; and (4) wedge t he
band tightly against the tooth and margin ( Fig. 10.97A ). he
wedge may be lightly moistened with water or a water-soluble
lubricant to facilitate its placement. If the wedge is placed occlusal
to the gingival margin, the band is pressed into the preparation,
which will result in an abnormal concavity in the proximal surface
of the restoration (see Fig. 10.97B ). he wedge should not be so
far apical to the gingival margin that the band will not be held
tightly against the gingival margin. his improper wedge placement
results in gingival excess of amalgam (i.e., amalgam “overhang”)
caused by the band moving slightly away from the margin during
condensation of the amalgam. Such an overhang often goes
undetected and may result in irritation of the gingiva or an area
of plaque accumulation, which may increase the risk of secon dary
caries. If the wedge is signiicantly apical of the gingival margin,
a second (usually smaller) wedge may be placed on top of the irst
to wedge adequately the matrix against the margin ( Fig. 10.98 ).
his type of wedging is particularly useful for patients whose
interproximal tissue level has receded.
he gingival wedge should be tight enough to prevent any
possibility of an overhang of amalgam in at least the middle two
thirds of the gingival margin (see Fig. 10.98A and B ). Occasionally,
double wedging is permitted (if access allows), securing the matrix
when the proximal box is wide faciolingually. Double wedging refers
to using two wedges: one from the lingual embrasure and one
from the facial embrasure (see Fig. 10.98E and F ). T wo wedges
help ensure that the gingival corners of a wide proximal box may
be properly condensed; they also help minimize gingival excess.
Double wedging should be used only if the middle two thirds of
the proximal margins are not able to be adequately wedged. Any
amalgam excess that forms in the facial and lingual corners is
accessible to carving, and therefore proper wedging to prevent
gingival excess of amalgam in the middle two thirds of the proximal
box (see Fig. 10.98B ) is the primary objective.
Occasionally a concavity may be present on the proximal surface
that is adjacent to the gingival margin. his may occur on a surface
with a luted root, such as the mesial surface of the maxillary irst
premolar (see Fig. 10.98G1 ). A gingival margin located in this
area may be concave (see Fig. 10.98G2 ). To wedge a matrix band
tightly against such a margin, a second pointed wedge may be
inserted between the irst wedge and the band (see Fig. 10.98G3
and G4 ).
• Fig. 10.95 The band may be trimmed for the shallower gingival
margin, permitting the matrix to extend farther gingivally for the deeper
gingival margin on the other proximal surface.
• Fig. 10.96 Using a mirror from the facial or lingual position to evaluate
the proximal contour of the matrix band.
ABIncorrect
• Fig. 10.97 A, Correct wedge position. B, Incorrect wedge positions. excellent for improving contour in the area where the proximal
contact is to occur. If a smaller burnishing instrument is used, the
dentist should use care not to create a grooved or bumpy surface
that would result in a restoration with an irregular proximal surface.
Ideally the band should be positioned 1 mm apical to the gingival
margin or deep enough to be engaged by the wedge (whichever
is less) and 1 to 2 mm above the adjacent marginal ridge(s) to
allow for adequate condensation of the amalgam in the marginal
ridge areas. A minor modiication of the matrix may be indicated
for restoring the proximal surface that is planned for a guide plane
for a RPD.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
BA C
ED
G1
G2
G3
GG4 FFlutingTriangular or round wedge
for moderately extended
gingival margin
Fluting results in
opening between
matrix and gingival
marginRigid supporting material:
most wedges should
be anchored by rigid
supporting material
to forestall any loosening
of wedges during amalgam
condensationDouble-wedging
Testing with explorer
in a press-scape motion for
soundness of enamel margin
and tightness of matrix to marginWedge-wedging
a matrix, ready for rigid supporting material;
wedges inserted from lingual or
facial embrasure, whichever is larger
• Fig. 10.98 Various double-wedging techniques. A and B, Proper wedging for the matrix for a typical
mesioocclusodistal preparation. C and D, Technique to allow wedging near the gingival margin of the
preparation when the proximal box is shallow gingivally, the interproximal tissue level has receded, or
both. E and F, Double wedging may be used with faciolingually wide proximal boxes to provide maximal
closure of the band along the gingival margin. G, Another technique may be used on the mesial aspect
of the maxillary irst premolars to adapt the matrix to the luted (i.e., concave) area of the gingival margin
(G1, G2) ; a second wedge inserted from the lingual embrasure (G3); testing the adaptation of the band
after insertion of the wedges from the facial aspect (G4).
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
attempts to remove the wedge (using the explorer with moderate
pressure) after irst having set the explorer tip into the wood near
the broken end. Moderate pulling should not cause dislodgment.
Often the rubber dam has a tendency to loosen the wedge through
rebounding of the dam stretched during wedge placement. Lubrication
of the wedge and stretching the interproximal dam septa, in the
direction opposite to the direction of wedge placement, before and
during wedge placement may prevent r ebound dislodgment. he
stretched dam is released after the wedge is inserted.
Some situations may require a triangular wedge that is modiied
(by knife or scalpel blade) to conform to the approximating tooth
contours ( Fig. 10. ). he round toothpick wedge is usually the
wedge of choice with conservative proximal boxes, however, because
its wedging action is more occlusal (i.e., nearer the gingival margin)
than with the triangular wedge ( Fig. 10.101A and B ).
he triangular (i.e., anatomic) wedge is recommended for a
preparation with a deep gingival margin. he triangular wedge is
positioned similarly to the round wedge, and the goal is the same.
When the gingival margin is deep (cervically), the base of the
triangular wedge more readily engages the tooth gingival to
the margin without causing excessive soft tissue displacement. he
anatomic wedge is preferred for deeply extended gingival margins
because its greatest cross-sectional dimension is at its base (see Fig.
10.101C and D ).
To maintain gingival isolation attained by an anatomic wedge
placed before the preparation of a deeply extended gingival margin, he wedging action between teeth should provide enough separa -
tion of adjacent teeth to compensate for the thickness of the matrix
band. his ensures a positive contact relationship after the matrix
is removed (after the condensation and initial carving of amalgam).
If a Tolemire retainer is used to restore a two-sur face Class II
preparation, the single wedge must provide enough separation to
compensate for two thicknesses of band material. he tightness of
the wedge is tested by pressing the tip of an explorer irmly at several
points along the middle two thirds of the gingival margin (against
the matrix band) to verify that it cannot be moved away from the
gingival margin ( Fig. 10.99 ). As an additional test, the dentist
• Fig. 10.99 Use of the explorer tip (with pressure) to ensure proper
adaptation of the band to the gingival margin.
AB
CDTall triangular wedge
incorrect for minimally
extended gingival margin
Corrective
trimming
of wedge
• Fig. 10. Modiied triangular (i.e., anatomic) wedge. A, Depending on the proximal convexity, a
triangular wedge may distort the matrix contour. B, A sharp-bladed instrument may be used to modify
the triangular steepness of the wedge. C, Modiied and unmodiied wedges are compared. D, Properly
modiied triangular wedge prevents distortion of the matrix contour.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
burnishes for appropriate occlusogingival contour (in the contact
areas), and inserts the band into the Tolemire retainer.
Occasionally the interdental spacing is so large that a suitably
trimmed tongue blade is required to wedge the matrix (Fig. 10. ).
Occasionally it is impossible to use a wedge to secure the matrix
band. I n this case the band must be suiciently tight to minimize
the gingival amalgam excess. Because the band is not wedged,
special care must be exercised to place small amounts of amalgam it may be appropriate to withdraw the wedge a small distance to
allow passage of the band between the loosened wedge and the
gingival margin. Tilting (i.e., canting) the matrix into place helps
the gingival edge of the band slide between the loosened wedge
and the gingival margin. he band is tightened, and the same
wedge is irmly reinserted.
Supporting the matrix material with the blade of a Hollenback
carver during the insertion of the wedge for the diicult deep
gingival restoration may be helpful.55 he tip of the blade is placed
between the matrix and the gingival margin, and then the “heel”
of the blade is leaned against the matrix and adjacent tooth ( Fig.
10. ). In this position, the blade supports the matrix to help
in positioning the wedge suiciently gingivally and preventing the
wedge from pushing the matrix into the preparation. After the
wedge is properly inserted, the blade is gently removed.
All aspects of the band and wedge are assessed, and any desired
inal corrections are made. he matrix band and wedge must provide
appropriate proximal contact and contour (see Fig. 10.96 ). After
wedging, relaxing the tension of the band by turning the larger
knurled nut of the Tolemire retainer a quarter turn counterclock -
wise will help to ensure proximal contact. If loosening the Tolemire
band still does not allow for contact with an adjacent tooth, a
custom-made band with a smaller angle may be used. Reducing
the angle of the band increases the diference in length (i.e., cir -
cumferences) of the gingival and occlusal edges. To reduce the
angle of the band, the operator folds it as shown in Fig. 10. ,
A
CDB Incorrect Correct
Incorrect Correct
• Fig. 10. Indications for the use of a round toothpick wedge versus a triangular (i.e., anatomic)
wedge. A, As a rule, the triangular wedge does not irmly support the matrix band against the gingival
margin in conservative Class II preparations (arrowhead). B, The round toothpick wedge is preferred for
these preparations because its wedging action is nearer the gingival margin. C, In Class II preparations
with deep gingival margins, the round toothpick wedge crimps the matrix band contour if it is placed
occlusal to the gingival margin. D, The triangular wedge is preferred with these preparations because its
greatest width is at its base.
Hollenback carver blade
• Fig. 10. Supporting the matrix with the blade of a Hollenback
carver during wedge insertion.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
Gingival edgeOcclusal edge
a
• Fig. 10. The custom-made matrix strip is folded, as indicated by
arrows. The smaller angle (a) compared with the angle of the commercial
strip increases the difference between the lengths of the gingival and
occlusal edges.
in the gingiv al loor and condense the irst 1 mm of amalgam
lightly but thoroughly in a gingival and lateral direction. he
condensation of additional increments is then carefully continued
in a gingival direction using a larger condenser with irm pressure.
Condensation against an unwedged matrix may cause a gross
extrusion of amalgam beyond the gingival margin. he excess
amalgam must be removed with a suitable carver immediately
after matrix removal.
• Fig. 10. A custom-made tongue blade wedge may be used when
excessive space exists between adjacent teeth.
ABC
DE
F
• Fig. 10. Rigid material–supported sectional matrix. A, The shape of the stainless steel strip after
trimming. B, The strip contoured to the circumferential contour of the tooth (ingers can be used).
C, Burnishing the strip to produce occlusogingival contact contour (left and right arrows indicate the short,
back-and-forth motion of the burnisher). D, Contoured strip in position. E, Matrix strip properly wedged.
F, Completed rigid material–supported sectional matrix.
Rigid-Material Supported Sectional Matrix
An alternative to the universal matrix band is the use of a properly
contoured sectional matrix that is wedged and suppo rted by a
material that is rigid enough to resist condensation pressure. he
supporting material selected must be easy to place and to remove.
Examples include light-cured, thermoplastic, and quick-setting
rigid polyvinyl siloxane (PVS) materials ( Fig. 10. ). he gingival
wedge is positioned interproximally to secure the band tightly at
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
he matrix should be tight against the facial and lingual margins
on the proximal surface so that the amalgam may be well condensed
at the preparation margins. In addition, when the matrix is tight
against the tooth, minimal carving is necessary on the proximal
margins after the matrix is removed.
Precontoured Sectional Matrix Strips
Commercially available sectional metal strips (e.g., Palodent System;
DENTSPLY Caulk, Milford, DE) are precontoured and ready for
application to the tooth ( Fig. 10. ). hese strips have limited
application when used for amalgam because of their rounded
contour. hey usually are most suitable for mandibular irst pre -
molars and the distal surface of maxillary canines. he contact
area of the adjacent tooth occasionally is too close to allow placement
of the contoured Palodent strip without causing a dent in the
strip’s contact area, making it unusable.
Condensation and Carving of the Amalgam
Proper condensation of amalgam results in close material adaptation
to the preparation walls (limiting marginal voids) and minimal
inclusion of internal voids. In addition, careful overstepping
condensation technique eliminates excess mercury and results in
a stronger restoration that is less prone to corrosion. Care should
be taken to choose condensers that are best suited for use in each
part of the tooth preparation and that may be used without binding
in the preparation or between the preparation and the matrix
band.
Condensation should occur in the proximal box(es) irst by
transfer of enough amalgam with the amalgam carrier to ill the
gingival portion by about 1 mm. his irst increment is condensed
in a gingival and lateral direction with suicient force to adapt
the amalgam to the gingival loor. Additional amalgam is carefully
condensed against the proximal margins of the preparation and
into the proximal retention grooves (if present). Firm, facially and
lingually directed condensation (i.e., lateral condensation) with
the side of the condenser should be accomplished along with the
application of gingivally directed force ( Fig. 10. ). Condensa -
tion strokes in a gingival and lateral direction help to ensure that
no voids occur internally or at the faciogingival or linguogingival
line angles. Mesial (or distal) condensation of the amalgam in the
proximal box is accomplished to ensure proper contour and proximal
contact with the adjacent tooth.the gingival margin to prevent any excess of amalgam (i.e., over -
hang). he wedge also separates teeth slightly to compensate for
the thickness of the section of matrix material. he wedge is placed
before the application of rigid supporting material.
he proximal surface contour of the matrix should allow the
normal slight convexity between the occlusal and middle thirds
of the proximal surface when viewed from the lingual (and facial)
aspect. Proximal surface restorations often display an occlusogingival
proximal contour that is too straight, thereby causing the contact
relationship to be located too far occlusally (with little or no occlusal
embrasure). his condition allows food impaction between teeth,
with resultant injury to the interproximal gingiva and supporting
tissues, and invites conditions leading to demineralization of the
adjacent proximal surfaces. he proximal surface contour of the
matrix should also provide the correct form to the proximal line
angles, both facially and lingually. If these contours are not present,
the facial and lingual embrasures of the restoration are too open,
inviting food impaction and injury to underlying supporting tissues.
Correct and incorrect contours and matrix correction steps are
illustrated in Figs. 10. and 10. .
Wrong
• Fig. 10. Alteration of the sectional matrix contour to provide the
correct form to the proximofacial line angle region.
Correct
Embrasure
Too closed
IncorrectToo open
• Fig. 10. Correct or incorrect facial and lingual embrasure form is
determined by the shape of the sectional matrix strip.
Precontoured
metal strips
• Fig. 10. Precontoured metal strips. (The Palodent System; cour -
tesy of DENTSPLY Caulk, Milford, DE.)
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
The procedure of adding and condensing continues until
amalgam reaches the level of the pulpal wal l. he size of the
condenser is changed (usually to a larger one), if indicated, and
amalgam is condensed in the remaining proximal portion of the
preparation concurrently with the occlusal portion. It may be
necessary to return to a smaller condenser when condensing in a
narrow extension of the preparation or near the proximal margins.
A smaller condenser face is more efective at condensing, provided
it does not signiicantly penetrate the amalgam already in place.
he occlusal margins are covered and overpacked by at least 1 mm
using a large condenser, ensuring that the margins are well con -
densed, especially in the area of the marginal ridge. Proper
condensation of the amalgam in the marginal ridge a rea(s) reduces
the risk of marginal ridge fracture during matrix removal. he
plasticity and wetness of the amalgam mass should be monitored
during condensation. Proper condensation requires that the mix
should be neither wet (i.e., mercury rich) nor dry and crumbly
(i.e., mercury poor). Amalgam that is beginning to set should be
discarded and a new mix obtained to complete the condensation.
Before carving procedures are initiated, precarve burnishing of the
occlusal portion with a large egg-shaped or ball burnisher should
be accomplished ( Fig. 10. ).79 As mentioned previously, precarve
burnishing is a form of condensation.
Carving the Occlusal Portion
Carving of the occlusal portion (including the occlusal embrasure
or embrasures) may be accomplished with the matrix assembly in
place while the amalgam is reaching its initial set. Early removal
of the band increases the risk of marginal ridge fracture. Careful
carving of the occlusal portion should begin immediately after
condensation and burnishing. Sharp discoid instruments of suitable
size as well as the Hollenback carver may be efective at reestablishing
the occlusal anatomy. he marginal ridge is carved conluent with
the tooth’s anatomy such that it duplicates the height and shape
of the adjacent marginal ridge (see Fig. 10.18 ). An explorer or
small Hollenback carver may be used to carefully deine the occlusal
embrasure. Remembering the pattern of occlusal contacts (that
were evaluated before tooth preparation), observing the height of
the adjacent marginal ridge, and knowing where the preparation
cavosurface margins are located all aid in completing the carving
of the occlusal surface, including the marginal ridge and occlusal
• Fig. 10. Lateral and occlusogingival force is necessary to con -
dense amalgam properly into the proximal grooves and into the angles at
the junction of the matrix band and the margins of the preparation.
• Fig. 10. Precarve burnishing with a large burnisher. (Courtesy
Aldridge D. Wilder, DDS.)
• Fig. 10. Using No. pliers, the matrix band should be removed
in a linguoocclusal (arrow) or facioocclusal direction (not just in an occlusal
direction).
embrasure. If the restoration has extensive proximal involvement
of the tooth, the occlusal carving should be accomp lished quickly.
Removal of the Matrix Band and Completion of Carving
At the appropriate time, the matrix retainer irst is removed from
the band by turning the small knurled nut countercl ockwise to
retract the pointed spindle from the vice. he end of an index
inger may be placed on the occlusal surface of the tooth and
matrix band to provide stabilization while the retainer is removed.
Next, any rigid supporting material, if used, is removed. he matrix
band is removed next. he No. pliers are used to tease the
band free, from one contact area at a time, by pushing or pulling
the band in a linguoocclusal (or facioocclusal) direction and, if
possible, in the direction of wedge insertion ( Fig. 10. ). he
wedge may be left in place to provide separation of teeth while
the matrix band is removed, and then subsequently removed. By
maintaining slight interdental separation, the wedge reduces the
risk of fracturing the newly condensed marginal ridge(s). Band
removal in a straight occlusal direction should be avoided so as to
limit the risk of marginal ridge fracture.
Matrix band removal allows access to carve the proximal portions
of the restoration. Eicient use of time is required so as to gain
access to the proximal areas while the amalgam remains carvable.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
Guiding Restoration with Amalgam. Finishing and polishing of
the proximal surface may be indicated where the proximal amalgam
is accessible. his area usually includes the facial and lingual margins
and areas occlusal to the contact. he remainder of the proximal
surface is often inaccessible; however, the matrix band should have
imparted suicient smoothness to it.
If amalgam along the facial and lingual proximal margins was
slightly overcarved, the enamel margin may be felt as the explorer
tip passes from amalgam across the margin onto the external enamel
surface. Finishing burs or sandpaper disks, rotating at slow speed,
may be used to smooth the enamel–amalgam margin. Sandpaper
disks also may be used to smooth and contour the marginal ridge.
Inappropriate use of sandpaper disks may “ledge” the restoration
around the contact, however, resulting in inappropriate proximal
contours.
In small preparations, the facial and lingual proximal margins
are generally inaccessible for inishing and polishing. Fin e abrasive
disks or the tip of a sharpened rubber polishing point or edge of
a sharped abrasive rubber polishing cup may be used to polish the
proximal portion that is accessible. When proximal margins are
inaccessible to inishing and polishing with disks or rubber polishing
points, and some excess amalgam remains (e.g., at the gingival
corners and margins), amalgam knives occasionally may be used
to trim amalgam back to the margin and to improve the contour,
though a lame-shaped inishing bur may ultimately be required.
Fig. 10. provides an example of a inished and polished Class
II amalgam restoration.
Quadrant Dentistry
When several teeth in a quadrant have caries lesions, the experienced
dentist usually treats them all at the same appointment rather than
individually. Quadrant dentistry increases eiciency and reduces
chair time for the patient. he use of the rubber dam is particularly
important in quadrant dentistry. For maximal eiciency, when a
quadrant of amalgam tooth preparations is planned, each rotary
or hand instrument should be used on every tooth where it is
needed before being exchanged.
When restoring a quadrant of Class II amalgam tooth prepara -
tions, it is permissible to apply matrix bands on alternate prepara -
tions in the quadrant and restore teeth two at a time. Banding
adjacent preparations requires excessive wedging to c ompensate
for a double thickness of band material and makes the control of
proximal contours and interproximal contacts diicult. Extensive
tooth preparations may need to be restored one at a time. If proximal
boxes difer in size, teeth with smaller boxes should be restored
irst because often the proximal margins are inaccessible to carving
if the larger adjacent box is restored irst. In addition, smaller
boxes may be restored more quickly and accurately because more
tooth structure remains to guide the carver. If the larger proximal
box is restored irst, the gingival contour of the restoration may
be damaged when the wedge is inserted to secure the matrix band
for the second, smaller restoration. If the adjacent proximal boxes
are similar in size, the banding of alternate preparations should
be started with the most posterior preparation because this allows
the patient to close slightly as subsequent restorations are inserted
(Fig. 10. ).
Before restoring the second of two adjacent teeth, the proximal
contour of the irst restoration should be carefully established. Its
anatomy serves as the guide to establish proper proximal contours
leading to correct embrasure forms and contact posi tion/size. If
necessary, a inishing strip may be used to reine the contour of
the irst proximal amalgam ( Fig. 10. ). he inishing strip is Proper matrix form should result in a proximal surface that is
nearly completed, with proper contact evident and minimal carving
required except to remove a possible small amount of excess amalgam
at the proximal facial and lingual margins, at the faciogingival and
linguogingival corners, and along the gingival margin. Amalgam
knives (scalers, No. 34 and No. 35) are ideal for removing gingival
amalgam excess (see Figs. 10.21 and 10.22 ). hey also are ideal
for reining the embrasure form around the proximal contacts (see
Fig. 10.19 ). he secondary (or “back”) edges on the blades of
amalgam knives are occasionally helpful, using a push stroke. he
Hollenback carver No. 3 and (occasionally) the side of the explorer
may also be suitable instruments for carving these areas. However,
the explorer may not reine the margins and contour as efectively
as the amalgam knife if the set of the amalgam is close to completion.
When the proximal carving is completed, the occlusal surface
contouring is completed. Occasionally, occlusal contouring may
require the use of an abrasive stone or inishing bur if the setting
of the amalgam is nearing completion.
When carving the margins of the restoration, the cutting surface
of the carving instrument is held in a perpendicular orientation.
Carving should be parallel to the margins, however, with the adjacent
tooth surface being used to guide the carver. he existence of the
proximal contact is veriied visually by using the mouth mirror.
When carving is completed, the rubber dam is removed and the
occlusion is assessed and adjusted, as needed.
Abutment teeth for a tooth-supported RPD must provide
amalgam contour to allow deining (by carving or [later] disking)
a guide plane extending from the marginal ridge 2.5 mm gingivally.
Normal proximal contour, rather than leaving an overcontour, is
usually suicient, however, and best for the development of a guide
plane. Guide plane development results in a gingival embrasure
between the natural tooth and RPD framework that is less open
and less likely to trap food (see Fig. 10.88B and D ).
An amalgam restoration of a proximal abutment tooth for a
tissue-supported (i.e., distal extension) RPD is carved to provide a
guide plan and adequate gingival embrasure space (see Fig. 10.88 D).
his allows for protection of the distogingival tissue, associated with
the distal abutment, when occlusal loading of the RPD distal extension
causes compression of the alveolar ridge soft tissue.
Before the patient is dismissed, thin unwaxed dental loss may
be passed through the proximal contact(s) once to remove any
amalgam shavings on the proximal surface of the restoration and
to assess the gingival margin. Passing the loss multiple times through
the contact area of an amalgam that is still early in its set may
result in removal of some surface amalgam and loss of contact
with the adjacent tooth. When positioned in the gingival embrasu re,
the loss is wrapped around the restored tooth and positioned
apical to the gingival margin of the restoration. he loss is moved
in an occlusogingival direction. he loss not only removes amalgam
shavings but also smooths the proximal amalgam and detects any
gingival overhang of amalgam. If an overhang is detected, further
use of an amalgam knife is necessary. Alternatively, a inishing
strip may be used to remove the amalgam excess and inish the
proximal surface gingival to the contact area. Floss also may be
used to verify that the intensity of the contact is similar to that
of neighboring teeth. Final rinsing and evacuation of the oral
cavity is then accomplished. he patient is advised to avoid chewing
with the restored tooth for 24 hours.
Finishing and Polishing of the Amalgam
Finishing and polishing of the occlusal surface of the Class II
amalgam should follow the approach presented in General Concepts
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
A
B
C
• Fig. 10. Polished mesioocclusal amalgam restoration. Note the conservative extension. A, Occlu -
sal view. B, Mesiofacial and occlusal views of the mesiofacial margin. C, Facial and occlusal views of the
proximal surface contour and the location of the proximal contact.
• Fig. 10. Quadrant dentistry. Unless otherwise indicated, a quad -
rant of Class II preparations with similarly sized proximal boxes may be
restored using two bands simultaneously if they are placed on every other
prepared tooth. It is recommended that the most distal tooth be restored
irst.
indicated, however, only where the proximal clearance is present.
Using a inishing strip between contacting amalgam restorations
may compromise or eliminate the proximal contact. Properly placed
amalgam restorations have the potential to last for decades ( Fig.
10. ).
Clinical Technique for Cla III
Amalgam Retoration
Class III restorations are indicated for defects located on the
proximal sur face of anterior teeth that do not afect the incisal
edge. Part of the facial or lingual surfaces also may be involved.
he Class III amalgam restoration is rarely used and has been
supplanted by tooth-colored restorations (primarily composite),
which have become increasingly wear resistant and color stable.
For esthetic reasons, use of amalgam is best suited for caries lesions
that may be accessed from the lingual rather than from the facial.
he Class III amalgam restoration is generally reserved for the
distal surface of maxillary and mandibular canines if (1) the
preparation is extensive with only minimal facial involvement, (2)
A
B
C
• Fig. 10. When the irst of two adjacent Class II preparations is
restored, proper contour may be established by using a inishing strip
before the second is restored. A, Before using the strip. B, Removing the
over-contour. C, Veriication of proper contour may be accomplished by
viewing the restoration with a mirror from the occlusal, facial, and lingual
positions. The proximal contour also may be evaluated after matrix place -
ment by noting the symmetry between the restored surface and the
burnished matrix band.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
A
B
C
• Fig. 10. Clinical examples of long-term amalgam restorations: A, 44-year-old amalgams;
B, 58-year-old amalgams in the irst molar; C, 65-year-old amalgams in molars. (A and B, Courtesy Drs.
John Osborne and James Summitt.)
• Fig. 10. Restoration for Class III tooth preparation using facial
approach on mandibular canine. The restoration is 5 years old. (Courtesy
Dr. C.L. Sockwell.)
the gingival margin primarily involves cementum, and/or (3)
moisture contr ol is diicult.
Initial Procedures
Appropriate review of the patient record (including medical history),
treatment plan, and radiographs should be accomplished. Anesthesia
is usually necessary when a vital tooth is to be restored. he gingival
extension of the preparation should be anticipated. Prewedging
in the gingival embrasure of the proximal site to be restored provides
(1) better protection of soft tissue and the rubber dam, (2) better
access because of the slight separation of teeth, and (3) better
reestablishment of the proximal contact. he use of a rubber dam
is generally recommended; however, cotton roll isola tion is also
acceptable.
Tooth Preparation for Cla III
Amalgam Retoration
A lingual access preparation on the distal surface of the maxillary
canine is described here because the use of amalgam in that location
is more likely. A facial approach for a mandibular canine may be
indicated, however, if the lesion is more facial than lingual. he
mandibular restoration is often not visible at conversational distance
(Fig. 10. ). he outline form of the Class III amalgam preparation
may include only the proximal surface. A lingual dovetail may be
indicated if one existed previously or if additional retention is
needed for a larger restoration.Initial Tooth Preparation
Bur size selection depends on the size of the lesion. Bur options
may include a No. 2 (or smaller) round bur or a No. bur.
he bur is positioned so that the entry cut penetrates into the
caries lesion, which is usually slightly gingival to the contact area.
Ideally the bur is positioned so that its long axis is perpendicular
to the lingual surface of the tooth, but directed at a mesial angle
as close to the adjacent tooth as possible. (he bur position may
be described as perpendicular to the distolingual line angle of the
tooth.) his position conserves the marginal ridge enamel ( Fig.
10.117A–C ). Penetration through enamel positions the bur so
that additional cutting isolates the proximal enamel afected by
the caries lesion and removes some or all of the soft dentin. In
addition, penetration should be at a limited initial axial depth
(i.e., 0.5–0.6 mm) inside the DEJ (see Fig. 10.117C and D ) or
at a 0.75to 0.8-mm axial depth when the gingival margin is on
the root surface (in cementum/dentin) ( Fig. 10. ). his 0.75-mm
axial depth on the root surface allows a 0.25-mm distance (the
diameter of the No. 14 bur is 0.5 mm) between the retention
groove (which is placed later) and the gingival cavosurface marg in.
Soft dentin that is deeper than this limited initial axial depth is
removed later during inal tooth preparation.
For a small lesion, the facial margin is extended 0.2 to 0.3 mm
into the facial embrasure (if necessary), with a curved outline
from the incisal to the gingival margin (resulting in a less visible
margin). he lingual outline blends with the incisal and gingival
margins in a smooth curve, creating a preparation with little or
no lingual wall. he cavosurface angle should be 90 degrees at all
margins. he facial, incisal, and gingival walls should meet the
axial wall at approximately right angles (although the lingual wall
meets the axial wall at an obtuse angle or may be continuous with
the axial wall) ( Figs. 10. and 10. ). If a large round bur is
used, the internal angles are more rounded. he axial wall should
be uniformly deep into dentin and follow the faciolingual contour
of the external tooth surface (see Fig. 10. ). he initial axial wall
depth may be in irm dentin (i.e., shallow lesion), in soft dentin
(i.e., moderate to deep lesion), or in existing restorative material,
if a restoration is being replaced.
Incisal extension to remove carious tooth structure may eliminate
the proximal contact ( Fig. 10. ). It is important to conserve as
much of the distoincisal tooth structure (i.e., sometimes referred
to as the “incisal canopy”) as possible to reduce the risk for sub -
sequent fracture. When possible (i.e., when the incisal enamel has
dentin support), it is best to leave the incisal margin in contact
with the adjacent tooth.
When preparing a gingival wall that is near the level of the
rubber dam or apical to it, it is beneicial to initially place a wedge
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
in the gingival embrasure to depress and protect soft tissue and
the rubber dam. As the bur is preparing the gingival wall, it may
lightly shave the wedge. A triangular (i.e., anatomic) wedge, rather
than a round wedge, is used for a deep gingival margin.
he initial tooth preparation is completed by using a No. 12
round bur to accentuate the axial line angles ( Fig. 10.122A and
B), particularly the axiogingival angle. his facilitates the subsequent
placement of retention grooves and leaves the internal line angles
slightly rounded. Rounded internal preparation angles permit more
complete condensation of the amalgam. he No. 12 round bur
also may be used to smooth any roughened, undermined enamel
produced at the gingival and facial cavosurface margins (see Fig.
10.122C ). he incisal margin of the minimally extended preparation
is often not accessible to the larger round bur without damaging
A
B
C D
• Fig. 10. Entry for Class III tooth preparation on maxillary canine. A, Bur position is perpendicular
to the enamel surface at the point of entry. B, Initial penetration through enamel is directed toward
cavitated, caries lesion. C, Initial entry should isolate the proximal enamel, while preserving as much of
the marginal ridge as possible. D, Initial cutting reveals the DEJ (arrow).
0.25 mm
deepiAxial wall
dentinal depths
before preparing
cove and groove:
crown, 0.5-0.6 mm
root, 0.75-0.8 mm
Arrows depict
depth directiong1
g2
• Fig. 10. Mesiodistal vertical section showing location, depth direc -
tion (arrows), and direction depth of the retention form in Class III tooth
preparations of different gingival depths. Incisal cove (i); gingival groove
(g1), enamel margin; gingival groove (g2), root-surface margin. Distance
from outer aspect of g2 groove to margin is approximately 0.3 mm; bur
head diameter is 0.5 mm; direction depth of groove is half this diameter
(or approximately 0.3 mm [0.25 mm]).
A
B
• Fig. 10. Class III tooth preparation on maxillary canine. A, Round
bur shaping the incisal area. The incisal angle remains. B, Initial shape of
the preparation accomplished with a round bur.
Facial
Lingual
• Fig. 10. Transverse section of mandibular lateral incisor illustrating
that the lingual wall of a Class III tooth preparation may meet the axial wall
at an obtuse angle and that the axial wall is a uniform depth into dentin
and follows the faciolingual contour of the external tooth surface.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
between the groove and the DEJ. he rotating bur is moved lingually
along the axiogingival line angle, with the angle of cutting generally
bisecting the angle between the gingival and axial walls. Ideally
the direction of the gingival groove is slightly more gingival than
axial (and the direction of an incisal [i.e., occlusal] groove would
be slightly more incisal [i.e., occlusal] than axial) ( Fig. 10. ; see
also Fig. 10. ).
Alternatively if less retention form is needed, two gingival coves
may be used as opposed to a continuous groove. One each may
be placed in the axiofaciogingival and axiogingivolingual point
angles. he diameter of the 14 round bur is 0.5 mm, and the
depth of the groove should be ~0.25 to 0.5 mm. Note the location
and depthwise direction of the groove, where the gingival wall
remains in enamel ( Fig. 10. ). When preparing a retention
groove on the root surface (gingival wall in cement um or dentin),
the angle of cutting is more gingival, resulting in the distance from
the gingival cavosurface margin to the groove being approximately
0.3 mm (see Fig. 10. ). Careful technique is necessary in prepar -
ing the gingival retention groove. If the dentin that supports gingival
enamel is removed, enamel is subject to fracture. In addition, if
the groove is placed only in the axial wall, no efective retention
form is developed and the risk of pulpal involvement is increased.(“marring”) the adjacent tooth (see Fig. 10.122D ). Further inishing
of the incisal margin is presented later. At this point the initial
tooth preparation is completed.
Final Tooth Preparation
Final tooth preparation involves removing any remaining soft
dentin, protecting the pulp, developing secondary resistance and
retention forms, inishing external walls, and debridement (clean -
ing)/inspecting. Any remaining soft dentin on the axial wall is
removed by using a slowly revolving round bur (No. 2 or No. 4),
appropriate spoon excavators, or both. (See Chapter 2 for the
management of soft dentin.)
For the Class III amalgam restoration, resistance form against
postrestorative fracture is provided by (1) cavosurface and amalgam
margins of 90 degrees, (2) enamel walls supported by sound dentin,
(3) suicient bulk of amalgam, and (4) rounded preparation internal
angles. he boxlike preparation form provides primary retention
form. Secondary retention form is provided by a gingival groove,
an incisal cove, and sometimes a lingual dovetail.
he gingival retention groove is prepared by placing a No. 14
round bur (rotating at low speed) in the axiofaciogingival point
angle. It is positioned in the dentin to maintain 0.2 mm of dentin
A
B
• Fig. 10. Distofacial (A) and incisal (B) views of the canine to show the curved proximal outline
necessary to preserve the distoincisal corner of the tooth. The incisal margin of this preparation example
is located slightly incisally of the proximal contact (but whenever possible, the margin may be in the
contact area).
A
B
C
D
• Fig. 10. Reining proximal portion. A–C, A small, round bur is used to shape the preparation walls,
deine line angles, and initiate removal of any undermined enamel along the gingival and facial margins.
D, Tooth preparation completed, except for the inal inishing of the enamel margins and placement of
secondary retention.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
incisally ( Fig. 10. ). his completes the typical Class III amalgam
tooth preparation (see Fig. 10. ).
A lingual dovetail is not required in small or moderately sized
Class III amalgam restorations. It may be used in large preparations,
especially preparations with excessive incisal extension in which
additional retention form is needed. he dovetail may not be
necessary (even in large preparations), however, if an incisal second -
ary retention form is possible ( Fig. 10. ).
If a lingual dovetail is needed, it is prepared only after initial
preparation of the proximal portion has been completed. Otherwise An incisal retention cove is prepared at the axiofacioincisal
point angle with a No. 14 round bur in dentin, being careful not
to undermine enamel. It is directed similarly into the incisal point
angle and prepared to half the diameter of the bur ( Fig. 10. ).
Undermining the incisal enamel should be avoided. For the maxillary
canine, the palm-and-thumb grasp may be used to direct the bur
A
B
C
• Fig. 10. Preparing the gingival retention form. A, Position of No. 14 round bur in axiofaciogingival
point angle. B, Advancing the bur lingually to prepare the groove along the axiogingival line angle. (See
Fig. 10. regarding location, depth direction, and direction depth of groove.) C, Completed gingival
retention groove.
• Fig. 10. Completed Class III tooth preparation for amalgam
restoration.
A
B
• Fig. 10. Preparing the incisal retention cove. A, Position of No.
14 round bur in the axioincisal point angle. B, Completed incisal cove.
A
B
• Fig. 10. Use of the palm-and-thumb grasp to place the incisal
retention cove. A, Hand position showing thumb rest. B, Handpiece posi -
tion for preparing the incisal retention.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
of the tooth. he No. bur is positioned in the proximal portion
at the correct depth and angulation and moved in a mesial direction
(Fig. 10.128A and B ). he correct angulation places the long axis
of the bur perpendicular to the lingual surface. he bur is moved
to the point that corresponds to the most mesial extent of the
dovetail (see Fig. 10.128C and D ). he bur is then moved incisally
and gingivally to create suicient incisogingival dimension to the the tooth structure needed for the isthmus between the proximal
portion and the dovetail may be removed when the proximal
outline form is prepared. he lingual dovetail should be conservative,
generally not extending beyond the mesiodistal midpoint of the
lingual surface; this varies according to the extent of the proximal
caries lesion. he depth of the axial wall of the dovetail should be
just inside the DEJ and should be parallel to the lingual surface
A
B
C
• Fig. 10. Extensive Class III tooth preparation. A, Initial tooth preparation with No. 2 round bur.
B, Deining line angles and removing undermined enamel with No. 12 round bur. C, Placing the retention
groove using No. 14 round bur. Note the completed incisal cove.
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
• Fig. 10. Lingual dovetail providing additional retention for extensive amalgam restoration. A, Bur
position at correct depth and angulation to begin cutting. B, Initial cut in beginning dovetail. C, Bur moved
to most mesial extent of dovetail. D, If possible, cutting should not extend beyond the midlingual position.
E, Bur cutting gingival extension of the dovetail. F, Incisal and gingival extensions of the dovetail.
G, Completing the isthmus. The proximal and lingual portions are connected by the incisal and gingival
walls in smooth curves. H, Completed lingual dovetail.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
A B
• Fig. 10. Ensuring retention in lingual dovetail (often optional). A,
Position of No. bur for cutting the retention cove. B, Preparation of
the cove should not remove the dentinal support of the lingual enamel
(arrow).
A
BCNo. 2 round8-3- /4 round
DE
FG
• Fig. 10. Class III tooth preparation for amalgam restoration on the mandibular incisor. A, Entering
the tooth from the lingual approach. B, Finishing the facial, incisal, and lingual enamel margins with an
8-3-22 triple angle hoe. Note how the secondary cutting edge of the blade is used on the lingual enamel.
C, Placing incisal and gingival retention forms with No. 14 round bur. D, Dotted line indicates the outline
of the additional extension that is sometimes necessary for access in placing the incisal retention cove.
E, Position of a bi-beveled hatchet to place the incisal retention cove. F, The axial wall forms a convex
surface over the pulp. G, Completed tooth preparation. Note the gingival retention groove. dovetail (approximately 2.5 mm) (see Fig. 10.128E and F ). he
incisal and gingival walls of the isthmus are prepared in smooth
curves connecting the dovetail to the proximal outline form (see
Fig. 10.128G and H ).
The gingival margin trimmer may be used to round the
axiopulpal line angle (i.e., the junction of the proximal and dovetail
preparation). his increases the strength of the restoration at the
junction of the proximal and lingual portions by providing bulk
and limiting stress concentration. he slight lingual convergence
of the dovetail’s external walls (prepared with the No. bur)
usually provides a suicient retention form. Retention coves, one
in the incisal corner and one in the gingival corner ( Fig. 10. ),
may be placed in the dovetail to enhance retention. he coves are
prepared with the No. 14 round bur or the No. bur without
compromising the dentinal support of the lingual enamel. his
preparation may require deepening of the axial wall. Unsupported
enamel is removed, the walls or margins are smoothed, and the
cavosurface angles are reined, where indicated. he 8-3-22 hoe
is recommended for inishing minimally extended margins ( Fig.
10. ). If the gingival margin is in enamel, correct marginal
coniguration (approximately 20 degrees gingival declination) is
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
II preparations. When properly placed, conservative restorations
in incisors and canines are relatively inconspicuous ( Fig. 10. ).
Fig. 10. illustrates a Class III amalgam restoration in a man -
dibular incisor.
Finishing and Polishing
Finishing and polishing of the Class III amalgam should follow
the approach presented in General Concepts Guiding Restoration
with Amalgam.
Clinical Technique for Cla V
Amalgam Retoration
Class V restorations are indicated to restore defects on the facial
or lingual cervical one third of any tooth. Class V amalgam restora -
tions may be especially technique sensitive because of location,
extent of the caries lesion, and limited access and visibility. Cervical
caries lesions usually develop because of the chronic presence of
an acidogenic bioilm located in the non–self-cleansing area just
gingival to the height of contour. Patients with gingival recession
are predisposed to Class V root caries lesions because dentin is more
susceptible to demineralization than enamel. Patients with a reduced
salivar y low caused by certain medical conditions (e.g., Sjögren’s
syndrome), medications, or head and neck radiation therapy are
also predisposed to cervical and root caries lesions. hese patients
usually have less saliva to bufer the acids produced by oral bacteria.
Class V restorations may be used to treat both cervical and root
caries lesions. Incipient, smooth-surface enamel demineralization
appears as a chalky white line just occlusal or incisal to the crest
of the marginal gingiva (usually on the facial surface) ( Fig. 10. ).
hese areas often are overlooked in the oral examina tion unless
teeth are isolated with cotton rolls, free of debris, and dried gently
with the air syringe. When the incipient cervical caries has not
decalciied the enamel suiciently to result in cavitation (i.e., a
break in the continuity of the surface), the lesion may be remineral -
ized by appropriate techniques, including patient motivation toward
proper diet and hygiene. Occasionally an enamel surface that is
only slightly cavitated may be treated successfully by smoothing
with sandpaper disks, polishing, and treating with a luoride varnish
or iniltrated with a low viscosity resin in an attempt to prevent
further demineralization, cavitation, and surgical management.
Prophylactic, preventive treatment alone will be inadequate if the
caries lesion has progressed to decalcify and soften enamel to an
appreciable depth. In this instance, a Class V tooth preparation
and restoration is indicated, particularly if the caries lesion has
penetrated to the DEJ ( Fig. 10.137A ). When numerous cervical
lesions are present (see Fig. 10.137B ), high caries activity is obvious.
In addition to the restorative treatment, the patient should be
instructed and encouraged to implement an aggressive prevention
program to avoid subsequent development of additional caries
lesions. Class V amalgam restorations may be used anywhere in
the mouth. As with Class III amalgam restorations, they generally
are reserved for nonesthetic areas, for areas where access and visibility
are limited and where moisture control is diicult, such as areas
that are signiicantly deep gingivally. Because of limited access and
visibility, many Class V restorations are diicult and present special
problems during the preparation and restorative procedures.
Occasionally amalgam is preferred when the caries lesion extends
gingivally enough that a mucoperiosteal lap must be relected for
adequate access and visibility ( Fig. 10. ). Proper surgical technique
must be followed, with special attention to complete debridement necessary to ensure full-length enamel rods forming the cavosurface
margin. All the walls of the preparation should meet the external
tooth surface to form a right angle (i.e., butt joint) ( Fig. 10. ;
see also Fig. 10. ). he various steps involved in the preparation
of the dovetail are shown in Fig. 10. .
he completed tooth preparation should be cleaned of any
residual debris and inspected. Careful assessment should be made
to see that all of the caries lesion has been removed (as indicated),
that the depth and retention are appropriate, and that cavosurface
margins provide for suicient amalgam bulk.
Retorative Technique for Cla III Amalgam
Preparation
Desensitizer Placement
A dentin desensitizer is placed on the prepared tooth structure per
manufacturer instructions. Excess moisture is removed without
desiccating the dentin.
Matrix Placement
he wedged, rigid material–supported sectional matrix may be
used for the Class III amalgam restoration. It is essential to trim
the lingual portion of the sectional matrix material correctly to
avoid covering the preparation and blocking access for insertion
of the amalgam. Stainless steel matrix material is obtained, 8 mm
wide and 0.05 mm thick, which covers one third of the facial
surface and extends through the proximal to the lingual surface.
he lingual portion is trimmed at an angle that corresponds
approximately to the slope of the lingual surface of the tooth ( Fig.
10. ). he section of matrix is burnished on a resilient paper
pad to create the desired proximal surface form. he sectional
matrix is placed in position and wedged from the facial or lingual
embrasure, whichever is greater. he facial and lingual portions of
the matrix are stabilized with a rigid material (see Fig. 10.132G ).
Precontoured metallic matrices may be used (instead of custom-made
matrices) if the contour of the precontoured matrix coincides with
that of the proximal surface being restored. If the preparation is
small and the matrix is suiciently rigid, additional rigid material
to support the matrix may not be required.
Condensation and Carving
Insertion of the amalgam, initial carving, matrix removal, wedge
removal, and inal carving are similar to the techniques for Class
• Fig. 10. Completed distolingual Class III tooth preparation for
amalgam.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
• Fig. 10. Distolingual tooth preparation and restoration. A, Bur position for entry. B, Penetration
made through the lingual enamel to the caries lesion. C, Proximal portion completed, except for the
retention form. D, Preparing the dovetail. E, Completed preparation, except for the retention groove and
the coves. F, Bur position for the incisal cove in the dovetail. G, Rigid material–supported sectional matrix
ready for the insertion of amalgam. H, Carving completed and rubber dam removed. I, Polished
restoration.
AB C
• Fig. 10. Matrix strip design. A, Design required for rigid material–supported matrix for Class II
tooth preparations. B, Alteration necessary for Class III preparation on the maxillary canine. C, Alteration
necessary for the mandibular incisor. The strip material is cut to approximate the slope of the lingual
surface.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
of amalgam particles before closure of the surgical site. Class V
amalgam restorations usually are contraindicated in esthetically
important areas because many patients object to met al restorations
that are visible ( Fig. 10. ). Generally Class V amalgams placed
on the facial surface of mandibular canines, premolars, and molars
are not readily visible. Amalgams placed on maxillary premolars
and irst molars may be visible.
Amalgam may be used in the cervical areas of partial denture
abutment teeth because amalgam resists wear as clasps move over
the restoration. Contours prepared in the restoration for clasp
retentive areas may be achieved relatively easily and maintained
when an amalgam restoration is used.
Initial Procedures
Proper isolation prevents moisture contamination of the operating
site, enhances asepsis, and facilitates access and visi bility. Moisture
in the form of saliva, gingiv al sulcular luid, or gingival hemorrhage
must be excluded during caries lesion removal, liner application,
and insertion and carving of amalgam. Moisture impairs visual
assessment, may contaminate the pulp during caries lesion removal
(especially with a pulpal exposure), and may negatively afect the
physical properties of the amalgam. he gingival margin of Class
V tooth preparations is often apical to the gingival crest. Such a
gingival margin necessitates use of appropriate rubber dam and
retainer, or displacement of the free gingiva with a retraction cord,
to protect it and to provide access. Isolation help s eliminate seepage
of sulcular fluid into the tooth preparation or restorative
materials.
Isolation objectives are met through local anesthesia and use
of (1) a cotton roll and a retraction cord or (2) a rubber dam and
a suitable cervical retainer ( Fig. 10. ). Isolation with a cotton
roll and a retraction cord is satisfactory when properly performed
(Fig. 10. ). his type of isolation is practical and probably the
approach most often used. he retraction cord should be placed
in the sulcus before initial tooth preparation to reduce the possibility
of cutting instruments damaging the free gingiva. he cord should
produce a temporary, adequate, atraumatic lateral displacement
of the free gingiva. he cord may be treated with hemostatic
preparations containing aluminum chloride or ferrous sulfate.
Alternatively the cord may be treated with epinephrine; however,
caution must be used as epinephrine on abraded gingiva is absorbed
rapidly into the circulatory system and may cause an increase in
blood pressure, elevated heart rate, and possible dysrhythmia. he
retraction cord may be braided, twisted, or woven. he diameter
of the cord should be easily accommodated in the gingival sulcus.
• Fig. 10. Inconspicuous facial margin (arrow) of Class III amalgam
restoration on the maxillary canine.
• Fig. 10. Class III amalgam restoration on the mandibular incisor
(arrowhead).
• Fig. 10. Incipient caries lesions of enamel appear as white spots.
The affected surface may be smooth (i.e., noncavitated). White spots are
more visible when dried. (From Cobourne MT, DiBiase AT: Handbook of
orthodontics , Edinburgh, , Mosby.)
B
A
• Fig. 10. Cervical caries lesions. A, Cavitation involving enamel and dentin in several teeth.
B, Relatively high caries index is obvious when numerous cervical lesions are present. (From Perry DA,
Beemsterboer PL: Periodontology for the dental hygienist , ed 3, St. Louis, , Saunders.)
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
steps along the cord helps prevent dislodgment of previously inserted
cord (see Fig. 10. ). In addition, using a second instrument
stepping along behind the irst instrument may help prevent dislodg -
ment of cord. Additionally using the air syringe or cotton pellets
to reduce or absorb the sulcular luid in the cord already placed
is helpful during cord placement. he cord results in adequate
retraction (displacement) in a short time. he cord may be moistened
with the hemostatic solution before, during, or after placement if
slight hemorrhage is anticipated or observed. Alternatively the
cord may be used dry.
he cord usually remains in place during tooth preparation as
well as insertion and initial carving of amalgam. While carving
amalgam at the gingival margin, the presence of the cord may
cause diiculty in detection of the unprepared tooth surface apical
to the margin. his may limit proper carving, result in an over -
contour and marginal excess. In this instance, after carving gross
excess, the cord may be teased from the sulcus before the carving
is completed.
Tooth Preparation for Cla V
Amalgam Retoration
Proper outline form for Class V amalgam tooth preparations results
in extending the cavosurface margins to sound tooth structure
while maintaining a limited axial depth of 0.5 mm inside the DEJ
and 0.75 mm inside cementum (when on the root surface). he
outline form for the Class V amalgam tooth preparation is deter -
mined primarily by the location and size of the caries lesion or
old restorative material. Clinical judgment determines inal prepara -
tion outline, especially when the cavosurface margins approach or
extend into areas of enamel decalciication. he operator must
observe the prepared enamel wall to evaluate the depth of the
decalciied enamel and to determine if cavitation exists peripheral
to the wall. When no cavitation has occurred and when the
decalciication does not extend appreciably into the enamel, exten -
sion of the outline form often should cease. In some cases, if all
decalciication were included in the outline form, the preparation
would extend into the proximal cervical areas (if not circumfer -
entially around the tooth). Such a preparation would be diicult
and perhaps unrestorable. A full-coverage indirect restoration should
be considered for teeth with extensive circumferential cervical
decalciication (but only after caries risk has been reduced).If signiicant blanching of the free gingiva is observed (or if too
much pressure has to be applied to place the cord), an oversized
cord may have been selected. If so, it should be exchanged for a
cord of smaller diameter. An appropriate amount is cut to a length
6 mm longer than the gingival margin. Some operators prefer to
place the cord in a dappen dish, wet it with a drop of hemostatic
solution, and blot it with gauze (5 × 5 cm) to remove excess liquid.
A braided or woven cord is usually easier to use because it does
not unravel during placement. A larger cord may be inserted over
the irst cord if the sulcus is large enough to accommodate two
cords. A thin, blunt-edged instrument blade or the side of an
explorer tine may be used to gently insert the cord progressively
into place. A slight backward direction of the instrument as it
A
B
C
• Fig. 10. Surgical access. A, Class V preparation requiring mucoperiosteal lap relection with a
releasing incision (arrowhead). B, Completed restoration with suture in place. C, Suture removed 1 week
after the procedure.
• Fig. 10. Patients may object to metal restorations that are visible
during conversation.
• Fig. 10. A rubber dam and a No. retainer may be required to
isolate the caries lesion properly.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
changing of the bur orientation so as to accommodate the cervical
mesiodistal and incisogingival (or occlusogingival) convexity of the
tooth. he preparation is extended incisally, gingivally, mesially,
and distally until the cavosurface margins are positioned in sound
tooth structure such that an initial axial depth of 0.5 mm inside
the DEJ (or 0.75 mm if on the root surface) is established. When
extending mesially and distally, it may be necessary to protect the
rubber dam from the bur by placing a lat-bladed instrument over
the dam ( Fig. 10. ). Because the axial wall follows the mesiodistal
and incisogingival (or occlusogingival) contours of the facial surface
of the tooth, it usually is convex in both directions ( Fig. 10. ).
In addition, the axial wall usually is slightly deeper at the incisal
wall, where more enamel (i.e., approximately 1–1.25 mm in depth)
is present than at the gingival wall, where little or no enamel (i.e.,
approximately 0.75–1 mm in depth) may be present. A depth of
0.5 mm inside the DEJ permits placement of necessary retention
grooves without undermining enamel. his subtle diference in
depth serves also to increase the thickness of the remaining dentin
(between the axial wall and the pulp) in the gingival aspect of the
preparation to aid in protecting the pulp.Initial Tooth Preparation
A Class V amalgam restoration is not used often in a mandibular
canine, but it is presented here for illustration. he same general
principles for tooth preparation apply for all other tooth locations.
A tapered issure bur of suitable size (e.g., No. ) is used to enter
the caries lesion (or existing restoration) to a limited initial axial
depth of 0.5 mm inside the DEJ ( Fig. 10. ). his depth is usually
1 to 1.25 mm total axial depth, depending on the incisogingival
(i.e., occlusogingival) location. he enamel of the incisal (occlusal)
external wall of the preparation is considerably thicker than the
cervical. If the preparation is on the root surface, however, the initial
axial depth is approximately 0.75 mm. he end of the bur at the
initial depth may be in sound dentin, in soft dentin, or in old
restorative material. he edge of the bur end may be used to penetrate
the area; this is more eicient than using the lat end of the bur,
reducing the possibility of the bur’s tendency to “crawl” (i.e., move
laterally instead of cut axially) on the external surface. When the
entry is made, the bur orientation is adjusted to ensure that all
external walls are perpendicular to the external tooth surface (i.e.,
parallel to the enamel rods) ( Fig. 10. ). his requires frequent
A B
C D
• Fig. 10. Use of the retraction cord for isolation of a Class V lesion. A, Preoperative view. B, Cord
placement initiated. C, Cord placement using a thin, lat-bladed instrument. D, Cord placement
completed.
A
B
• Fig. 10. Starting the Class V tooth preparation. A, Bur positioned for entry into caries lesion.
B, The entry cut is the beginning of the outline form having a limited axial depth.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
the gingivoaxial line angle (see Fig. 10. ). he handpiece is
positioned so that the No. 14 round bur is directed generally to
bisect the angle formed at the junction of the axial wall and the
incisal (i.e., occlusal) wall. Ideally the direction of the incisal (i.e.,
occlusal) groove is slightly more incisal (i.e., occlusal) than axial,
and the direction of the gingival groove is slightly more gingival
than axial. Alternatively, four retention coves may be prepared,
one in each of the four axial point angles of the preparation ( Fig.
10. ).
Using four coves instead of two full-length grooves conserves
the dentin near the pulp, reducing the possibility of a mechanical
pulp exposure. he depth of the grooves (or coves) should be
approximately 0.25 to 0.5 mm. It is important that the retention
grooves be adequate because they provide the only retention form
to the preparation. Regardless, the grooves should not remove
dentin immediately supporting enamel. In a large Class V amalgam
preparation, extending the retention groove circumferentially around
all the internal line angles of the tooth preparation may enhance
the retention form.
If access is inadequate for use of the No. 14 round bur, an
angle-former chisel may be used to prepare the retention form.
Additionally, a No. bur may be used. Both methods result
in retention grooves that are angular, but positioned in the same
location and approximately to the same depth as when the No.
14 round bur is used. he rounded retention form created with
the No. 14 round bur is generally preferred, however, because
amalgam is able to be condensed into rounded areas more readily
than into sharp areas, resulting in better adaptation of amalgam
into the retention grooves. If necessary, suitable hand instruments
(e.g., chisels, margin trimmers) are used to plane the enamel margins,
verifying soundness and 90-degree cavosurface angles. Finally the
preparation is cleaned of debris and inspected for completeness.
Large Preparations That Include Line Angles
A caries lesion on the facial (or lingual) surface may extend beyond
the line angles of the tooth. Maxillary molars, particularly the
second molars, are most commonly afected by these extensive
defects ( Fig. 10.147A ). In this example, if the remainder of the Alternatively, an appropriate carbide bur (usually No. 2 or No.
4) may be used for the initial tooth preparation. Round burs are
indicated in areas inaccessible to a issure bur, which must be
oriented perpendicular to the tooth surface. If needed, smaller
round burs may also be used to deine the internal angles in these
preparations, enhancing proper placement of the retention grooves.
Final Tooth Preparation
Final tooth preparation involves the removal of any remaining soft
dentin, pulp protection, retention form, the inishing of external
walls, and cleaning/inspecting. Speciically any remaining soft axial
wall dentin is removed (as indicated) with a No. 2 or No. 4 round
bur. Any old restorative material remaining (including base and
liner) may be left if (1) no evidence of recurrent caries exists, (2)
the periphery of the base and liner is intact, and (3) the tooth is
asymptomatic. With proper outline form, the axial line angles are
already in sound dentin. If needed, an appropriate liner or base
is applied.
Because the mesial, distal, gingival, and incisal walls of the
tooth preparation are perpendicular to the external tooth surface,
they usually diverge. Consequently this form provides no inherent
retention, and retention form must be provided to retain the
amalgam. A No. 14 round bur is used to prepare two retention
grooves, one along the incisoaxial line angle and the other along
A B
D C
• Fig. 10. When extending incisally (A), gingivally (B), mesially (C), and distally (D), the bur is posi -
tioned to prepare these walls perpendicular to the external tooth surface.
• Fig. 10. The lat-bladed instrument protects the rubber dam from
the bur.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
Preparing the facial portion irst provides better access and visibility
to the distal portion. Occasionally hand instruments may be useful
for completing the distal half of the preparation when space for
the handpiece is limited (see Fig. 10.147D–F ).
Grooves placed along the entire length of the occlusoaxial and
gingivoaxial line angles help ensure retention of the restoration.
he No. 14 round bur is used as previously described to prepare
the retention grooves. A gingival margin trimmer or a 7-
-6 angle-former chisel may be used in the distal half of the prepara -
tion to provide retention form when access for the handpiece is
limited (see Fig. 10.147G and H ).distal surface is sound and the distal caries lesion is accessible
facially, the facial restoration should extend around the line angle.
his prevents the need for a Class II proximal restoration to restore
the distal surface. However, the operator should strive not to
overextend the occlusal wall of the distal surface preserving as
much sound tooth structure as possible to support the dista l marginal
ridge. As much of the preparation as possible should be completed
with a issure bur. A round bur approximately the same diameter
as the issure bur is then used to initiate the distal portion of the
preparation (see Fig. 10.147B and C ). Smaller round burs should
be used to accentuate the internal line angles of the distal portion.
A
B
G
F
D
E
C
• Fig. 10. Retention form. A, A No. 14 round bur positioned to prepare the gingival retention groove.
B, Gingival retention groove (arrow) prepared along the gingivoaxial line angle generally to bisect the angle
formed by the gingival and axial walls. Ideally the direction of preparation is slightly more gingival than
pulpal. An incisal retention groove is prepared along the incisoaxial line angle and directed similarly. C and
D, A groove is placed with a No. 14 round bur along the gingivoaxial and incisoaxial line angles 0.2 mm
inside the DEJ and ~0.25 – 0.5 mm deep. Note the slight pulpal inclination of the shank of the No. 14
round bur. E, Facial view. F, Incisogingival section. Grooves depthwise are directed mostly incisally (gin -
givally) and slightly pulpally. G, Mesiodistal section.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
structure between the two restorations ( Fig. 10. ). In this
illustration the previously placed amalgam serves as the distal wall
of the preparation. When proper treatment requires Class II and
V amalgam restorations on the same tooth, the Class II pre paration
and restoration is completed before initiating the Class V restoration.
If the Class V restoration was accomplished irst, it might be
damaged by the matrix band and wedge needed for the Class II
restoration.Because of the proximity of the coronoid process, access to the
facial surfaces of maxillary molars, particularly the second molars,
is often limited. Having the patient partially close and shift the
mandible toward the tooth being restored improves access and
visibility ( Fig. 10. ).
If the Class V outline form approaches an existing proximal
restoration, it is better to extend slightly into t he bulk of the
proximal restoration rather than to leave a thin section of the tooth
DRecommended
four-cove retention AB0.2 mm
0.25 mm
0.75 mm
0.25 - 0.3 mm1 mm
C
• Fig. 10. A–C, Extended Class V tooth preparation ( A) with the axial wall contoured parallel to the
DEJ mesiodistally ( B) and incisogingivally ( C). The axial wall pulpal depth is 1 mm in the crown and
0.75 mm in the root. In addition, note location and direction depth (~0.25 – 0.5 mm) of the retention
grooves and the dimension of the gingival wall (0.25 mm) from the root surface to the retention groove.
D, Large Class V preparation with retention coves prepared in the four axial point angles.
A B C
D E F
G H I
• Fig. 10. Tooth preparation on a maxillary molar. A, Caries lesion extending around distofacial
corner of the tooth. B and C, Distal extension is accomplished with round bur. D–F, A gingival margin
trimmer may be useful in completing the distal half of the preparation when handpiece access is limited.
G, A gingival margin trimmer may be used to provide the retention grooves. H, An angle-former chisel
may be used to prepare the retention grooves in the distal portion of the preparation. I, Completed tooth
preparation.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
must be trimmed to conform to the circumferential contour (level)
of the base of the gingival sulcus to prevent soft tissue damage.
Rather than using two short pieces, the operator may use a longer
length that is passed through one proximal contact, extended around
the lingual surface, and passed through the other contact, forming
a U-shaped matrix. T rimming the gingival edge to conform to the
interproximal soft tissue anatomy usually is mor e diicult with
one matrix strip than when two strips are used.
A conventional Tolemire band and retainer may be used with
a window cut into the band, with a high-speed handpiece bur, to
allow access to the preparation for condensation ( Fig. 10. ).
Alternatively, the tooth may be prepared and restored in sections
without using a matrix. Each successive section of the preparation
should be extended slightly into the previously condensed portion
to ensure caries lesion removal.
Insertion and Carving of the Amalgam
he amalgam carrier is used to insert the mixed amalgam into the
preparation in small increments ( Fig. 10.152A ). Amalgam is
condensed into the retention areas irst by using an appropriate
condenser (see Fig. 10.152B ). Amalgam is then condensed against
the mesial and distal walls of the preparation (see Fig. 10.152C ).
Finally a suicient bulk of amalgam is placed in the central portion
to allow for carving the correct contour (see Fig. 10.152D ). As
the surface of the restoration becomes more convex, condensation
becomes increasingly diicult. It is important to guard against the
“land sliding” of amalgam during overpacking. A large condenser
or lat-bladed instrument held against amalgam may help re sist
pressure applied elsewhere on the restoration ( Fig. 10. ).
Carving may begin immediately after the insertion o f amalgam
(Fig. 10. ). All carving should be done using the side of the
explorer tine or a Hollenback No. 3 carver held parallel to the
margins. he side of the carving instrument always should rest on
the unprepared tooth surface adjacent to the prepared cavosurface
margin; this prevents overcarving or submargination of the restora -
tion. he carving procedure is begun by removing excess amalgam
to expose the incisal (or occlusal) margin. Removal of excess material he preparation should then be cleaned, carefully inspected as
indicated in General Concepts Guiding Preparation for Amalgam
Restorations, and any inal modiications completed.
Retorative Technique for Cla V
Amalgam Preparation
Desensitizer Placement
A dentin desensitizer is placed over the prepared tooth structure
per manufacturer instructions. Excess moisture is removed without
desiccating the dentin.
Matrix Placement
Most Class V amalgam restorations are accomplished without the
use of any type of matrix. he most diicult condensation occurs
in a tooth preparation with an axial wall that is convex mesiodistally.
T wo alternative methods for insertion may be used. he preferred
method is the application of a matrix that conines amalgam in
the mesial and distal portions of the preparation ( Fig. 10. ).
Short lengths of stainless steel matrix material, one each for the
mesial and distal surfaces, are passed through the proximal contacts,
carefully guided into the gingival sulcus, and wedged. he strips
must be wide enough to extend occlusally through the respective
proximal contacts and long enough to extend slightly past the
facial line angles. he strip usually requires rigid material support
for stability. he strips ofer resistance against condensing the mesial
and distal portions, which provides support for condensing the
center of the restoration. he gingival edge of the steel strip often
• Fig. 10. The mandible shifted laterally for improved access and
visibility.
• Fig. 10. When a Class V outline form closely approaches an exist -
ing restoration, the preparation should be extended to remove the remain -
ing thin enamel wall to achieve adjoining restorations.
Matrix
Wedges
• Fig. 10. Application of the matrix to conine amalgam in the mesial
and distal extensions of the preparation.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
gingiv al inlammation and increased risk of secondary caries from
bioilm accumulation.
In some instances it is appropriate to change facial contours
because of altered soft tissue levels (e.g., cervical lesions in peri -
odontally treated patients). Facial contours may be increased (or
relocated) only enough to prevent food impaction into the gingival
sulcus and to provide access for the patient to clean the area.
Overcontouring must be avoided as it results in reduced stimulation
and cleansing of the gingiva during mastication.
When a rubber dam and the No. cervical retainer have
been used for isolation, the retainer is removed using care to open
the jaws of the retainer wide enough to prevent damage to the
surface of the restoration. he rubber dam is removed and the
area is examined carefully to ensure that no amalgam particles
remain in the sulcus.
When a retraction cord is used for isolation, it may interfere
with carving any excess amalgam at the gingival margin. If so,
removal of the gross excess of amalgam is followed by careful removal
of the cord, followed by completion of the carving along the margin.
Finishing and Polishing of the Amalgam
If carving procedures were performed correctly, no inishing of
the restoration should be required. A slightly moistened cotton continues until the mesial and distal margins are exposed. Finally,
material excess at the gingival margin is carved away. Carving the
marginal areas should result in developing the desired convex
contours in the completed restoration. Improper use of the carving
instruments results in a poorly contoured restoration. Note in Fig.
10.20 how carving instruments are positioned to provide the desired
contours. No amalgam excess should remain at the margins because
amalgam may break away, creating a defect at the margin, or cause
A B
• Fig. 10. Customized matrix band used to restore an area of proximal root caries. A, Conventional
Toflemire matrix with window cut into the band using a high-speed bur to allow access for condensation.
B, Matrix in place around the tooth, allowing lingual access to preparation.
B
DA
C
• Fig. 10. Inserting amalgam. A, Place amalgam into the preparation in small increments. B, Con -
dense irst into the retention grooves with a small condenser. C, Condense against the mesial and distal
walls. D, Overill and provide suficient bulk to allow for carving.
• Fig. 10. Use a large condenser or a lat-bladed instrument to offer
resistance to condensation pressure applied elsewhere on the
restoration.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
Clinical Technique for Cla VI
Amalgam Retoration
he Class VI tooth preparation is used to restore the incisal edge
of anterior teeth or the cusp tip regions of posterior teeth (see Fig.
10.26C ). Such tooth preparations are frequently indicated where
attrition (loss of tooth substance from the occluding of food,
abrasives, and opposing teeth) has removed enamel to expose the
underlying dentin on those areas ( Fig. 10. ). When the softer
dentin is exposed, it wears faster than the surrounding enamel,
resulting in “cupped-out” areas of the cusp tips. Intrinsic or extrinsic
erosion also may be contributing to the excessive loss of tooth
structure. Diagnostic steps, to identify the etiology of the tooth
structure loss, are indicated and may involve referral for evaluation
of potential gastroesophageal relux disease. As the dentin support
is lost, enamel begins to fracture away and more dentin is exposed,
which often causes sensitivity. Sensitivity to hot and cold is a
frequent complaint with Class VI lesions, and some patients are
bothered by food impaction in deeper depressions. Enamel edges
may become jagged and sharp to the tongue, lips, or cheek. Lip,
tongue, or cheek biting is occasionally a complaint. Rounding and
smoothing such incisoaxial (or occlusoaxial) edges is an excellent
service to the patient. Early recognition and restoration of these
lesions is recommended to limit the loss of dentin and the subse -
quent loss of enamel supported by this dentin.
he Class VI tooth preparation may be indicated to restore th e
hypoplastic pit occasionally found on cusp tips ( Fig. 10. ). Such
developmental faults are vulnerable to caries lesion formation,
especially in high-risk patients, and should be restored as soon as
they are detected.
Amalgam may be selected for posterior Class VI preparations
because of its wear resistance and longevity. Moisture control for
Class VI restorations is usually achieved with cotton roll isolation.
Class VI amalgam preparations may be accomplished with a small
tapered issure bur (e.g., No. L or ) and involves extension
to place the cavosurface margin on enamel that has sound dentin
support (see Fig. 10.158B ). he preparation walls may need to pellet held in cotton pliers may be used to further smooth the
carved restoration. Additional inishing and polishing of amalgam
restorations may be necessary, however, to correct a marginal
discrepancy or to improve contour. Care is required when using
stones or any rotating cutting instruments on margins positioned
below the CEJ because of the possibility of removing cementum,
notching the tooth structure gingival to the margin, or both ( Fig.
10. ). Fig. 10. illustrates reshaping a rubber abrasive point
to allow optimal access to the gingival portion of a Class V amalgam
restoration. A rubber abrasive cup may be preferred for inishing
convex surfaces, like Class V restorations, if used carefully.
One measure of clinical success of cervical amalgam restorations
is the length of time the restoration serves without failing ( Fig.
10. ). Properly placed Class V amalgams have the potential to
be clinically acceptable for many years. Some cervi cal amalgam
restorations show evidence of failure, however, even after a short
period. Inattention to tooth preparation principles, improper
manipulation of the restorative material, and moisture contamina -
tion contribute to early failure. Extended service life of the restora -
tion depends on the operator’s care in following accepted treatment
techniques and proper care by the patient. Any additional inishing
and polishing of the Class V amalgam should follow the approach
presented in General Concepts Guiding Restoration with Amalgam.
A
CB
D
• Fig. 10. Carving and contouring the restoration. A, Begin the carving procedure by removing any
excess and locating the incisal margin. B and C, An explorer may be used to remove the excess and
locate the mesial and distal margins. D, Remove the excess and locate the gingival margin.
• Fig. 10. Incorrect use of a pointed stone at the gingival margin
results in the removal of cementum, notching of the tooth structure gingival
to the margin, or both.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
A
B
C
• Fig. 10. Reshaping a rubber abrasive point against a mounted carborundum disk.
A
B
C
• Fig. 10. A, Six-year-old cervical amalgam restorations. B, After 16 years, some abrasion and
erosion are evident at the gingival margin of the lateral incisor and canine restorations. C, Twenty-year-old
cervical amalgam restorations.
A
B
• Fig. 10. Class VI preparation. A, Exposed dentin on the mesiofa -
cial cusp. B, Tooth preparation necessary to restore the involved area.
b
a
• Fig. 10. Class VI lesions. Carious cusp tip fault on the irst pre -
molar (a). Noncarious fault on the second premolar (b). diverge occlusally to ensure a 90-degree cavosurface margin. A
depth of 1.5 mm i s suicient to provide bulk of material for
strength. Retention of the restoration is ensured by the creation
of small undercuts along the internal line angles similar to other
areas where secondary retention is indicated. Conservative tooth
preparation is particularly important with Class VI preparations
because it is easy to undermine the enamel on incisal edges and
cusp tips. he preparation should be cleaned, carefully inspected
as indicated in General Concepts Guiding Preparation for Amalgam
Restorations, and any inal modiications completed. Insertion,
carving, inishing, and polishing are similar to procedures described
in General Concepts Guiding Restoration with Amalgam.
Some older patients have excessive occlusal wear of most of
their teeth in the form of large concave areas with much exposed dentin. Teeth with excessive wear may require indirect restorations
or, at least, eforts to limit further loss of tooth structure.
Clinical Technique for Complex
Amalgam Retoration
Indication
Complex posterior restorations are indicated when tooth structure
is missing due to cusp fracture, severe caries lesion development,
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
pins provide additional resistance and retention form to the tooth
when remaining vertical walls are inadequate.
Status and Prognosis of the Tooth
A tooth with a severe caries lesion that may require endodontic
therapy or crown lengthening or that has an uncertain periodontal
prognosis often is treated initially with a control restoration. A
control restoration helps (1) protect the pulp from the oral cavity
(i.e., luids, thermal stresses, pH changes, bacteria), (2) provide
an anatomic contour that is consistent with gingival health, (3)
facilitate control of acidogenic bioilm and resulta nt caries risk,
and (4) provide some resistance against tooth fracture (or propaga -
tion of an existing fracture). (See Chapter 2 for caries-control
rationale and techniques.)
he status and prognosis of the tooth determine the size, number,
and placement of retention features. Larger restorations generally
require more retention. he size, number, and location of retention
features demand greater care in smaller teeth. Carelessness may
increase the risk of pulpal irritation or exposure.
Role of the Tooth in Overall Treatment Plan
he restorative treatment choice for a tooth is inluenced by its
role in the overall treatment plan. Although complex amalgam
restorations are used occasionally as an alternative to indirect restora -
tions, particularly due to cost savings, they often are used as
foundations for full-coverage restorations. Abutment teeth for ixed
prostheses may use a complex restoration as a foundatio n (Fig.
10. ). Extensive caries or previous restorations on abutment or when replacement of existing restorative material is necessary.
Complex amalgam preparations should be considered when large
amounts of tooth structure are missing, when one or more cusps
need to be covered, and when increased resistance and retention
forms are needed ( Fig. 10. ). Complex amalgams may be
used as (1) deinitive (inal) restorations, (2) foundations, (3) control
restorations in teeth that have a questionable pulpal or periodontal
prognosis, or (4) control restorations in teeth with acute or severe
caries lesions. When determining the appropriateness of a complex
amalgam restoration, the factors discussed in the following sections
must be considered.
Resistance and Retention Forms
In a tooth with a severe caries lesion or existing restorative material,
any undermined enamel or weak tooth structure subject to fracture
must be removed and replaced. Usually a weakened tooth is best
restored with a properly designed indirect (usually cast) restoration
that prevents tooth fracture caused by mastication forces (see Online
Chapter 18 ). In selected cases, amalgam preparations that improve
the resistance form of a tooth may be designed ( Fig. 10. ).
When conventional retention features are not adequate because
of insuicient remaining tooth structure, the retention form may
be enhanced by using auxiliary features such as slots and pins. he
type of retention features needed depend on the amount of tooth
structure remaining and the tooth being restored. As more tooth
structure is lost, more auxiliary retention is required. Slots and
• Fig. 10. Mesioocclusodistolingual (MODL) complex amalgam
tooth No. 3.
A B
• Fig. 10. Maxillary second premolar weakened by an extensive caries lesion and by the small
fracture line extending mesiodistally on the center of the excavated dentinal wall. A, Minikin pins placed
in the gingival loor improve resistance form after amalgam has been placed. B, Restorations polished.
• Fig. 10. Mesioocclusodistofacial (MODF) amalgam foundation for
abutment tooth No. 15 in preparation for a 3 unit ixed partial denture.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
Reduced Cost
he complex amalgam restoration may be utilized to reinforce and
stabilize compromised posterior teeth at a much reduced cost to
the patient. It may serve as a deinitive inal restoration or an
intermediate-term restoration with a long-term goal of indirect,
more costly restoration and protection of the tooth.
Diadvantage
Tooth Anatomy
Proper contours and occlusal contacts and anatomy are sometimes
diicult to achieve with large, complex restorations.
Resistance Form
Resistance form is more diicult to develop with a complex amalgam
as compared to the preparation of a tooth for a cusp-covering
onlay (skirting axial line angles of the tooth [see Online Chapter
18]) or a full crown. he complex amalgam restoration does not
protect the tooth from fracture as efectively as a full-coverage
indirect restoration.
Tooth Preparation for Complex
Amalgam Retoration
In this section various types of Complex Amalgam preparation
procedures are discussed before the restoration technique is pre -
sented. Also the word “vertical” is used to describe tooth preparation
walls and other preparation aspects that are approximately parallel
to the long axis of the tooth. he word “horizontal” is used to
describe the walls and other aspects that are approximately per -
pendicular to the long axis of the tooth. Every efort should be
made to protect the pulp as early as possible when accomplishing
the procedures associated with complex amalgam restorations.
Preparation for Cusp Coverage Complex Amalgams
General concepts of initial tooth preparation presented in earlier
sections apply to the complex amalgam preparations described
here. When a caries lesion is extensive with resultant loss of dentin
necessary to support occlusally loaded areas of the tooth, reduction
of one or more of the cusps followed by coverage with amalgam
may be indicated. When the facial or lingual extension exceeds
two thirds the distance from a primary issure toward the cusp tip
(or when the faciolingual extension of the occlusal preparation
exceeds two thirds the distance between the facial and lingual cusp
tips), reduction of the cusp for coverage with amalgam usually is
required for the development of adequate resistance form ( Fig.
10.164A ; see also Fig. 4.13 ). For cusps prone to fracture, coverage
reduces the risk of fracture and extends the life of the restora -
tion. , Complex amalgam restorations that cover one or more
cusps have documented longevity of 72% after 15 years. ,
he operator uses the bur to reduce the cusp, following the
mesiodistal inclines of the cusp; this results in a uniform reduction
(see Fig. 10.164B–E ). If only one of two facial (or lingual) cusps
is to be covered, the cusp reduction should extend slightly beyond
the facial (or lingual) groove area, provide the correct amount of
tooth structure removal, and meet the adjacent, unreduced cusp
to create a 90-degree cavosurface margin. his approach results in
adequate thickness and edge strength of the amalgam (see Fig.
10.164F and G ). Cusp reduction and coverage reduce the amount
of vertical preparation wall height and increase the need for the
use of secondary retention features ( Fig. 10. ). An increased
retention form may be provided by proximal box retention grooves teeth for removable prostheses generally indicate an indirect restora -
tion for the resistance and retention forms and for development
of external surface contours for retention of the p rosthesis. A tooth
may be treated with a complex direct restoration if adequate
resistance and retention forms are provided. For patients with
periodontal and orthodontic problems, the complex r estoration
may be the restoration of choice until the inal phase of treatment,
when indirect restorations may be preferred.
Occlusion and Economics
Complex amalgam restorations are sometimes indicated as interim
restorations for teeth that require elaborate occlusal alterations,
ranging from vertical dimension changes to correcting occlusal
plane discrepancies. When cost of indirect restorations is a major
factor for the patient, the complex direct amalgam restoration may
be an appropriate treatment option, provided that adequate
resistance and retention forms are included ( Fig. 10. ). ,
Age and Health of Patient
For some older patients and/or those who are debilitated, complex
amalgam restoration may be the treatment preferred over the more
expensive and time-consuming indirect restoration.
Contraindication
he complex amalgam restoration may be contraindicated if the
tooth cannot be restored properly with direct restoration because
of anatomic or functional considerations (or both). he complex
amalgam restoration also may be contraindicated if the area to be
restored has esthetic importance for the patient.
Advantage
Conservation of Tooth Structure
he preparation for a complex amalgam restoration is usually more
conservative than the preparation for an indirect restoration.
Appointment Time
he complex restoration may be completed in one appointment.
An indirect restoration generally requires at least two appointments
unless it is done using a chairside computer-assisted desig n/
computer-assisted machining (CAD/CAM) system.
Resistance and Retention Forms
Amalgam restorations with cusp coverage signiicantly increase the
fracture resistance of weakened teeth compared with amalgam
restorations without cusp coverage. Resistance and retention
forms may be signiicantly increased by the use of slots and pins
(discussed in subsequent sections).
• Fig. 10. Mesioocclusodistolingual (MODL) complex amalgam
tooth #19.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
visibility for subsequent steps. If the cusp to be reduced is located
at the correct occlusal height before preparation, depth cuts should
be made on the remaining occlusal surface of each cusp to be
covered, using the side of a carbide issure bur or a suitable diamond
instrument (see Fig. 10.164B ). he depth cuts should be a minimum
of 2 mm for functional cusps and 1.5 mm for nonfunctional cusps.
hese dimensions provide adequate strength for amalgam by prevent -
ing lexure of the restoration during loading. To reduce the cusp,
the dentist orients the bur parallel to the cuspal incline (lingual
incline for facial cusp reductions and facial inclines for lingual cusp
reduction) and makes several depth cuts in the cusp (to a depth of
1.5 or 2 mm as indicated). he depth cuts provide guides for the
correct amount of cusp reduction. Without depth cuts, after the
beginning reduction of the cusp, the operator may no longer know
how much more reduction is necessary. When using the restoration
to correct an occlusal relationship, if the unreduced cusp height is
located at less than the correct occlusal height, the depth cuts may
be less. Likewise, if the unreduced cusp height is located higher
than the correct occlusal height, the depth cuts may be deeper. he
goal is to ensure that the inal restoration has restored cusps with but may require the use of slots and/or pins (as described in
subsequent sections). If indicated, cusp reduction and coverage
increase the resistance form of the tooth. ,
Reduction of the unsupported cusp should be accomplished
during the initial tooth preparation because it improves access and
A
B
C
D
E
F G
• Fig. 10. Covering the cusp with amalgam. A, Comparison of the mesial aspects of normally
extended (left) and extensive (right) mesioocclusodistal tooth preparation. The resistance form of the
mesiolingual cusp with extensive preparation is compromised and cusp coverage with amalgam is indi -
cated. B, Preparing depth cuts. C, Depth cuts prepared. D, Reducing the cusp. E, Cusp reduced. F and
G, Final restoration.
• Fig. 10. A retention groove is associated with the remaining verti -
cal wall of a cusp requiring reduction.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
cusp is accomplished (if necessary) to include weak or carious
tooth structure or existing restorativ e material. he lingual groove
may be extended arbitrarily to increase the retention form (see
Fig. 10.167B and C ). When possible, opposing vertical walls should
be formed to converge occlusally, to enhance the primary retention
form (see Fig. 10.167C and D ). he pulpal and gingival walls
should be relatively lat and perpendicular to the long axis of the
tooth. Secondary retention features may be indicated when the
divergence of proximal walls results in limited primary retention
form (see Fig. 10.167D ). Mesial extension of the preparation into
the mesiolingual cusp should be enough to allow pla cement of
the distooblique and lingual groove within the amalgam restoration
(see Fig. 10.167E ).
Mandibular First Molar
Reducing the distal cusp is an alternative to extending the entire
distofacial wall when the occlusal margin crosses the cuspal eminence
(Fig. 10.168A ; compare with Fig. 10.83 ). A minimal reduction a minimal thickness of 2 mm of amalgam for functional cusps and
1.5 mm of amalgam for nonfunctional cusps (see Fig. 10.164C ),
while developing an appropriate occlusal relationship. Using the
depth cuts as a guide, the reduction is completed to provide for a
uniform reduction of tooth structure (see Fig. 10.164D ). he occlusal
contour of the reduced cusp should be similar to the normal contour
of the unreduced cusp. Any sharp internal corners of the tooth
preparation formed at the junction of prepared surfaces should be
rounded to reduce stress concentration in the amalgam and improve
its resistance to fracture from occlusal forces (see Fig. 10.164E ).
When reducing only one of two facial or lingual cusps, the cusp
reduction should be extended just past the facial or lingual groove,
creating a vertical wall against the adjacent unreduced cusp. Fig.
10.164F and G illustrate a inal restoration.
Mandibular First Premolar
he lingual cusp of the mandibular irst premolar may need to be
reduced for coverage with amalgam if the lingual margin of the
occlusal step extends more than two thirds the distance from the
central issure to the cuspal eminence ( Fig. 10. ). Special attention
is given to such cusp reduction because retention is severely
diminished when the cusp is overreduced resulting in elimination
of the lingual wall of the occlusal portion. Depth cuts of 1.5 mm
aid the operator in establishing the correct amount of cusp reduction
and in conserving a small portion of the lingual wall in the occlusal
step. It is acceptable when restoring diminutive nonfunctional
cusps, such as the lingual cusp of a mandibular irst premolar, to
reduce the cusp only 0.5 to 1 mm and restore the cusp to achieve
an amalgam thickness of 1.5 mm. his procedure conserves more
of the lingual wall of the isthmus for added retention form.
Maxillary First Molar
he procedure for reducing the distolingual cusp of a maxillary
irst molar for coverage is illustrated in Fig. 10. . Extending
the facial or lingual wall of a proximal box to include the entire
• Fig. 10. Mandibular irst premolar with the lingual cusp reduced
for coverage with amalgam.
A
B
C
D
E
• Fig. 10. Reduction of the distolingual cusp of the maxillary molar. A, Cutting a depth gauge groove
with the side of the bur. B, Completed depth gauge groove. C and D, Completed cusp reduction.
E, Distoocclusolingual complex amalgam.
A B
• Fig. 10. Mandibular irst molar. A, Reduction of the distal cusp is indicated when the occlusal
margin crosses the cuspal eminence. B, Distofacial view of the distal cusp shown in A before reduction
for coverage (left); the distal cusp after reduction (right). A reduction of 2 mm is necessary to provide for
minimal 2-mm thickness of amalgam.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
of 2 mm will allow a 2-mm thickness of amalgam over the reduced
cusp (see Fig. 10.168B ). he cusp reduction should result in a
butt joint between the tooth structure and amalgam. When possible,
reducing and covering the distal cusp is more desirable than
extending the distofacial proximal margin because this conserves
tooth structure of the functional cusp, and the remaining portion
of the cusp helps in applying the matrix for the development of
proper distofacial embrasure form. he plane of the reduced cusp
should parallel the facial (or lingual) outline of the unreduced
cusp mesiodistally and the cuspal incline emanating from the central
groove faciolingually.
Tooth Preparation for Slot-Retained
Amalgam Retoration
When loss of vertical coronal height is approximately 2 to 4 mm,
then use of slots, in horizontal areas where no vertical walls remain,
may be indicated to gain secondary retention form for the complex
amalgam restoration ( Figs. 10. , 10. , and 10. ). A slot
is a horizontal retention groove in dentin (see Fig. 10. ). Slots
are placed in the gingival loor of a preparation with a No.
bur (see Fig. 10.169B , inset). In general, slots should be about
1 mm wide and 1 mm deep, should be placed in the line-angle
areas of the tooth, should be 2 to 4 mm in length (depending on
the distance between remaining vertical walls), and be positioned
0.5 to 1 mm inside the DEJ. In general, one slot per missing axial
line angle should be used. Increasing the width and depth of the
slot does not increase the retentive strength of the amalgam restora -
tion. Slot length depends on the extent of the tooth preparation.
A slot may be continuous or segmented, depending on the amount
of missing tooth structure and whether pin retention is being
planned (see subsequent sections). Shorter slots provide as much
resistance to horizontal force as do longer slots. Preparations
with shorter slots fail less frequently than do preparations with
longer slots. Slot design should be such that it is independently
retentive as a singular feature (the internal walls of the slot should
be convergent) (see Fig. 10.169B , inset). In addition, the walls of
the slot should work together with other vertical walls to create
B ACovesDentin slot1.0 mm
1.0 mm0.8 mm
Coves
• Fig. 10. Slots. A and B, With a No. bur, dentinal slots are prepared approximately 1 mm
deep and 0.5 to 1 mm inside the DEJ.
Cove
• Fig. 10. Coves prepared in dentin with No. 14 bur, where
appropriate.
• Fig. 10. Vertical grooves prepared in dentin with a No. 14 round
or No. 169L bur, where appropriate.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
is an important adjunct in the restoration of teeth with extensive
caries lesions or fractures. Amalgam restorations including pins
have signiicantly greater retention compared with restorations
using boxes only or restorations relying solely on bonding systems.
However, caution is indicated when using pins. Preparing pinholes
and placing pins may create craze lines or fractures and internal
stresses in dentin. - Such craze lines and internal stress areas
may have little or no clinical signiicance, but they may be important
when minimal dentin is present. Preparation steps for pin retention
have increased risk of penetrating into the pulp or perforating the
external tooth sur face. he use of pins decreases the tensile and
horizontal strength of associated amalgam restorations. ,
Types of Parapulpal Retention Pins
he most frequently used type of parapulpal pin is t he self-threading
pin. he pin-retained amalgam restoration using self-threading
pins originally was described by Going in . Friction-locked
and cemented pins, although still available, are rarely used ( Fig.
10. ). The diameter of the prepared pinhole is 0. to
0. mm smaller than the diameter of the pin ( ).
he threads engage dentin as the pin is inserted, thus retaining
the pin. he elasticity (resiliency) of dentin permits insertion of
a threaded pin into a hole of smaller diameter. Although the
threads of self-threading pins do not engage dentin for their entire
width, self-threading pins are the most retentive of the three types
of pins ( Fig. 10. ), being three to six times more retentive than
cemented pins. -143an overall convergence of the preparation so as to enhance retention
of the restoration.
In addition to any slot placement, retention grooves and coves
may be utilized in association with remaining vertical walls ( Figs.
10. and 10. ). Coves and retention grooves should be prepared
when possible. Coves are prepared in a horizontal plane, and grooves
are prepared in a vertical plane.
Coves also may be used in preparations using slots (see Fig.
10. ). Proximal retention grooves, as described for wide Class
II preparations, also are placed in the proximal box and in other
locations where suicient vertical tooth preparation permits (see
Figs. 10. and 10. ).
Tooth Preparation for Pin-Retained
Amalgam Retoration
When severe carious destruction or cusp fracture has resulted in
the loss of 4 mm or more of vertical coronal height, consideration
should be given to the use of a parapulpal retention pin to regain
some of the lost vertical height. A pin-retained amalgam (also
referred to as a “pin-amalgam”) is deined as any restoration requiring
the placement of one or more pins in dentin to provide adequate
resistance and retention forms. Pins are used whenever adequate
resistance and retention forms are not able to be established with
slots, grooves, or undercuts only. Pins placed into prepared
pinholes (also referred to as pin channels ) are used to provide
auxiliary resistance and retention forms. he pin-retained amalgam
BC
BAC
• Fig. 10. Groove (A), slots (B), and coves (C).
AB
• Fig. 10. Placement of retention grooves. A, Position of No. 169L bur to prepare the retention
groove. B, Groove prepared with No. 14 bur.
AB C2.0 mm
3.0 mm2.0 mm
2.0 mm3.0 mm
3.0 mm
• Fig. 10. Three types of pins. A, Cemented. B, Friction locked.
C, Self-threading.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
restoration. he shape of the self-threading pin results in the greatest
retention of amalgam.
Orientation, Number, and Diameter
Placing pins in a nonparallel manner increases their ability to
retain the restoration; however, bending pins to improve their
retention in amalgam is not advised as the bends may interfere
with adequate condensation of amalgam around the pin and decrease
amalgam retention. In addition, bending also may weaken the pin
and risk fracture of the adjacent dentin. Pins should be bent only
to provide for an adequate amount of amalgam (approximately
1 mm) between the pin and the external surface of the inished
restoration (on its lateral surface). Only the manufacturer’s speciic
bending tool should be used to bend a pin, not other hand instru -
ments (see subsequent section, Pin Insertion).
In general, increasing the number of pins increases their retention
in dentin and amalgam. However, the potential beneit of increasing
the number of pins must be compared with the potential problems.
As the number of pins increases, (1) the crazing of dentin and the
potential for fracture increase, (2) the amount of available dentin
between the pins decreases, and (3) the strength of the amalgam
restoration decreases. , Also, as the diameter of the pin increases,
retention in dentin and amalgam generally increases. As the number,
depth, and diameter of pins increase, the danger of perforating
into the pulp or the external tooth surface increases. Numerous
long pins also may severely compromise the condensation of
amalgam and its adaptation to the pins. A pin technique (i.e., a
balance between pin orientation, size, and number) that permits
optimal retention with minimal danger to the remaining tooth
structure should be used.
Extenion Into Dentin and Amalgam
Self-threading pin extension into dentin and amalgam should be
approximately 1.5 to 2 mm to preserve the strength of dentin and
amalgam. Extension greater than this is unnecessary for pin
retention and is contraindicated.
Pin Placement Factors and Techniques
Pin Size
Four sizes of TMS pins are available ( Fig. 10. ), each with a
corresponding color-coded drill (see ). Familiarity with
drill sizes and their corresponding colors is necessary to en sure
that a proper-sized pinhole is prepared for the des ired pin. It is Vertical and horizontal stresses, potentially resulting in craze
lines (cracks), are generated in dentin when a self-threading pin
is inserted. Craze lines in dentin are related to the size of the pin.
he insertion of 0. -mm self-threading pins produces more
dentinal craze lines than does the insertion of 0. -mm selfthreading pins. Some evidence suggests, however, that selfthreading pins may not cause dentinal crazing. Pulpal stress is
maximal when the self-threading pin is inserted perpendicular to
the pulp. he depth of the pinhole varies from 1.3 to 2 mm,
depending on the diameter of the pin used. Recommended
pinhole depth is generally accepted to be 2 mm.
Several styles of self-threading pins are available . he hread
Mate System (TMS) (Coltène/Whaledent Inc., Cuyahoga, Ohio)
is the most widely used self-threading pin system because of its
(1) versatility, (2) wide range of pin sizes, (3) color-coding system,
and (4) greater retentiveness. , TMS pins are available in goldplated stainless steel or in titanium. Titanium alloy pins (Max
Restorative Pins, Coltène/Whaledent Inc.) are also available.
Factors A fecting Retention of the Pin in Dentin
and Amalgam
Type
With regard to the retentiveness of the pin in dentin, the selfthreading pin is the most retentive, the friction-locked pin is
intermediate, and the cemented pin is the least retentive.
Surface Characteritic
he number and depth of the elevations (serrations or threads)
on the pin inluence the retention of the pin in the amalgam
The Thread Mate System (TMS) Pins
NameIllustration (Not to
Scale) Color CodePin Diameter
(inches/mm) *Drill Diameter
(inches/mm) *Total Pin Length
(mm)Pin Length Extending
From Dentin (mm)
Regular (standard) Gold 0. /0.78 0. /0.68 7.1 5.1
Regular (self-shearing) Gold 0. /0.78 0. /0.68 8.2 3.2
Regular (two-in-one) Gold 0. /0.78 0. /0.68 9.5 2.8
Minim (standard) Silver 0. /0.61 0. /0.53 6.7 4.7
Minim (two-in-one) Silver 0. /0.61 0. /0.53 9.5 2.8
Minikin (self-shearing) Red 0. /0.48 0. /0.43 7.1 1.5
Minuta (self-shearing) Pink 0. /0.38 0. /0.34 6.2 1
*1 mm = 0. inch.
Restorative
material
Dentin
• Fig. 10. The complete width of the threads of self-threading pins
does not engage dentin.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
Pinhole Location
Factors that aid in determining the pinhole locations include (1)
knowledge of normal pulp anatomy and external tooth contours,
(2) a current radiograph of the tooth, (3) a periodontal probe,
and (4) the patient’s age. Although the radiograph is only a twodimensional image of the tooth, it may give an indication of the
position of the pulp chamber and the contour of the mesial and
distal surfaces of the tooth. Consideration also must be given to
the placement of pins in areas where the greatest bulk of amalgam
will occur so as to compensate (through the reinforcing tendency
of the amalgam restoration) for the w eakening efect of the pins
on the tooth structure. Areas of occlusal contacts on the restoration
must be anticipated because a pin oriented vertically and positioned
directly below an occlusal contact point weakens amalgam signii -
cantly. Occlusal clearance should be suicient to provide 2 mm
of amalgam over the pin. ,
Several attempts have been made to identify the ideal location
of the pinhole. , , , he following principles of pin placement
are recommended. In the cervical third of molars and premolars
(where most pins are located), pinholes should be located near the
line angles of the tooth except as described later. , he pinhole
should be positioned no closer than 0.5 to 1 mm to the DEJ or
no closer than 1 to 1.5 mm to the external surface of the tooth,
whichever distance is greater ( Fig. 10. ). Before the inal decision
is made about the location of the pinhole, the operator should
probe the gingival crevice carefully to determine if any abnormal
contours exist that would predispose the tooth to an external
perforation. he pinhole should be parallel to the adjacent external
surface of the tooth.
he position of a pinhole must not result in the pin being so
close to a vertical wall of tooth structure that condensation of
amalgam against the pin or wall is jeopardized ( Fig. 10.178A ). It
may be necessary to irst prepare a recess in the vertical wall with
the No. bur to permit proper pinhole preparation and to diicult to specify a particular size of pin that is always appropriate
for a particular tooth. T wo determining factors for selecting the
appropriate-sized pin are 1) the amount of dentin available to
safely receive the pin and 2) the amount of retention desired. In
the TMS system, the pins of choice for severely involved posterior
teeth are the Minikin (0.48 mm) and, occasionally, the Minim
(0.61 mm). he Minikin pins usually are selected to reduce the
risk of dentin crazing, pulpal penetration, and root-surface perfora -
tion. he Minim pins usually are used as a backup in case the
pinhole for the Minikin is overprepared or the pin threads strip
dentin during placement resulting in a lack of Minikin pin retention
in the dentin.
Larger diameter pins have the greatest retention. For example,
the Minuta (0.38 mm) pin is approximately half as retentive as
the Minikin and one third as retentive as the Minim pin. ,
he Minuta is usually too small to provide adequate retention in
posterior teeth. he Regular (0.78 mm) or largest diameter pin is
rarely used because a signiicant amount of crazing in the tooth
(dentin and enamel) may be created during its insertion. , Of
the four types of pins, the Regular pin is associated with the highest
incidence of dentinal crack communication with the pulp
chamber.
Number of Pin
Factors to be considered when deciding how many pins are required
include (1) the amount of missing tooth structure, (2) the amount
of dentin available to safely receive the pins, (3) the amount of
retention required, and (4) the size of the pins. As a general rule,
one pin per missing axial line angle should be used. he fewest
pins possible should be used to achieve the desired retention for
a given restoration. Although the retention of the restoration
increases as the number of pins increases, an excessive number of
pins may fracture the tooth and signiicantly weaken the amalgam
restoration.
A
B
C
DColor code
for drill
Gold
Silver
PinkRed
• Fig. 10. Four sizes of the Thread Mate System (TMS) pins. A, Regular (0.78 mm). B, Minim
(0.61 mm). C, Minikin (0.48 mm). D, Minuta (0.38 mm).
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
the prominent mesial concavity of the maxillary irst premolar;
(2) at the midlingual and midfacial bifurcations of the mandibular
irst and second molars; and (3) at the midfacial, midmesial, and
middistal furcations of the maxillary irst and second molars. Pulpal
penetration may result from pin placement at the me siofacial corner
of the maxillary first molar and the mandibular first molar.
Mandibular posterior teeth (with their lingual crown tilt), teeth
that are rotated in the arch, and teeth that are abnormally tilted
in the arch warrant careful attention before and during pinhole
placement. When possible, the location of pinholes on the distal
surface of mandibular molars and lingual surface of maxillary molars
should be avoided. Obtaining the proper direction for preparing
a pinhole in these locations is diicult because of the abrupt laring
of the roots just apical to the CEJ ( Fig. 10. ). If the pinhole is
placed parallel to the external surface of the tooth crown in these provide a minimum 0.5-mm clearance around the circumference
of the pin for adequate condensation of amalgam (see Fig. 10.178B
and C ). If necessary, after a pin is inappropriately placed, the
operator should provide clearance around the pin to provide
suicient space for the smallest condenser nib to ensure that
amalgam is condensed adequately around the pin. A No. 169L
bur may be used, taking care not to damage or weaken the pin.
Pinholes should be prepared on a lat surface that is perpendicular
to the proposed direction of the pinhole. his will help prevent
the drill tip from slipping or “crawling” and will allow a depthlimiting drill (discussed later) to prepare the pinhole as deeply as
intended ( Fig. 10. ).
Whenever three or more pinholes are placed, they should be
located at diferent vertical levels on the tooth, if possible; this
reduces stresses resulting from pin placement in the same horizontal
plane of the tooth. Spacing between pins, or the interpin distance,
must be considered when two or more pinholes are prepared. he
optimal interpin distance depends on the size of pin to be used.
he minimal interpin distance is 3 mm for the Minikin pin and
5 mm for the Minim pin. Maximal interpin distance results
in lower levels of stress in dentin.
Several posterior teeth have anatomic features that may preclude
safe pinhole placement. Fluted and furcal areas should be avoided.
External perforation may result from pinhole placement (1) over
B
1.5 mmA
1 mm
• Fig. 10. Pinhole position. A, Position relative to the DEJ. B, Posi -
tion relative to external tooth surface.
ABC
• Fig. 10. A, Pin placed too close to the vertical wall such that adequate condensation of amalgam
is jeopardized. B and C, Recessed area prepared in the vertical wall of the mandibular molar with a
No. bur to provide adequate space for amalgam condensation around the pin.
2.0 mm
/H110212.0 mm
• Fig. 10. Use of a depth-limiting drill to prepare a pinhole in the
surface that is not perpendicular to the direction of the pinhole results in
a pinhole of inadequate depth.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
Pinhole Preparation
he KODEX drill (a twist drill provided in the TMS system)
should be used for preparing pinholes ( Fig. 10. ). he aluminum
shank of this drill, which acts as a heat absorber, is color coded
to allow ready matching with the appropriate pin size ( ;
see also ). he drill shanks for the Minuta and Minikin
pins are tapered to provide a built-in “wobble” when placed in a
latch-type contra-angle handpiece. his wobble allows the drill to
be “free loating” and to align itself as the pinhole is prepared.
his feature minimizes the potential for dentinal crazing or the
breakage of small drills.
Because the optimal depth of the pinhole into the dentin is
2 mm (only 1.5 mm for the Minikin pin), a depth-limiting drill
should be used to prepare the hole (see Fig. 10. ). his type of
drill is able to prepare the pinhole to the correct depth only when
used on a lat surface that is perpendicular to the drill (see Fig.
10.178C ; contrast with Fig. 10. ). When the location for starting
a pinhole is not perpendicular to the desired pinhole direction,
the location area should be lattened or the standard twist drill
should be used (see Fig. 10. ). he standard twist drill has
blades that are 4 to 5 mm in length, which would allow preparation
of a pinhole with an efective depth. Creation of a lat area and
use of the depth-limiting drill provide for a more predictab le
outcome and are recommended.
he technique of creating a properly aligned pinhole is as follows:
(1) A pilot hole (dimple) is placed in the horizontal dentin surface
to receive the pin; (2) the correct size twist drill (based on the pin
size) is placed in a latch-type contra-angle handpiece; (3) the twist
drill is placed in the gingival crevice beside the location for the
pinhole and positioned such that it lies lat against the external
surface of the tooth; (4) without changing the angulation obtained
from the gingival crevice position, the handpiece is moved occlusally
and the drill placed in the previously prepared pilot hole ( Fig.
10.185A ); (5) the drill is then viewed from a 90-degree angle to
the previous viewing position to ascertain that the drill also is
angled correctly in this plane (see Fig. 10.185B ); (6) with the drill
tip in its proper position and with the handpiece rotating at very
low speed ( – rpm), pressure is applied to the drill until
the depth-limiting portion of the drill is reached (see Fig. 10.185C
and D ); (7) the pinhole is prepared in one or two movements
without allowing the drill to stop rotating. While still rotating, the
drill is immediately removed from the pinhole.areas, penetration into the pulp is likely. For mandibular second
molars that are severely tilted mesially, care must be exercised to
orient the drill properly to prevent external perforation on the
mesial surface and pulpal penetration on the distal surface ( Fig.
10. ). Because of limited interarch space, it is someti mes diicult
to orient the twist drill (see subsequent section, Pinhole Preparation)
correctly when placing pinholes at the distofacial or distolingual
line angles of the mandibular second and third molars ( Fig. 10. ).
When the pinhole locations have been determined, a No. 14
round bur is irst used to prepare a pilot hole (dimple) approximately
one half the diameter of the bur at each location ( Fig. 10. ).
he purpose of this pilot hole is to permit more accurate placement
of the twist drill and to prevent the twist drill from moving laterally
(i.e., “crawling”) when it has begun to rotate.
A
B
• Fig. 10. Distal laring of the mandibular molar (A) and palatal root
laring of the maxillary molar (B). Root angulation should be considered
before pinhole placement.
AB
• Fig. 10. Care must be exercised when preparing pinholes in mesially tilted molars to prevent
external perforation on mesial surface (A) and pulpal penetration on the distal surface (B).
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
• Fig. 10. When placing pinholes in molars and interarch space is limited, care must be exercised
to prevent external perforation on distal surface.
• Fig. 10. Pilot hole (dimple) prepared with a No. 14 bur. The Thread Mate System (TMS) Link Series and Link Plus Pins
NameIllustration (Not to
Scale) Color CodePin Diameter
(Inches/mm) *Drill Diameter
(Inches/mm) *Pin Length Extending
from Sleeve (mm)Pin Length Extending
From Dentin (mm)
Link Series
Regular Gold 0. /0.78 0. /0.68 5.5 3.2 (single shear)
Regular Gold 0. /0.78 0. /0.68 7.8 2.6 (double shear)
Minim Silver 0. /0.61 0. /0.53 5.4 3.2 (single shear)
Minim Silver 0. /0.61 0. /0.53 7.6 2.6 (double shear)
Minikin Red 0. /0.48 0. /0.43 6.9 1.5 (single shear)
Minuta Pink 0. /0.38 0. /0.34 6.3 1 (single shear)
Link Plus
Minim Silver 0. /0.61 0. /0.53 10.8 2.7 (double shear)
*1 mm = 0. inch.
Incorrect angulation of the drill may result in pulpal exposure
or external perforation. If the proximity of an adjacent tooth
interferes with placement of the drill into the gingival crevice, a
lat, thin-bladed hand instrument is placed into the crevice and
against the external surface of the tooth to indicate the proper
angulation for the drill. Using more than one or two movements,
tilting the handpiece during the drilling procedure, or allowing
the drill to rotate more than briely at the bottom of the pinhole
will result in a pinhole that is too large. he twist drill should
never stop rotating (from insertion to removal from the pinhole)
so as to limit the potential for binding and/or breakage while
creating the pinhole.
Dull twist drills used to prepare pinholes may cause increased
frictional heat and cracks in the dentin. Standlee et al. showed
that a twist drill becomes too dull for use after cutting 20 pinholes
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
A
B
• Fig. 10. A, Two types of KODEX twist drills: standard (a) and depth limiting (b). B, Drills enlarged:
standard (a) and depth limiting (b).
A B CD
• Fig. 10. Determining the angulation for the twist drill. A, Drill placed in the gingival crevice, posi -
tioned lat against the tooth, and moved occlusally into position without changing the angulation obtained.
B, A repeated while viewing the drill from position 90 degrees left or right of that viewed in A. C and D,
With twist drill at correct angulation, the pinhole is prepared in one or two thrusts until the depth-limiting
portion of drill is reached and then removed while still rotating.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
• Fig. 10. Minikin self-limiting drill with worn shank shoulder (left)
compared with a new drill with an unworn shoulder (right).
A
B
C
D
E
• Fig. 10. Five designs of the Thread Mate System (TMS) pins. A, Standard. B, Self-shearing.
C, Two-in-one. D, Link Series. E, Link Plus.
• Fig. 10. Cross-sectional view of Link Series pin.
Pin No. 1 Pin No. 22.7 mm 2 mm
Plastic sleeve
• Fig. 10. Link Plus pin. or less, and the signal for discarding the drill is the need for
increased pressure on the handpiece. Using a drill when its
self-limiting shank shoulder has become rounded is contraindicated
(Fig. 10. ). A worn and rounded shoulder may not properly
limit pinhole depth and may permit pins to be placed too deeply.
Pin Deign
Several designs are available for each of the four sizes of TMS
self-threading pins: standard, self-shearing, two-in-one, Link Series,
and Link Plus ( Fig. 10. ). he Link Series pin is free loating
in a plastic sleeve, which allows self-alignment as it is threaded
into the pinhole ( Fig. 10. ). When the pin reaches the bottom
of the hole, the pin shears of at a machined narrow area, leaving
a length of pin extending from dentin. he plastic sleeve is then
discarded. he Minuta, Minikin, Minim, and Regular pins are
available in the Link Series. Link Series pins are recommended
because of their versatility, self-aligning ability, and
retentiveness.
Link Plus self-threading pins are also self-shearing and are
available as single and two-in-one pins contained in color-coded plastic sleeves ( Fig. 10. ). his design has a sharper thread, a
shoulder stop at 2 mm, and a tapered tip to it the bottom of the
pinhole more readily as prepared by the twist drill. It also provides
a 2.7-mm length of pin to extend out of dentin, which usually
needs to be shortened with the use of a handpiece bur. heoretically,
and as suggested by Standlee et al., these innovations should reduce
the stress created in the surrounding dentin as the pin is inserted
and reduce the apical stress at the bottom of the pinhole. Kelsey
et al. reported that the two-in-one Link Plus irst and second pins
seat completely into the pinhole before shearing.
he self-shearing pin has a total length that varies according
to the diameter of the pin (see ). It also consists of a
lattened head to engage the hand wrench or the appropriate
handpiece chuck for threading into the pinhole. When the pin
approaches the bottom of the pinhole and begins to bind, the
head of the pin shears of leaving a length of pin extending from
dentin.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
rotated one quarter to one half turn counterclockwise to reduce
the dentinal stress created by the end of the pin that is pressing
on dentin at the bottom of the pinhole. he hand wrench should
be removed from the pin carefully. If the hand wrench is used
without rubber dam isolation, a gauze throat shield must be in
place, and a strand of dental loss, approximately 30 to 38 cm in
length, should be tied securely to the end of the wrench ( Fig.
10. ) to prevent accidental swallowing or aspiration by the
patient.
he lengths of the pins are evaluated after placement (see Fig.
10.191C ). Any length of pin greater than 2 mm should be removed.
A sharp No. 14, No. 12, or No. 169L or bur, at high speed
and oriented perpendicular to the pin, may be used to remove the
excess length ( Fig. 10.194A ). If oriented otherwise, the rotation he two-in-one pin is actually two pins in one, with each one
being shorter than the standard pin. The two-in-one pin is
approximately 9.5 mm in length and has a lattened head to aid
in its insertion. When the pin reaches the bottom of the pinhole,
it shears approximately in half, leaving a length of pin extending
from dentin with the other half remaining in the hand wrench or
the handpiece chuck. his second pin may be positioned in another
pinhole and threaded to place in the same manner as the standard
pin. he designs available with each size of pin are shown in Tables
10.1 and 10.2.
Selection of a particular pin design is inluenced by the size of
the pin being used, the amount of interarch space available, and
operator preference. With minimal interarch space, the two-in-one
design may be undesirable because of its length. It has been reported
that 93% of Link Series and Link Plus two-in-one pins extended
to the optimal depth of 2 mm. - Even so, both the two-in-one
pin and the self-shearing pin may occasionally fail to reach the
bottom of the pinhole.
Pin Inertion
he TMS utilizes hand wrenches to place the self-threading pins
(Figs. 10.190A–C and 10.191A ). Link Series and Link Plus pins
are contained in color-coded plastic sleeves that it a latch-type
contra-angle handpiece or a specially designed plastic hand wrench
(see Fig. 10.190D ). In addition, handpiece chucks are available
(Fig. 10. ). he results of studies are conlicting as to which
method of pin insertion produces the best results. he latch-type
handpiece is recommended for the insertion of the Link Series
and the Link Plus pins. he hand wrench is recommended for the
insertion of standard pins.
When using the latch-type handpiece, a Link Series or a Link
Plus pin is inserted into the handpiece and positioned over the
pinhole. he handpiece is activated at low speed until the plastic
sleeve shears from the pin. he pin sleeve is then discarded. For
low-speed handpieces with a low gear, the low gear should be used.
Using the low gear increases the torque and increases the tactile
sense of the operator. It also reduces the risk of stripping the
threads in dentin during pin insertion.
A standard pin is placed in the appropriate hand wrench (see
Fig. 10.191A ) and slowly threaded clockwise into the pinhole until
a deinite resistance (indicating the pin has reache d the bottom of
the pin hole) is felt (see Fig. 10.191B ). he pin should then be
A
B
C
D
• Fig. 10. Hand wrenches for the Thread Mate System (TMS) pins.
A, Regular and Minikin. B, Minim. C, Minuta. D, Link Series and Link Plus.
BAC
• Fig. 10. A, Use of a hand wrench to place a pin. B, Threading the pin to the bottom of the pinhole
and reversing the wrench one quarter to one half turn. C, Evaluating the length of the pin extending from
dentin.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
contour of the inal restoration such that there will be adequate
bulk of amalgam between the pin and the external surface of the
inal restoration (see Fig. 10.194B and C ). When pins require
bending, the TMS bending tool ( Fig. 10.195A ) must be used. he
bending tool should be placed on the pin where the pin is to be
bent, and with irm controlled pressure, the bending tool should
be rotated until the desired amount of bend is achieved (see Fig.
10.195B–D ). Use of the bending tool allows placement of the
fulcrum at some point along the length of the exposed pin. Other
instruments should not be used to bend a pin because the location
of the fulcrum would be at the oriice of the pinhole (i.e., the
surface of the dentin). Force placed at this area may cause crazing
or fracture of dentin, and the abrupt or sharp bend that usually
results increases the chances of breaking the pin ( Fig. 10. ).
Also the operator has less control when pressure is applied with a
hand instrument, and the risk of slipping is increased. Pins should
only be bent if absolutely necessary, never simply to make them
parallel or based on a notion that bending them will increase their
relative retentiveness.
Possible Problems With Pins
Failure of Pin-Retained Retoration
he failure of pin-retained restorations might occur at any of ive
diferent locations ( Fig. 10. ). Failure may occur (1) within the
restoration (restoration fracture), (2) at the interface between the
pin and the restorative material (pin–restoration separation), (3)
within the pin (pin fracture), (4) at the interface between the pin of the bur may loosen the pin by rotating it counterclockwise and
unthreading it out of the pinhole. During removal of excess pin
length, the assistant may apply a steady stream of air to the pin
and have the high-volume evacuator tip positioned to remove the
pin segment. Also, during removal of excess pin length, the pin
may be stabilized with a small hemostat or cotton p liers. After
placement, the pin should be tight, immobile, and not easily
withdrawn. Every pin must be assessed with cotton pliers for stability
immediately after placement.
he preparation is viewed from all directions with a mirror
(particularly from the occlusal direction) to determine if any pins
need to be bent so as to be positioned within the anticipated
A
B
• Fig. 10. Handpiece chucks for the Thread Mate System (TMS)
regular self-shearing and Minikin pins (A) and TMS Minuta pins (B).
A B
• Fig. 10. Precautions to be taken if a rubber dam is not used. A, Gauze throat shield. B, Hand
wrench with 30 to 38 cm of dental tape attached.
A B C
• Fig. 10. A, Use of sharp No. 14 bur held perpendicular to the pin to shorten the pin. B and
C, Evaluating the preparation to determine the need for bending the pins.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
AB
D C
• Fig. 10. A, The Thread Mate System (TMS) bending tool. B, Use of the bending tool to bend the
pin. C and D, The pin is bent to a position that provides adequate bulk of amalgam between the pin and
the external surface of the inal restoration.
BCIncorrectSharp bend Chipped
dentin
Incorrect
A
• Fig. 10. A, A Black spoon excavator or other hand instrument should not be used to bend the
pin. B and C, Use of hand instruments may create a sharp bend in the pin and fracture dentin.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
Penetration Into the Pulp and Perforation of the External
Tooth Surface
Penetration into the pulp or perforation of the external surface of
the tooth is obvious if hemorrhage occurs in the pinhole after
removal of the drill. Usually the operator is able to perceive when
pulp penetration or root perforation has occurred by an abrupt
loss of resistance of the drill to hand pressure. Also if a standard
or Link Series pin continues to thread into the tooth beyond the
2-mm depth of the pinhole, this is an indication of a penetration
or perforation. A pulpal penetration might be suspe cted if the
patient is anesthetized and has sudden sensitivity when the pinhole
is being completed or the pin is being placed. However, if the
patient still has profound pulpal anesthesia, pulpal penetration of
the pinhole or pin may not be perceived.
Pulpal penetration is treated as any other small mechanical
exposure if the tooth has been asymptomatic. When preparation
of the pinhole causes a pulp exposure, any hemorrhage is controlled.
A calcium hydroxide liner is placed over the opening of the pinhole,
and another hole is prepared 1.5 mm away. If the exposure is
discovered as the pin is being placed, the pin is removed and the
area of pulp penetration treated as described. Although certain
studies have shown that the pulp tolerates pin penetration when
the pin is placed in a relatively sterile environment, it is not recom -
mended that pins be left in place when a pulpal penetration has
occurred. , If the pin were left in the pulp, (1) the depth of
the pin into pulpal tissue would be diicult to determine, (2)
considerable postoperative sensitivity might ensue, and (3) the pin
location might complicate subsequent endodontic therapy. Regard -
less of the method of treatment rendered, the patient must be
informed of the pulpal penetration or root perforation at the
completion of the appointment. he afected tooth should be
evaluated periodically using appropriate diagnostic tests including
radiographs. he patient should be instructed to inform the dentist
if any discomfort develops.
Because most teeth receiving pins have had extensive caries,
restorations, or both, the health of the pulp is likely compromised.
he ideal treatment of a pulpal penetration for such a compromised
tooth generally is endodontic therapy. Furthermore, endodontic
treatment should be strongly considered when such a tooth is to
receive an indirect restoration.
An external perforation might be suspected if an unanesthetized
patient senses pain when a pinhole is being prepared or a pin is
being placed in a tooth that has had endodontic therapy. Observation
of the angulation of the twist drill or the pin may help in the
determination of whether a pulpal penetration or external perfora -
tion has occurred. Perforation of the external surface of the tooth
may occur occlusal or apical to the gingival attachment. Careful
probing and radiographic examination must be used to accurately
diagnose the location of a perforation. he method of treatment
for a perforation often depends on the experience of the operator
and the particular circumstances of the tooth being treated.
hree options are available for perforations that occur occlusal
to the gingival attachment: (1) he pin may be cut of lush with
the tooth surface and no further treatment rendered; (2) the pin
may be cut of lush with the tooth surface and the preparation
for an indirect restoration extended gingivally beyond the perfora -
tion; or (3) the pin may be removed, if still present, and the
external aspect of the pinhole enlarged slightly and restored with
amalgam. Surgical relection of gingival tissue may be necessary
to render adequate treatment. he location of perforations occlusal
to the attachment often determines the option to
be pursued.and dentin, and (5) within dentin (dentin fracture). Failure is
more likely to occur at the pin–dentin interface than at the
pin–restoration interface. he operator must keep these areas of
potential failure in mind at all times and apply necessary principles
to reduce failure risk.
Broken Drill and Broken Pin
Occasionally, a twist drill breaks if it is stressed laterally or allowed
to stop rotating before it is removed from the pinhole. Use of a
sharp twist drill helps to limit the possibility of drill breakage.
Pins also may break during bending if care is not exercised. he
treatment for broken drills and broken pins is to choose an alterna -
tive location, at least 1.5 mm remote from the broken item, and
prepare another pinhole and place another pin. Removal of a
broken pin or drill is diicult, if not impossible, and usually should
not be attempted.
Looe Pin
Self-threading pins sometimes do not engage dentin properly because
the pinhole was inadvertently prepared too large or a self-shearing
pin failed to shear, resulting in stripped-out dentin. he pin should
be removed from the tooth and the pinhole re-prepared with the
next largest size drill, and the appropriate pin should be inserted.
Preparing another pinhole of the same size as the original, 1.5 mm
from the original pinhole, also is acceptable .
As described earlier, a properly placed pin may be loosened
while being shortened with a bur, if the bur is not held perpen -
dicularly to the pin and the pin stabilized. A loose pin may be
removed from the pinhole by holding a rotating bur parallel to
the pin and lightly contacting the surface of the pin; this causes
the pin to rotate counterclockwise out of the pinhole. A second
attempt should be made with the same-size pin. If the second
pin fails to irmly engage the dentin, a larger hole is prepared,
and the appropriate pin is inserted. Preparing another pinhole of
the same size 1.5 mm from the original pinhole also is
acceptable.
Restorative material
DentinRestorative material
a
Dentinb
c
d
e
• Fig. 10. Five possible locations of failure of pin-retained restora -
tions: fracture of restorative material (a), separation of pin from restorative
material (b), fracture of pin (c), separation of pin from dentin (d), fracture
of dentin (e).
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
forms for the inal indirect restoration (e.g., crown or bridge
retainer). he retention of the foundation material should not be
compromised by tooth reduction during the inal preparation for
the indirect restoration. he foundation also should provide the
resistance form against forces that otherwise might fracture the
remaining tooth structure.
In contrast to a conventional complex amalgam restoration, an
amalgam foundation may not depend primarily on the remaining
coronal tooth structure for support. Instead it may rely mainly on
secondary preparation retention features (proximal retention grooves,
coves, slots, pins). A temporary or caries-control restoration may
serve as a foundation, but only if the retention and resistance
forms of the restoration are appropriate.
A temporary or caries-control restoration is used to restore a
tooth when deinitive treatment is uncertain or when several teeth
require immediate attention for control of caries lesions. It also
may be used when a tooth’s prognosis is questionable. A temporary
or control restoration might depend only on the remaining coronal
tooth structure for support, however, using few auxiliary retention
features. When preparing a tooth for either a foundation or a
temporary restoration, remaining unsupported enamel may be left
(except at the gingival aspect) to aid in forming a matrix for amalgam
condensation. In this case the remaining unsupported enamel will
subsequently be removed when the preparation for the indirect
restoration is accomplished. Occasionally, when providing a
temporary or control restoration, suicient retention and resistance
forms are included in the preparation to meet the requirements
of a foundation.
As a rule, foundations are placed in anticipation of full-coverage
indirect restorations. Not all teeth with foundations, however,
need to be immediately restored with full-coverage crowns. For
example, amalgam may be used as a deinitive partial-coverage
restoration of endodontically treated teeth if only minimal coronal
damage has occurred. he greatest inluence on fracture resistance
is the amount of remaining tooth structure; therefore restorations
that conserve natural tooth structure are preferred.178T wo options are available for perforations that occur apical to
the gingival attachment: (1) Relect the tissue surgically, perform
any necessary ostectomy, enlarge the pinhole slightly, and restore
with amalgam; or (2) perform a crown-lengthening procedure and
place the margin of a cast restoration gingival to the perforation
(Fig. 10. ). As with perforations located occlusal to the gingival
attachment, the location of the perforation and the design of the
present or planned restoration help determine which option to
pursue. As with pulpal penetration, the patient must be informed
of the perforation and the proposed treatment. he prognosis of
external perforations is favorable when they are recognized early
and treated properly.
Considerations for the Use of Slots or Pins
Slot retention may be used in conjunction with pin retention or
as an alternative to it. Some operators use slot retention and
pin retention interchangeably. Others more frequently use slot
retention in preparations with vertical walls that allow retention
grooves to oppose one another. Pin retention is used more frequently
in preparations with few or no vertical walls. Slot s are particularly
indicated in short clinical crowns and when cusp reduction has
been limited to 2 or 3 mm. More tooth structure is removed
in slot preparation as compared with pin placement; however, slots
are less likely to (1) create microfractures in dentin, (2) perforate
the tooth surface, or (3) penetrate into the pulp. Slot placement
does not elicit an inlammatory response, whereas medium-sized
self-threading pins may elicit an inlammatory response if placed
within 0.5 mm of the pulp. he retention potential of slots and
pins is similar. -
Tooth Preparation for Amalgam Foundation
An amalgam foundation may be used as part of the initial restoration
of a severely involved tooth. he tooth is restored so that the
restorative material (amalgam, composite, or other) serves to replace
lost tooth structure necessary to provide retention and resistance
A
C DB
• Fig. 10. External perforation of a pin. A, Radiograph showing the external perforation of a pin.
B, Surgical access to extruding pin (arrow). C, Pin cut lush with the tooth structure and crown-lengthening
procedure performed. D, Length of pin removed.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
more than half the diameter of the pin, any retentiv e efect of the
pin probably has been eliminated.
he location of the pinhole from the external surface of the
tooth for foundations depends on (1) the occlusogingival location
of the pin (external morphology of the tooth), (2) the type of
restoration to be placed (e.g., a porcelain-fused-to-metal [PFM]
requires more reduction than a full gold crown), and (3) the type
of margin to be prepared. Preparations with heavily chamfered
margins at a normal occlusogingival location require slot and pin
placement at a greater axial depth. he length of the pins also
must be adjusted to permit adequate occlusal reduction without
exposing the pins. Proximal retention grooves still should be used,
wherever possible.
Completion of all inal preparation steps is accomplished as
described previously. An RMGI liner/base may be applied as
indicated. A liner or base should not extend closer than 1 mm to
a slot or a pin.
Pulp Chamber Retention of Foundations
he pulp chamber may be efectively used to retain an amalgam
foundation in multirooted, endodontically treated teeth. his
alternative to the use of slots/pins is recommended when (1) dimension
of the pulp chamber is adequate to provide retention and bulk of
amalgam, and (2) dentin thickness in the region of the pulp chamber
is adequate to provide rigidity and strength to the tooth. Additional
extension of 2 to 4 mm into the root canal space is recommended
when the pulp chamber height is 2 mm or less (see Fig. 10. ).
When the pulp chamber height is 4 to 6 mm in depth, no advantage
is gained from additional extension into the root canal space. After
matrix application, amalgam is thoroughly condensed into the pulp
chamber (and radicular space if indicated) and the coronal portion
of the tooth. Natural undercuts in the pulp chamber and the divergent
root canals provide the necessary retention form. he resistance
form against forces that otherwise may cause tooth fracture is improved
by gingival extension of the crown preparation approximately 2 mm
beyond the foundation onto sound tooth structure to establish the
necessary ferrule once the indirect restoration is in place. his
extension should have a total taper of opposing walls of less than
10 degrees. If the pulp chamber height is less than 2 mm, the
use of a prefabricated post, cast post and core, pins, or slots should
be considered for additional retention of the foundation
material.
he preparation should then be cleaned, carefully inspected as
indicated in General Concepts Guiding Preparation for Amalgam
Restorations, and any inal modiications completed.
Retorative Technique for Complex
Amalgam Preparation
Desensitizer Placement
A dentin desensitizer is placed over the prepared tooth structure
per manufacturer instructions. Excess moisture is removed without
desiccating the dentin.
Matrix Placement
One of the most diicult steps in restoring a severely compromised
posterior tooth is development of a satisfactory matrix to assist in
formation of the anatomic shape of the restoration. Fulilling the
objectives of a matrix is complicated by possible gingival extensions,
missing line angles, and restoration of reduced cusps typical of
complex tooth preparations.Amalgam and composite resin are the direct restorat ive materials
used for foundations. RMGIs may be used to block out minor
undercut areas of the preparation for an indirect restoration that
do not draw. Amalgam may be preferred by some clinicians because
it is easy to use and it is strong. While slots and threaded pins
may be used for secondary retention in vital teeth, prefabricated
posts and cast post/cores are used to provide additional retention
for the foundation material in endodontically treated teeth receiving
foundations. Prefabricated posts and cast post/cores are generally
used on anterior teeth or single-canal premolars that have little or
no remaining coronal tooth structure. Note, however, that there
must be adequate remaining natural tooth structure to allow creation
of a ferrule so as to achieve long-term clinical success. he pulp
chamber and entrance to the root canals of endodontically treated
molar teeth typically provide retention for foundations, and it is
not necessary to use any form of intraradicular retention (i.e., post
material extended further into the root canal space)
(Fig. 10. ).
Slot and/or Pin Retention of Foundations
he technique of tooth preparation for a foundation depends on
the type of retention that is selected—slot retention, pin retention,
or both. he techniques have in common the axial location of the
retention. Slots and pins for the retention of amalgam foundations
are placed slightly more axial (farther inside the DEJ) than indicated
for deinitive complex amalgam restorations. he actual pulpal
positioning depends on the type of indirect restoration that has
been planned. he preparation for an indirect restoration should
not eliminate or cut into the foundation’s retentive features.
Severely broken teeth with few or no vertical walls, in which
an indirect restoration is indicated, may require a pin-retained
foundation. he main diference between the use of pins for
foundations and the use of pins in deinitive complex restorations
is the distance of the pinholes from the external surface of the
tooth. For foundations, the pinholes must be located farther
from the external surface of the tooth (farther internally from the
DEJ), and more bending of the pins may be necessary to allow
for adequate axial reduction of the foundation without exposing
the pins during the cast-metal tooth preparation. Any removal of
the restorative material from the circumference of the pin would
compromise its retentive efect. If the material is removed from
• Fig. 10. Pulp chamber retention with 2to 4-mm extension of the
foundation into the canal spaces.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
he Tolemire retainer is loosened one half turn, and the strip
of matrix material is inserted next to the opening between the
matrix band and the tooth. he retainer is then tightened and
the matrix is completed. Sometimes it is helpful to place a small
amount of rigid material (hard-setting polyvinyl silox ane [PVS] or
compound or light-cured lowable resin) between the strip and the
open aspect of the band retainer to stabilize and support the strip (see
Fig. 10.201G and H ).
When little tooth structure remains and deep gingival
margins are present, the Tofflemire matrix may not func -
tion successfully, and the AutoMatrix system (DENTSPLY
Caulk, Milford, DE) may be an alternative method
(Fig. 10. ).Univeral Matrix
he Tolemire retainer and band may be used successfully for
most amalgam restorations ( Fig. 10. ). Use of the Tolemire
retainer requires suicient tooth structure to retain the band
after it is applied. Even when the Tolemire retainer is placed
appropriately an opening may remain next to an area of the
preparation tooth structure. In this case a closed system may be
developed as illustrated in Fig. 10. . A strip of matrix mate -
rial that is long enough to extend from the mesial to the distal
corners of the tooth is prepared. he strip must extend into these
corners suiciently that the band, when tight, holds the strip in
position. Also it must not extend into the proximal areas, or a
ledge would result in the restoration contour (see Fig. 10.201F ).
A
D
G
JB C
E F
H I
K L
• Fig. 10. A, Mandibular irst molar with fractured distolingual cusp. B, Insertion of wedges. C, Initial
tooth preparation. D and E, Removal of any soft dentin and/or any remaining old restorative material as
indicated. F, Application of a liner and a base (if necessary). G, Preparation of pilot holes. H, Alignment
of the twist drill with the external surface of the tooth. I, Preparation of pinholes. J, Insertion of Link pins
with a slow-speed handpiece. K, Depth-limiting shoulder (arrowhead) of inserted Link Plus pin. L, Use of
a No. 14 bur to shorten pins.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
or ev entually fail because of lack of suicient strength secondary
to internal voids or fractures. Matrix stability during condensation
is especially important for slot-retained amalgam restorations. If
the matrix is not secure during condensation, it may slip out of
position causing separation of the main bulk of the amalgam from
its retentive slots or pins.
Insertion, Contouring, and Finishing of Amalgam
A high-copper alloy is strongly recommended for the complex
amalgam restoration because of excellent clinical performance and
high early compressive strengths. - Spherical alloys have a higher
early strength than admixed alloys, and spherical alloys may be
condensed more quickly and with less pressure so as to ensure
good adaptation in slots and around the pins. However, proximal
contacts may be easier to achieve with admixed alloys because of
their condensability. Alloys that provide extended working time
are necessary to allow adequate time for condensation, removal of
the matrix band, and inal carving. Because complex amalgam
restorations usually are quite large, a slow-set or medium-set
amalgam may be selected to provide more time for the carving
and adjustment of the restoration.
Regardless of the type of alloy chosen, care must be taken to con -
dense the amalgam thoroughly in and around the retentive features of
the preparation. If a mix of amalgam becomes dry or crumbly, a new AutoMatrix
he AutoMatrix is a retainerless matrix system designed for any
tooth regardless of its circumference and height. AutoMatrix
bands are supplied in three widths: (1) 4.76 mm, (2) 6.35 mm,
and (3) 7.94 mm. he medium band is available in two thicknesses
(0. mm and 0.05 mm). he 4.76, 6.35, and 7.94 mm band
widths are available in the 0.05 mm thickness only. Advantages
of this system include (1) convenience, (2) improve d visibility
because of absence of a retainer, and (3) ability to place the autolock
loop on the facial or lingual surface of the tooth. Disadvantages
of this system are that (1) the band is lat and diicult to burnish
and is sometimes unstable even when wedges are in place, and
(2) development of proper proximal contours and contacts may
be diicult. Use of the AutoMatrix system is illustrated in Fig.
10. .
Regardless of the type of matrix system used, the matrix must
be stable during condensation of the amalgam. he matrix should
extend beyond the gingival margins of the preparation enough to
provide support for the matrix and to permit appropriate wedge
stabilization. he matrix should extend occlusally beyond the
marginal ridge of the adjacent tooth by 1 to 2 mm. If the matrix
for a complex amalgam restoration is not stable during condensation,
a homogeneous restoration will not be developed. An improperly
condensed amalgam may disintegrate when the matrix is removed,
S
T
M
N
O
P
Q
R
M, Bending pins (if necessary) with a bending tool. N, Final tooth preparation.
O, Toflemire retainer and matrix band applied to the prepared tooth. P , Relecting light to evaluate the
proximal area of the matrix band. Q, Preparation overilled. R, Restoration carved. S, Relecting light to
evaluate the adequacy of the proximal contact and contour. T, Restoration polished. • Fig. 10. , cont’d
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
is removed with an explorer or a Black spoon. Tolem ire matrices
are removed irst by loosening and removing the retain er while
the wedges are still in place. Leaving the wedges in place may help
prevent fracturing the freshly condensed amalgam. It may be
beneicial to place a ingertip on the occlusal surface of the restored
tooth to stabilize the matrix while loosening and removing the
retainer fr om the band. his is to reduce the risk of fracturing the
freshly inserted amalgam while applying the force necessary to
loosen the retainer. he matrix is removed by sliding each end of
the band in an oblique direction (i.e., moving the band facially
or lingually while simultaneously moving it in an occlusal direction).
Moving the band obliquely toward the occlusal surface minimizes
the possibility of fracturing the marginal ridge. Preferably the matrix
band should be removed in the same direction as the wedge place -
ment to prevent dislodging the wedges. AutoMatrix bands are
removed by using the system’s instruments and, after the band is
open, by the same technique described for Tolemire-retained
matrices. Carving of the restoration is then continued (see Figs.
10.200R and 10.203N ).
Wedges are then removed, and the gingival excess on the proximal
surface is removed with an amalgam knife or explorer. Facial and
lingual contours are developed with a Hollenback carver, amalgam
knife, or explorer to complete the carving (see Figs. 10.200R and
S and 10.201I ). Appropriately shaped rotary instruments are used mix is triturated immediately. Placement of a whole freshly mixed
mass of amalgam (instead of using the amalgam carrier to place incre -
ments of amalgam) increases the rate of completely illing the defect.
Special care must be taken when this technique is used to ensure
the amalgam is well adapted in and around all retentive areas and at
all margins.
With a complex (or any large) amalgam, carving time must be
properly allocated. he time spent on carving occlusal anatomy
(while the matrix is still in place) must be shortened to allow
adequate time for carving the more inaccessible gingival margins
and the proximal and axial contours (after the matrix is removed).
he bulk of excess amalgam on the occlusal surface is removed
and the initial anatomic contours are rapidly developed, especially
the marginal ridge heights and cuspal inclines, with a discoid
carver and/or Hollenback carver. he occlusal embrasures are deined
by running the tine of an explorer against the internal aspect of
the matrix band. Appropriate marginal ridge heights and embrasures
reduce the potential of fracturing the marginal ridge when the
matrix is removed.
Matrix removal is crucial when completing complex amalgam
restorations, especially slot-retained restorations. If the matrix
is removed prematurely, the newly placed restoration may fracture
immediately adjacent to the areas where amalgam has been con -
densed into the slot(s). Any rigid material supporting the matrix
A
D
G
B
E
H
C
F
I
• Fig. 10. Technique for closing the open space of the Toflemire matrix system. A, Tooth prepara -
tion with wedges in place. B, Open aspect of the matrix band next to the prepared tooth structure. C
and D, Cutting an appropriate length of the matrix material. E, Insertion of a strip of the matrix material.
F, Closed matrix system. G and H, Placement of the rigid supporting material between the strip and the
matrix band, and contouring, if necessary. I, Restoration carved.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
to complete the occlusal contouring if amalgam has become so
hard that the force needed to carve with hand instruments might
fracture portions of the restoration.
Each proximal contact is evaluated by using a mirror occlusally
and lingually to ensure that no light can be r elected between the
restoration and the adjacent tooth at the level of the proximal
contact (see Fig. 10.200S ). When the proper proximal contour or
contact is not achieved in a large, complex restoration, it may be
possible to prepare a conservative “ideal” two-surface tooth prepara -
tion within the initial amalgam to restore the proper proximal
surface contours. Amalgam forming the walls of this “ideal”
preparation must have suicient bulk to prevent future fracture.
A
B
Lock-release holeAutolock loop
Coil
C D
• Fig. 10. A, AutoMatrix retainerless matrix system. B, AutoMatrix band. C, Automate II tightening
device. D, Shielded snippers. (A, Courtesy Dentsply Caulk, Milford, DE.)
he rubber dam is removed and the occlusal surface of the
amalgam is adjusted to obtain appropriate occlusal contacts. hin,
unwaxed dental loss may be carefully passed through the proximal
contacts one time to remove amalgam shavings and to smooth the
proximal surface of amalgam. Amalgam excess and loose particles
are removed from the gingival sulcus by moving the loss occlu -
sogingivally and faciolingually. he patient should be cautioned
not to chew with the restoration for 24 hours. Fast-setting highcopper amalgam may be prepared for an indirect restoration within
30 to 45 minutes after insertion of the foundation. Further i nishing
and polishing of the complex amalgam may be accomplished, if
desired, as early as 24 hours after placement (see Fig. 10.200T ).
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
A
D
G
B
E
H
C
F
I
J
M
K
N
L
O
• Fig. 10. Application of AutoMatrix for developing a pin-retained amalgam crown on the mandibular
irst molar. A, Tooth preparation with wedges in place. B, Enlargement of the circumference of the band,
if necessary. C, Burnishing the band with an egg-shaped burnisher. D–F, Placement of the band around
the tooth, tightening with an Automate II tightening device, and setting wedges irmly in place. G, Applica -
tion of the green compound. H, Contouring of the band with the back of a warm Black spoon excavator
so the softened compound will allow matrix deformation. I, Overilling the preparation and carving the
occlusal aspect. J and K, Use of shielded snippers to cut an autolock loop. L, Separating the band with
an explorer. M, Removing the band in an oblique direction (facially with some occlusal vector). N, Restora -
tion carved. O, Restoration polished.
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
Summary
Dental amalgam remains a predictable, costefective, and safe
means for the restoration of posterior (and some anterior) teeth
that are missing various amounts of tooth structure. he design
of a successful tooth preparation must be based on the material
properties of dental amalgam and the successful use of primary
and secondary means of restoration retention. Complex pre parations use retention grooves/coves in remaining vertical walls as well as
slots, pins, and customized matrix designs to efect successful restora -
tions. Restoration of normal anatomic contours and therefore
normal clinical function may be readily accomplished with dental
amalgam.
Reference
1. American Dental Association Council on Scientiic Afairs: Dental
amalgam: update on safety concerns. J Am Dent Assoc : – ,
.
2. Collins CJ, Bryant RW, Hodge KL: A clinical evaluation of posterior
composite resin restorations: 8-year indings. J Dent 26: – ,
.
3. Lauterbach M, Martins IP , Castro-Caldas A, et al: Neurological
outcomes in children with and without amalgam-related mercury
exposure: seven years of longitudinal observations in a randomized
trial. J Am Dent Assoc : – , .
4. Corbin SB, Kohn WG: he beneits and risks of dental amalgam:
current indings reviewed. J Am Dent Assoc : – ,
.
5. Burgess JO: Dental materials for the restorations of root surface
caries. Am J Dent 8: , .
6. Gottlieb EW, Retief DH, Bradley EL: Microleakage of conventional
and high-copper amalgam restorations. J Prosthet Dent 53: ,
.
7. Hilton TJ: Can modern restorative procedures and materials reliably
seal cavities? In vitro investigations: part 2. Am J Dent 15: ,
.
8. Berry TG, Summitt JB, Chung AK, et al: Amalgam at the new
millennium. J Am Dent Assoc : – , .
9. Dunne SM, Gainsford ID, Wilson NH: Current materials and
techniques for direct restorations in posterior teeth: silver amalgam:
part 1. Int Dent J 47: – , .
10. Bernando M, Luis H, Martin MD, et al: Survival and reasons for
failure of amalgam versus composite restorations placed in a random -
ized clinical trial. J Am Dent Assoc : – , .
11. Opdam NJM, Bronkhorst EM, Loomans BA, et al: 12-year survival
of composite vs. amalgam restorations. J Dent Res 89: – ,
.
12. American Dental Association: Amalgam waste: ADA’s best manage -
ment practices. ADA News 35:1, .
13. Ben-Amar A, Cardash HS, Judes H: he sealing of the tooth/
amalgam interface by corrosion products. J Oral Rehabil 22: – ,
.
14. Liberman R, Ben-Amar A, Nordenberg D, et al: Long-term sealing
properties of amalgam restorations: an in vitro study. Dent Mater
5: – , .
15. Letzel H, van ‘t Hof MA, Marshall GW, et al: he inluence of the
amalgam alloy on the survival of amalgam restorations: a secondary
analysis of multiple controlled clinical trials. J Dent Res 76: – ,
.
16. Mahler DB: he high-copper dental amalgam alloys. J Dent Res
76: – , .
17. Suchatlampong C, Goto S, Ogura H: Early compressive strength
and phase-formation of dental amalgam. Dent Mater 14: – ,
.
18. Osborne JW: Photoelastic assessment of the expansion of directplacement gallium restorative alloys. Quintessence Int 30: – ,
.
19. Osborne JW, Summitt JB: Direct-placement gallium restorative
alloy: a 3-year clinical evaluation. Quintessence Int 30:49–53,
.20. Venugopalan R, Broome JC, Lucas LC: he efect of water contamina -
tion on dimensional change and corrosion properties of a gallium
alloy. Dent Mater 14: – , .
21. Kiremitci A, Bolay S: A 3-year clinical evaluation of a gallium restora -
tion alloy. J Oral Rehabil 30(6): – , .
22. Bullard RH, Leinfelder KF , Russell CM: Efect of coeicient of
thermal expansion on microleakage. J Am Dent Assoc : – ,
.
23. Williams PT, Hedge GL: Creep-fatigue as a possible cause of dental
amalgam margin failure. J Dent Res 64: – , .
24. Combe EC, Burke FJT, Douglas WH: hermal properties. In
Combe EC, Burke FJT, Douglas WH, editors: Dental biomaterials ,
Boston, , Kluwer Academic Publishers.
25. Bryant RW: he strength of ifteen amalgam alloys. Aust Dent J
24: – , .
26. Murray GA, Yates JL: Early compressive and diametral tensile
strengths of seventeen amalgam alloy systems. J Pedod 5:40–50,
.
27. Mahler DB, Adey JD: Factors inluencing the creep of dental
amalgam. J Dent Res 70: – , .
28. Vrijhoef MM, Letzel H: Creep versus marginal fracture of amalgam
restorations. J Oral Rehabil 13: – , .
29. Dilley DC, Vann WF , Jr, Oldenburg TR, et al: Time required for
placement of composite versus amalgam restorations. J Dent Child
57: , .
30. Dias de Souza GM, Pereira GD, Dias CT, et al: Fracture resistance
of teeth restored with the bonded amalgam technique. Oper Dent
26: , .
31. Mahler DB, Engle JH: Clinical evaluation of amalgam bonding in
class I and II restorations. J Am Dent Assoc :43, .
32. Smales RJ, Wetherell JD: Review of bonded amalgam restorations
and assessment in a general practice over ive years. Oper Dent
25: , .
33. Summitt JB, Burgess JO, Berry TG, et al: Six-year clinical evaluation
of bonded and pin-retained complex amalgam restorations. Oper
Dent 29: , .
34. Gorucu J, Tiritoglu M, Ozgünaltay G: Efects of preparation designs
and adhesive systems on retention of class II amalgam restorations.
J Prosthet Dent 78: – , .
35. Winkler MM, Moore BK, Allen J, et al: Comparison of retentiveness
of amalgam bonding agent types. Oper Dent 22: – , .
36. Ben-Amar A, Liberman R, Rothkof Z, et al: Long term sealing
properties of Amalgam bond under amalgam restorations. Am J
Dent 7: – , .
37. Olmez A, Ulusu T: Bond strength and clinical evaluation of a new
dentinal bonding agent to amalgam and resin composite. Quintessence
Int 26: – , .
38. Bjertness E, Sonju T: Survival analysis of amalgam restorations in
long-term recall patients. Acta Odontol Scand 48:93, .
39. Downer MC, Azli NA, Bedi R, et al: How long do routine restorations
last? A systematic review. Br Dent J : , .
40. Letzel H, van ‘t Hof MA, Marshall GW, et al: he inluence of the
amalgam alloy on the survival of amalgam restorations: a secondary
analysis of multiple controlled clinical trials. J Dent Res 76: ,
.
41. Mjör IA, Jokstad A, Qvist V: Longevity of posterior restorations.
Int Dent J 40:11, .
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
73. Anusavice KJ, editor: Phillips’ science of dental materials , ed 11, St.
Louis, , Mosby.
74. M ahler DB: he amalgam-tooth interface. Oper Dent 21: , .
75. Symons AL, Wing G, Hewitt GH: Adaptation of eight modern
dental amalgams to walls of Class I cavity preparations. J Oral
Rehabil 14:55, .
76. Bauer JG: A study of procedures for burnishing amalgam restorations.
J Prosthet Dent 57: , .
77. Lovadino JR, Ruhnke LA, Consani S: Inluence of burnishing on
amalgam adaptation to cavity walls. J Prosthet Dent 58: , .
78. Kanai S: Structure studies of amalgam II: efect of burnishing on
the margins of occlusal amalgam illings. Acta Odontol Scand 24:47,
.
79. May KN, Wilder AD, Leinfelder KF: Clinical evaluation of various
burnishing techniques on high-copper amalgam [abstract]. J Prosthet
Dent 61: , .
80. May KN, Jr, Wilder AD, Jr, Leinfelder KF: Burnished amalgam
restorations: a two-year evaluation. J Prosthet Dent 49: ,
.
81. Strafon LH, Corpron RE, Dennison JB, et al: A clinical evaluation
of polished and unpolished amalgams: 36-month results. Pediatr
Dent 6: , .
82. Collins CJ, Bryant RW: Finishing of amalgam restorations: a
three-year clinical study. J Dent 20: , .
83. Drummond JL, Jung H, Savers EE, et al: Surface roughness of
polished amalgams. Oper Dent 17: , .
84. Mofa JP: he longevity and reasons for replacement of amalgam
alloys [abstract]. J Dent Res 68: , .
85. Summitt JB, Burgess JO, Berry TG, et al: Six-year clinical evaluation
of bonded and pin-retained complex amalgam restorations. Oper
Dent 29: , .
86. Mayhew RB, Schmeltzer LD, Pierson WP: Efect of polishing on
the marginal integrity of high-copper amalgams. Oper Dent 11:8,
.
87. Osborne JW, Leinfelder KF , Gale EN, et al: T wo independent
evaluations of ten amalgam alloys. J Prosthet Dent 43: ,
.
88. Council on Dental Materials, Instruments, and Equipment: Dental
mercury hygiene: summary of recommendations in . J Am
Dent Assoc : , .
89. Sockwell CL: Dental handpieces and rotary cutting instruments.
Dent Clin North Am 15: , .
90. Blaser PK, Lund MR, Cochran MA, et al: Efect of designs of Class
2 preparations on resistance of teeth to fracture. Oper Dent 8:6,
.
91. Vale WA: Tooth preparation and further thoughts on high speed.
Br Dent J : , .
92. Gilmore HW: Restorative materials and tooth preparation design.
Dent Clin North Am 15:99, .
93. Mahler DB, Terkla LG: Analysis of stress in dental structures. Dent
Clin North Am 2: , .
94. Restoration of tooth preparations with amalgam and tooth-colored
materials: Project ACCORDE student syllabus, Washington, D.C.,
, US Department of Health, Education, and Welfare.
95. Dias de Souza GM, Pereira GD, Dias CT, et al: Fracture resistance
of teeth restored with the bonded amalgam technique. Oper Dent
26: , .
96. Mahler DB, Engle JH: Clinical evaluation of amalgam bonding in
class I and II restorations. J Am Dent Assoc :43, .
97. Smales RJ, Wetherell JD: Review of bonded amalgam restorations
and assessment in a general practice over ive years. Oper Dent
25: , .
98. Ziskind D, Venezia E, Kreisman I, et al: Amalgam type, adhesive
system, and storage period as inluencing factors on microleakage
of amalgam restorations. J Prosthet Dent 90: , .
99. Lindemuth JS, Hagge MS, Broome JS: Efect of restoration size on
fracture resistance of bonded amalgam restorations. Oper Dent
25: , .42. Osborne JW, Norman RD: 13-year clinical assessment of 10 amalgam
alloys. Dent Mater 6: , .
43. Osborne JW, Norman RD, Gale EN: A 14-year clinical assessment
of 12 amalgam alloys. Quintessence Int 22: , .
44. Maryniuk GA: In search of treatment longevity—a 30-year perspec -
tive. J Am Dent Assoc : , .
45. Maryniuk GA, Kaplan SH: Longevity of restorations: survey results
of dentists’ estimates and attitudes. J Am Dent Assoc :39, .
46. Jokstad A, Mjor IA: he quality of routine class II cavity preparations
for amalgam. Acta Odontol Scand 47:53, .
47. Kreulen CM, Tobi H, Gruythuysen RJ, et al: Replacement risk of
amalgam treatment modalities: 15-year results. J Dent 26: , .
48. Smales RJ: Longevity of lowand high-copper amalgams analyzed
by preparation class, tooth site, patient age, and operator. Oper
Dent 16: , .
49. Bader JD, Shugars DA: Variations in dentists’ clinical decisions. J
Public Health Dent 55: , .
50. Plasmans P , Creugers NH, Mulder J: Long-term survival of extensive
amalgam restorations. J Dent Res 77: – , .
51. Martin JA, Bader JD: Five-year treatment outcomes for teeth with
large amalgams and crowns. Oper Dent 22:72–78, .
52. Mair LH: Ten-year clinical assessment of three posterior resin
composites and two amalgams. Quintessence Int 29: – ,
.
53. Ferracane JL: Resin-based composite performance: Are there some
things we can’t predict? Dent Mater 29(1):51–58, .
54. Almquist TC, Cowan RD, Lambert RL: Conservative amalgam
restorations. J Prosthet Dent 29: , .
55. Markley MR: Restorations of silver amalgam. J Am Dent Assoc
43: , .
56. Berry TG, Laswell HR, Osborne JW, et al: Width of isthmus and
marginal failure of restorations of amalgam. Oper Dent 6:55, .
57. Osborne JW, Gale EN: Relationship of restoration width, tooth
position and alloy to fracture at the margins of 13to 14-year-old
amalgams. J Dent Res 69: , .
58. Goel VK, Khera SC, Gurusami S, et al: Efect of cavity depth on
stresses in a restored tooth. J Prosthet Dent 67: , .
59. Lagouvardos P , Sourai P , Douvitsas G: Coronal fractures in posterior
teeth. Oper Dent 14:28, .
60. Osborne JW, Gale EN: Failure at the margin of amalgams as afected
by cavity width, tooth position, and alloy selection. J Dent Res
60: , .
61. Fusayama T: T wo layers of carious dentin: diagnosis and treatment.
Oper Dent 4:63, .
62. Hebling J, Giro EM, Costa CA: Human pulp response after an
adhesive system application in deep cavities. J Dent 27: , .
63. Hilton TJ: Cavity sealers, liners, and bases: current philosophies
and indications for use. Oper Dent 21: , .
64. Eliades G, Palaghias G: In-vitro characterization of visible-light-cured
glass-ionomer liners. Dent Mater 9: , .
65. Wieczkowski G, Jr, Yu XY, Joynt RB, et al: Microleakage evaluation
in amalgam restorations used with bases. J Esthet Dent 4:37, .
66. Robbins JW: he placement of bases beneath amalgam restorations:
review of literature and recommendations for use. J Am Dent Assoc
: , .
67. Hilton TJ: Sealers, liners, and bases. J Esthet Restor Dent 15: ,
.
68. Rasaratnam L: Review suggests direct pulp capping with MTA more
efective than calcium hydroxide. Evid Based Dent 17(3):94–95,
, 1. Vlietstra JR, Sidaway DA, Plant CG: Cavity cleansers, Br Dent J
: , .
72. Schüpbach P , Lutz F , Finger WJ: Closing of dentinal tubules by
Gluma desensitizer. Eur J Oral Sci : , .
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
. Davis R, Over ton JD: Eicacy of bonded and nonbonded amalgam
in the treatment of teeth with incomplete fractures, J Am Dent Assoc
: – , .
. McDaniel RJ, Davis RD, Murchison DF , et al: Causes of failure
among cuspal-coverage amalgam restorations: a clinical survey. J
Am Dent Assoc : – , .
. Robbins JW, Summitt JB: Longevity of complex amalgam restorations.
Oper Dent 13:54–57, .
. Mondelli RF , Barbosa WF , Mondelli J, et al: Fracture strength of
weakened human premolars restored with amalgam with and without
cusp coverage. Am J Dent 11: , .
. Chan CC, Chan KC: he retentive strength of slots with diferent
width and depth versus pins. J Prosthet Dent 58: – ,
.
. McMaster DR, House RC, Anderson MH, et al: he efect of slot
preparation length on the transverse strength of slot-retained restora -
tions. J Prosthet Dent 67: – , .
. Christensen GJ: Achieving optimum retention for restorations. J
Am Dent Assoc : – , .
. Mozer JE, Watson RW: he pin-retained amalgam. Oper Dent
4: – , .
. Fischer GM, Stewart GP , Panelli J: Amalgam retention using pins,
boxes, and Amalgambond. Am J Dent 6: – , .
. Boyde A, Lester KS: Scanning electron microscopy of self-threading
pins in dentin. Oper Dent 4:56–62, .
. Standlee JP , Caputo AA, Collard EW, et al: Analysis o f stress distribu -
tion by endodontic posts. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol
33: – , .
. Webb EL, Straka WF , Phillips CL: Tooth crazing associated with
threaded pins: a three-dimensional model. J Prosthet Dent 61: – ,
.
. Going RE, Mofa JP , Nostrant GW, et al: he strength of dental
amalgam as inluenced by pins. J Am Dent Assoc 77: – ,
.
. Welk DA, Dilts WE: Inluence of pins on the compressive and
horizontal strength of dental amalgam and retention of pins in
amalgam. J Am Dent Assoc 78: – , .
. Going RE: Pin-retained amalgam. J Am Dent Assoc 73: – ,
.
. Pameijer CH, Stallard RE: Efect of self-threading pins. J Am Dent
Assoc 85: – , .
. Mofa JP , Razzano MR, Doyle MG: Pins—a comparison of their
retentive properties. J Am Dent Assoc 78: – , .
. Perez E, Schoeneck G, Yanahara H: he adaptation of noncemented
pins. J Prosthet Dent 26: – , .
. Vitsentzos SI: Study of the retention of pins. J Prosthet Dent
60: – , .
. Dilts WE, Welk DA, Laswell HR, et al: Crazing of tooth structure
associated with placement of pins for amalgam restorations. J Am
Dent Assoc 81: – , .
. T rabert KC, Caputo AA, Collard EW, et al: Stress transfer to the
dental pulp by retentive pins. J Prosthet Dent 30: – ,
.
. Dilts WE, Welk DA, Stovall J: Retentive properties of pin materials
in pin-retained silver amalgam restorations. J Am Dent Assoc
77: – , .
. Eames WB, Solly MJ: Five threaded pins compared for insertion
and retention. Oper Dent 5:66–71, .
. Hembree JH: Dentinal retention of pin-retained devices. Gen Dent
29: – , .
. Khera SC, Chan KC, Rittman BR: Dentinal crazing and interpin
distance. J Prosthet Dent 40: – , .
. Wing G: Pin retention amalgam restorations. Aust Dent J 10:6–10,
.
. Courtade GL, Timmermans JJ, editors: Pins in restorative dentistry ,
St. Louis, , Mosby.
. Dilts WE, Duncanson MG, Jr, Collard EW, et al: Retention of
self-threading pins. J Can Dent Assoc 47: – , . . Larson TD, Douglas WH, Geistfeld RE: Efect of prepared cavities
on the strength of teeth. Oper Dent 6:2, .
. Rodda JC: Modern class II amalgam tooth preparations. N Z Dent
J 68: , .
. Joynt RB, Davis EL, Wieczkowski G, Jr, et al: Fracture resistance
of posterior teeth with glass ionomer-composite resin systems. J
Prosthet Dent 62:28, .
. Osborne JW, Summitt JB: Extension for prevention: Is it relevant
today? Am J Dent 11: , .
. Summitt JB, Osborne JW: Initial preparations for amalgam restora -
tions: extending the longevity of the tooth-restoration unit. J Am
Dent Assoc :67, .
. Leon AR: he periodontium and restorative procedures: a critical
review. J Oral Rehabil 4: , .
. Loe H: Reactions of marginal periodontal tissues to restorative
procedures. Int Dent J 18: , .
. Waerhaug J: Histologic considerations which govern where the
margins of restorations should be located in relation to the gingivae.
Dent Clin North Am 4: , .
. Summitt JB, Howell ML, Burgess JO, et al: Efect of grooves on
resistance form of conservative class 2 amalgams. Oper Dent 17:50,
.
. Crockett WD, Shepard FE, Moon PC, et al: he inluence of
proximal retention grooves on the retention and resistance of
class II preparations for amalgam. J Am Dent Assoc 91: ,
.
. Summitt JB, Osborne JW, Burgess JO, et al: Efect of grooves on
resistance form of Class 2 amalgams with wide occlusal preparations.
Oper Dent 18:42, .
. Della Bona A, Summitt JB: he efect of amalgam bonding on
resistance form of class II amalgam restorations. Quintessence Int
29:95, .
. Görücü J, et al: Efects of preparation designs and adhesive systems
on retention of class II amalgam restorations. J Prosthet Dent 78: ,
.
. Mondelli J, Ishikiriama A, de Lima Navarro MF , et al: Fracture
strength of amalgam restorations in modern Class II prepara -
tions with proximal retentive grooves. J Prosthet Dent 32: ,
.
. Mondelli J, Francischone CE, Steagall L, et al: Inluence of proximal
retention on the fracture strength of Class II amalgam restorations.
J Prosthet Dent 46: , .
. Sturdevant JR, Taylor DF , Leonard RH, et al: Conservative prepara -
tion designs for Class II amalgam restorations. Dent Mater 3: ,
.
. Khera SC, Chan KC: Microleakage and enamel inish. J Prosthet
Dent 39: , .
. Summitt JB, Osborne JW, Burgess JO: Efect of grooves on resistance/
retention form of Class 2 approximal slot amalgam restorations.
Oper Dent 18: , .
. Duncalf WV, Wilson NHF: Adaptation and condensation of
amalgam restorations in Class II preparations of conventional and
conservative design. Quintessence Int 23: , .
. Jokstad A, Mjor IA: Cavity design and marginal degradation of the
occlusal part of Class II amalgam restorations. Acta Odontol Scand
48: , .
. Pack AR: he amalgam overhang dilemma: a review of causes and
efects, prevention, and removal. N Z Dent J 85:55, .
. Van Nieuwenhuysen JP , D’Hoore W, Carvalho J, et al: Long-term
evaluation of extensive restorations in permanent teeth. J Dent
31: – , .
. Martin JA, Bader JD: Five-year treatment outcomes for teeth with
large amalgams and crowns. Oper Dent 22:72–78, .
. Smales RJ: Longevity of cusp-covered amalgams: survivals after 15
years. Oper Dent 16:17–20, .
. Mondelli RF , Barbosa WF , Mondelli J, et al: Fracture strength of
weakened human premolars restored with amalgam with and without
cusp coverage. Am J Dent 11: – , .
CHAPTER 10 Clinical Technique for Amalgam Retoration
. Irvin AW, Webb EL, Holland GA, et al: Photoelastic analysis of
stress induced from insertion of self-threading retentive pins. J
Prosthet Dent 53: – , .
. Abraham G, Baum L: Intentional implantation of pins into the
dental pulp. J South Calif Dent Assoc 40: – , .
. Robbins JW, Burgess JO, Summitt JB: Retention and resistance
features for complex amalgam restorations. J Am Dent Assoc
: – , .
. Bailey JH: Retention design for amalgam restorations: pins versus
slots. J Prosthet Dent 65:71–74, .
. Garman TA, Outhwaite WC, Hawkins IK, et al: A clinical comparison
of dentinal slot retention with metallic pin retention. J Am Dent
Assoc : – , .
. Outhwaite WC, Garman TA, Pashley DH: Pin vs. slot retention
in extensive amalgam restorations. J Prosthet Dent 41: – ,
.
. Outhwaite WC, T wiggs SW, Fairhurst CW, et al: Slots vs. pins: a
comparison of retention under simulated chewing stresses. J Dent
Res 61: – , .
. Smith CT, Schuman N: Restoration of endodontically treated teeth:
a guide for the restorative dentist. Quintessence Int 28: – ,
.
. Oliveira Fde C, Denehy GE, et al: Fracture resistance of endodonti -
cally prepared teeth using various restorative materials. J Am Dent
Assoc :57–60, .
. Lambert RL, Goldfogel MH: Pin amalgam restoration and pin
amalgam foundation. J Prosthet Dent 54:10–12, .
. Nayyar A, Walton RE, Leonard LA: An amalgam coronal-radicular
dowel and core technique for endodontically treated posterior teeth.
J Prosthet Dent 43: – , .
. Kane JJ, Burgess JO, Summitt JB: Fracture resistance of amalgam
coronal-radicular restorations. J Prosthet Dent 63: – , .
. Shillingburg HT, Jr, editor: Fundamentals of ixed prosthodontics , ed
3, Chicago, , Quintessence.
. Leinfelder KF: Clinical performance of amalgams with high content
of copper. Gen Dent 29:52–55, .
. Osborne JW, Binon PP , Gale EN: Dental amalgam: clinical behavior
up to eight years. Oper Dent 5:24–28, .
. Eames WB, MacNamara JF: Eight high copper amalgam alloys and
six conventional alloys compared. Oper Dent 1:98– , . . Durkowski JS, Harris RK, Pelleu GB, et al: Efect of diameters of
self-threading pins and channel locations on enamel crazing. Oper
Dent 7:86–91, .
. Mondelli J, Vieira DF: he strength of Class II amalgam restorations
with and without pins. J Prosthet Dent 28: – , .
. Cecconi BT, Asgar K: Pins in amalgam: a study of reinforcement.
J Prosthet Dent 26: – , .
. Dilts WE, Mullaney TP: Relationship of pinhole location and tooth
morphology in pin-retained silver amalgam restorations. J Am Dent
Assoc 76: – , .
. Dolph R: Intentional implanting of pins into the dental pulp. Dent
Clin North Am 14:73–80, .
. Felton DA, Webb EL, Kanoy BE, et al: Pulpal response to threaded
pin and retentive slot techniques: a pilot investigation. J Prosthet
Dent 66: – , .
. Caputo AA, Standlee JP: Pins and posts—why, when, and how.
Dent Clin North Am 20: – , .
. Gourley JV: Favorable locations for pins in molars. Oper Dent
5:2–6, .
. Caputo AA, Standlee JP , Collard EW: he mechanics of load transfer
by retentive pins. J Prosthet Dent 29: – , .
. Dilts WE, Coury TL: Conservative approach to the placement of
retentive pins. Dent Clin North Am 20: – , .
. Standlee JP , Collard EW, Caputo AA: Dentinal defects caused by
some twist drills and retentive pins. J Prosthet Dent 24: – ,
.
. Standlee JP , Caputo AA, Collard EW: Retentive pin installation
stresses. Dent Pract Dent Rec 21: – , .
. Kelsey WP , III, Blankenau RJ, Cavel WT: Depth of seating of pins
of the Link Series and Link Plus Series. Oper Dent 8:18–22, .
. Barkmeier WW, Cooley RL: Self-shearing retentive pins: a laboratory
evaluation of pin channel penetration before shearing. J Am Dent
Assoc 99: – , .
. Barkmeier WW, Frost DE, Cooley RL: he two-in-one, self-threading,
self-shearing pin: eicacy of insertion technique. J Am Dent Assoc
97:51–53, .
. Garman TA, Binon PP , Averette D, et al: Self-threading pin penetra -
tion into dentin. J Prosthet Dent 43: – , .
. May KN, Heymann HO: Depth of penetration of Link Series and
Link Plus pins. Gen Dent 34: – , .
Periodontology Applied to
Operative Dentistry
PATRICIA A. MIGUEZ, THIAGO MORELLI
This chapter presents an overview of the periodontal structu res
and their importance in restorative dentistry. Following a
review of the anatomy and physiology of the periodontal
tissues, periodontal contributor y factors afecting restorative dentistry
are discussed. he impact of periodontal therapy as part of the
restorative treatment and the efect of the restorative treatment on
the periodontium will also be presented.
he proximity of many dental restorations to the periodontium
makes their relationship inseparable. To maintain a healthy peri -
odontium and avoid chroni c periodontal inlammation, restorations
should be designed and performed properly. Dental restorations
that reestablish function and esthetics, when required, and are
supported by a healthy periodontium should be the goal of any
restorative procedure.
When necessary, periodontal therapy to eliminate or control
the etiologic factors that contribute to periodontal disease should
be performed prior to restorative procedures. Timely periodontal
therapy can avoid unesthetic results such as undesired position of
the gingival margins. Healthy gingival tissues that frame the denti -
tion are crucial to maintain the oral health and to enhance
esthetics.
Baic Concept of the Periodontium
Relevant for Retorative Dentitry
The Gingiva
From an anatomic point of view, the gingiva represents the mastica -
tory mucosa that is bound to the teeth and covers th e alveolar
processes. he gingiva involves the alveolar crest, the interdental
bony septa, and part of the alveolar process to the mucogingival
junction in continuity to the lining alveolar mucosa.1
he gingiva is described as free, attached, and interdental gingiva,
with the free gingival groove and mucogingival junction as main
anatomical landmarks ( Fig. 11.1 ). he free gingiva is unattached
and often characterized by the sulcus depth. It can be distinguished
from the attached gingiva by the free gingival groove. he free
gingival groove is present in only about one third of the normal
gingiva with similar occurrence betw een diferent genders and
deciduous/permanent dentitions.2he attached gingiva is irmly attached to the periosteum of the
alveolar process. he attached gingiva is clinically characterized by
a irm and pink gingiva surrounding the dentition and separated
from the mucosa by the mucogingival junction. In a series of
radiographic studies, Ainamo and colleagues demonstrated the
relative stable position of the mucogingival junction over time and
suggested that the zone of attached gingiva increases with age due
to teeth and alveolar process eruption.3-5 he widest band of attached
gingiva is present on the buccal aspect of central and lateral incisors;
the narrowest band is present at the buccal area of canines and
irst premolars.
he interdental gingiva consists of the gingival tissues that ill
the embrasures below the interproximal contact points in anterior
teeth. In posterior teeth where the interproximal contact p oints
are broad, the interdental gingiva is formed from the buccal and
lingual papillae bridged by the col.
The Cementum
he cementum is an avascular, multiunit, mineralized connective
tissue with variable phenotypes (i.e., cellular, acellular, ibrillar,
aibrillar) and functions. he principal function of the cementum
is tooth anchorage ( Fig. 11.2 ). Due to its dynamic restorative
nature and adaptability, the cementum is important for the
maintenance of the occlusal relationships and for the integrity of
the root surface.6
The Alveolar Bone
he alveolar processes house the teeth and are composed of the
outer cortical plates of compact bone, the trabecular bone, and
the alveolar bone proper (the bundle bone around teeth)7 (see Fig.
11.2). he cortical plates are built from bony lamellae and are
thinner in the maxilla and thicker in the posterior mandible. he
alveolar bone proper is located adjacent to the periodontal
ligament.
The Periodontal Ligament
he periodontal ligament (PDL) occupies the space between the
cementum and the alveolar bone (see Fig. 11.2 ). he PDL is a
CHAPTER 11 Periodontology Applied to Operative Dentitry
most consistent dimension. he junctional epithelium was the
most variable area.13 Years later, Vacek and colleagues focused on
the implication of biologic width dimensions for restorative dentistry.
hey conducted another cadaveric study in pursuit of the minimum
biologic dimensions that can be tolerated by the tissues. he authors
conirmed the indings of the previous study in terms of the vari -
ability of the individual components. In addition, they recognized
that the biologic width was greater in posterior teeth and the
junctional epithelium was signiicantly longer in teeth with restora -
tions.14 he mean biologic width was found to be 1.91 mm, which
consisted of junctional epithelium (1.14 mm) and connective tissue
attachment (0.77 mm). he mean sulcus depth was found to be
1.32 mm ( ; see Fig. 11.3 ).
Violating the biologic width by placing restorative margins
within or apical to the junctional epithelium will lead to disturbance
of the biologic seal and penetration of bacteria and their by-products
leading to gingival inlammation, attachment loss, and recession
or pocket formation. In that event, the biologic width can only
be restored by apical reestablishment of the supracresta l connective
tissue.15
The Gingival Diplay
In a healthy smile, the lip rises to the level of or slightly apical to
the gingival margins of the maxillary anterior teeth, revealing 1
to 2 mm of gingiva. When more than 2 mm of gingival tissue is
shown upon smiling this is described as a “gummy smile” and
considered unesthetic. Diferent etiologic factors have be en described
in the literature for this excessive gingival display ( Fig. 11.4 ).16
Excessive gingival display has been associated with excessive
maxillary bone growth. In this case individuals may have longer
lower third facial height, shorter upper lips, and consequently multifunctional unit of connective tissue that contains numerous
cells, ibers, rich vasculature, and cellular components—osteoblasts,
osteoclasts, ibroblasts, epithelial rests of Malassez, odontoblasts,
cementoblasts, macrophages, and undiferentiated mesenchymal
cells. he extracellular matrix consists of collagen ibrils and other
noncollagenous proteins8 and pluripotent dynamic stem cells.9
From a functional point of view, the PDL participates in tooth
anchorage, bone tissue development and homeostasis, nutritionmetabolic circulation, and innervation.7 Its width varies from 0.15
to 0.4 mm and is adapted to functional demands within this narrow
range.8
The Biologic Width
he term biologic width, a genetically driven structure, refers to
the combined vertical dimension of the junctional epithelium and
the supraalveolar connective tissue ( Fig. 11.3 ). his dentogingival
complex acts as a seal around the cervical portion of the tooth
and has a self-restoration capacity. For instance, epithelial attachment
mechanically separated from the tooth surface during periodontal
probing or lossing reattaches to the original level in approximately
5 days.10 In health, the epithelial attachment terminates at the
apical end of the junctional epithelium. In diseased tissues, it
terminates at the coronal aspect of the connective tissue, or apical
to the junctional epithelium.11,12
Gargiulo and colleagues studied the dentogingival dimensions
in healthy human specimens using autopsy material from 30
subjects, completing measurements in a total of teeth. One
of their observations was that the epithelial–connective tissue
complex as a whole migrates apically during passive eruption.
Moreover, they noted that during the diferent phases of develop -
ment and passive eruption, the connective tissue zone had the
0*-
)**$*
)*
• Fig. 11.1 Free gingiva (FG) and attached gingiva (AG) are parts of the gingiva and limited by the
anatomical landmarks mucogingival junction (MGJ) and free gingival groove (FGG).
CHAPTER 11 Periodontology Applied to Operative Dentitry
results in excessive gingival display ( Fig. 11.5 ). Surgical intervention
is usually beneicial in individuals with thick, ibrotic, and non -
inlamed gingival tissue with a probing depth of 3 to 4 mm coronal
to the CEJ. To ascertain the type of surgical intervention needed,
the clinician is referred to the classiication and treatment recom -
mendations described by Coslet and colleagues.19 Considerations
in the decision between crown lengthening and gingivectomy are
described later in this chapter.
Challenge in Periodontal Health Afecting
Retorative Dentitry
Periodontal Dieae
Periodontitis is an immune-inlammatory infection of the toothsupporting structures and a major cause of tooth loss among adults. more eruption of the maxillary teeth. A multidisciplinary approach
including potentially combined orthodontic therapy and orthog -
nathic surgery is indicated to move the maxillary complex apically
and address this esthetic concern. Recently, surgical techniques
for lip repositioning have been described as alternatives to orthog -
nathic surgery.17,18 A comprehensive evaluation is always indicated
to avoid frustration with unexpected results.
Another etiologic factor for excessive gingival displ ay is the
delayed migration of the gingival margin commonly known as
altered passive eruption. As teeth erupt, the gingival margin migrates
apically to a level at or about 1 mm coronal to the cementoenamel
junction (CEJ). he failure of gingival tissues to move apically
$3&%%3/*
• Fig. 11.2 The periodontium surrounds and supports the teeth and is
composed of gingiva (G), periodontal ligament (PL), bundle bone (BB),
cementum (C), and alveolar process (AP).
2UDOVXOFXODU
HSLWKHOLXP
-XQFWLRQDO
HSLWKHOLXP(
&RQQHFWLYH
WLVVXH
%RQH2UDO
HSLWKHOLXP
• Fig. 11.3 The biologic width combines the vertical dimension of the
junctional epithelium and the supraalveolar connective tissue. The oral
sulcular epithelium lines the clinical gingival sulcus, which is occlusal to
the biological width. E, enamel.
Biologic Width Components and
Dimensions (mm and Range)
Gargiulo et al. Vacek & Gher
Sulcus 0.69 (0.61–1.76) 1.32 (0.26–6.03)
Junctional epithelium 0.97 (0.71–1.35) 1.14 (0.32–3.27)
Connective tissue 1.07 (1.06–1.08) 0.77 (0.29–1.84)
Biologic width 2.04 1.91
• Fig. 11.4 “Gummy smile” showing more than 2 mm of gingival tissue
during smile. (Courtesy Dr. Tony Crivello.)
CHAPTER 11 Periodontology Applied to Operative Dentitry
Furthermore, the decision to extract a tooth is subjective and may
depend on the preference and philosophy of the practitioner.
Nevertheless, studies have shown that patients in periodic main -
tenance therapy preserve more teeth than those who fail to
comply.23,24 Changes in attachment level and probing depth are
surrogate end points and are objective; however, the cutof point
determines the sensitivity of the parameters used. Longitudinal
studies indicate that patients in a periodic maintenance therapy
schedule may have less mean annual attachment loss than non -
compliant patients.25,26
Although maintenance therapy can be very efective in stabilizing
the progression of periodontal disease in most patients, a subset
of patients (2%–4%) and sites may sufer from progressive attach -
ment loss regardless of regular maintenance schedule.27,28 As
mentioned earlier, several risk factors such as smoking, stress, and
genetic background can inluence disease progression.29
Gingival Biotype
he gingival architecture depends on the type of gingival biotype.
Generally the periodontium has been described as having two
basic forms: a thick and lat biotype or a thin and scalloped
biotype.30,31 Each biotype has its own distinct characteristics and
the clinician must be mindful of these to achieve a stable dento -
gingival complex.
he thin and scalloped biotype frequently responds to gingival
inlammation with gingival recession and is usually associated with
tapered or triangular anatomic crown shapes with small interproxi -
mal contact areas ( Fig. 11.6 ). hin bone support with underlying
dehiscences and/or fenestrations is a common inding in individuals
with thin biotype. On the other hand, thick and lat biotype often
responds to gingival insults with deep pocket depth formation,
and it is usually associated with square anatomic crowns with
broad interproximal contact areas ( Fig. 11.7 ). he stability of the
bone crest and position of the free gingival margin are positively
correlated to the thickness of the alveolar bone and gingival tissue.
his was conirmed by Stetler and Bissada who showed that there
was less inlammation and shrinkage when subgingival restorations
were placed in individuals with thick gingival biotype.32
Furcation Involvement
he furcation forms with the presence of two or more roots in a
tooth and is therefore most common in molars. It is assumed that
furcations increase the surface area of teeth for periodontium
attachment and thus provide additional periodontal support. It has been recognized as one of the current most prevalent infectious
diseases, afecting nearly 50% of the American population.20
Associations with overall systemic conditions and numerous risk
factors or indicators such as diabetes, smoking, age, genetics,
immunosuppression, and obesity have been identiied as these may
increase the severity and distribution of periodontal disease.21
A healthy periodontium is important to achieve long-term
success with optimum comfort, function, and esthetics for any
restorative procedure. In the presence of active pe riodontal diseases,
such as gingivitis or periodontitis, periodontal therapy should be
performed prior to most restorative procedures in order to eliminate
and/or control the etiologic factors contributing to tissue damage.
Active periodontitis is diagnosed by clinical and radiographic
evaluations. It is characterized clinically by deep probing depths,
inflammation (bleeding on probing or visual bleeding), and
subgingival calculus. Radiographically, active perio dontitis is
characterized by alveolar bone loss. Signs of successful periodontal
therapy are the resolution of gingival inlammation, which can be
achieved with eicient oral hygiene habits and nonsurgical and/
or surgical periodontal therapy. Administration of antibiotics is
indicated in some situations.22
Similar to periodontitis, gingivitis is also diagnosed by gingival
inlammation characterized by edematous, spongy, and red gingiva.
Bleeding on probing is usually present as well. However, there
is no loss of the periodontal attachment often characterized by
radiographic bone loss. Diferent than periodontitis, gingivitis may
be controlled with adequate oral hygiene and adult prophylaxis
only. Periodontitis requires scaling and root planing to remove
subgingival plaque and calculus deposits. Severe cases may
require concomitant antibiotic therapy and periodontal surgery
to reestablish a healthy periodontium. A healthy periodontium is
important to establish a controlled and clean ield for restorative
procedures and to maintain the integrity and esthetics of restorative
treatments.
The Importance of Maintenance Therapy
he end of active periodontal treatment, nonsurgical or surgical,
is not the end of periodontal therapy. Only maintenance therapy
can secure the long-term success of periodontal treatment. he
efect of maintenance therapy is evident when comparing tooth
loss, amount of bone loss, changes in attachment level and probing
depth, tooth mobility, and the progression of furcation involvement
between patients with and without regular maintenance visits. It
should be noted that tooth loss, while being the ultimate end
point, may occur for reasons other than periodontal disease.
• Fig. 11.5 Example of altered passive eruption where the gingival
margin failed to move apically and closer to the cementoenamel junction,
resulting in excessive gingival display. (Courtesy Dr. André Ritter.)
• Fig. 11.6 Thin and scalloped biotype often shows transparency within
the clinical gingival sulcus when a periodontal probe is inserted. It is often
associated with tapered or triangular anatomic crown shapes with small
interproximal contact areas.
CHAPTER 11 Periodontology Applied to Operative Dentitry
• Fig. 11.7 Thick and lat biotype often shows more pronounced
“orange peel” surface characteristics of the attached gingiva. It is often
associated with square anatomic crowns with broad interproximal contact
areas.
&ODVV, &ODVV,, &ODVV,,,
• Fig. 11.8 Furcation involvement classiied into three different grades or Classes by Hamp. Usually the
furcation is examined with a speciic probe such as the Nabers probe. The probe is placed against the
tooth and moved in an apical direction as to try to ind the entrance of the furcations. However, this unique structure also renders neighboring periodon -
tium more susceptible to destruction.
Exposure of the furcation with its involvement may occur as a
result of bone loss during progression of periodontal disease or of
surgical treatment as part of the restorative therapy. he diagnosis
of furcation involvement is crucial because it is related to tooth
prognosis. he degree of furcation involvement dictates the treatment
for the tooth, as there is an association between t he severity of
furcation involvement and tooth longevity.33 For proper diagnosis,
thorough clinical and radiographic examinations must occur. Usually
the furcation is examined with a speciic probe such as the Nabers
probe ( Fig. 11.8 ), a 12-mm curved probe with 3-mm markings.
Placing the tip of the Nabers probe against the tooth and moving
it in an apical direction aids in detection of furcation involvement.
he depression of the furca may also be examined in a similar
manner.
Unfortunately, even though special care is taken during clinical
examinations, furcation involvement, especially in maxillary molars,
is diicult to detect. he assessment of furcation areas tends to be
inaccurate because of great variations in root anatomy. It is further
complicated by limited access due to adjacent teeth or soft tissue
coverage. Radiographs provide an essential aid to clinical examina -
tions; however, there are also limitations associated with the diagnosis
of furcation involvement using radiographic images. he inherent
two-dimensional presentation of conventional radiographic images
limits the recognition of furcations.
T reatment options for furcation-involved teeth are generally
based on the nature and extent of the furcation involvement. In
general, treatment modalities are selected based on the classiication of the furcation involvement. Several classiication systems have
been designed to determine the severity of furcation-involved teeth.
he most commonly used is the Hamp classiication. It classiies
furcation involvement into three diferent grades:
• Grade I: horizontal penetration of the Nabers probe less than
3 mm
• Grade II: horizontal penetration of the Nabers probe more than
3 mm, but not through the furcation
• Grade III: through penetration of the Nabers probe from buccal
to lingual34 (Fig. 11.9 ).
Other factors, such as size and divergence of roots, root trunk
length, crown-root ratio, and volume of remaining bone, are also
important. Grade I furcation is generally treated with scaling and
root planing. A clinical study evaluated the eicacy of scaling and
root planing in Grade I furcation involvement and showed a %
survival rate during a 5-year evaluation series.34 Open lap debride -
ment and furcation plasty may be indicated in some situations
where prosthetic treatment is needed. Grades II and III furcations
are also treated initially with scaling and root planing. However,
the need for surgical treatment, such as open lap debridement or
guided tissue regeneration, may be indicated to improve tooth
prognosis. An investigation on the efects of nonsurgical treatment
on periodontally involved teeth with furcation involvement showed
a 90.7% survival rate during a 5to 12-year period. Out of the
failures, 60% were on teeth with Grade III furcation and 30% on
teeth with Grade II furcation. hat demonstrates the limitations
of nonsurgical therapy to treat severe furcation involvement.35 A
retrospective study looking at the long-term survival of maxillary
furcation-involved teeth in patients who had received treatment
and were on maintenance showed decent prognosis with only 12%
of involved molars being lost in 24 years.33
Open Proximal Contact
Interestingly, open proximal contacts do not have a direct efect
on periodontal disease progression despite its reported indirect
impact on the periodontium. In , Hancock and colleagues
analyzed 40 males with open proximal contacts betwe en their
teeth and could not demonstrate a signiicant correlation between
open contacts, gingival inlammation, and deep probing depths.
On the other hand, open contacts were signiicantly related to
food impaction, which demonstrated a signiicant correlation with
higher gingival inlammation and deeper probing depths.36 Jernberg
and collaborators reported similar indings in regard to gingival
inlammation and pocket depths. In their study, however, open
proximal contacts demonstrated direct efect on the development
CHAPTER 11 Periodontology Applied to Operative Dentitry
• Grade 1: Short but distinct change in the contour of CEJ
extending toward the furcation
• Grade 2: CEP approaches the furcation, without making contact
with it
• Grade 3: CEP extends into the furcation
Considering CEPs are a contributory factor to periodontal
disease, especially in furcation areas, its removal or at least reduction
is indicated. However, this should be done carefully to avoid
irreversible damage to the tooth.
Cemental Tear
he cemental tear is a fragment of cementum that detaches from
the tooth, usually after trauma, causing isolated bone loss (vertical
bone defects) ( Fig. 11.11 ). It should be taken into consideration
as a diferential diagnosis for root fracture. Due to its low incidence,
most studies available are case reports. T reatment involves surgical
debridement, removal of the cementum fragment, and periodontal
regeneration, if indicated. Several case reports dem onstrate that
the area can be successfully maintained after surgical
treatment.44,45of periodontal disease. A total of adults were evaluated and
open proximal contacts were found to be signiicantly correlated
with deeper probing depths and higher clinical attachment loss.37
To reduce the inluence of open proximal contacts, it is appropri -
ate to restore (close) them as long as overhangs are not created.
Adequate oral hygiene instructions should always be part of the
therapy.
Enamel Pearl
Enamel pearls are ectopic globules of enamel adherent to the tooth
found most often in furcation regions of maxillary second and
third molars.38 hey consist primarily of enamel, but dentin and
even pulpal tissues can be found in some cases. he mean occurrence
of enamel pearls in humans is 2.9% with a high occurrence of
9.7% among the Eskimo population.38 Ectopic enamel such as
enamel pearl is highly associated with attachment loss39 and its
removal is therefore indicated. Histologic observations demonstrate
that enamel pearls have most of the structural features of enamel
but with less orderly organization.40 Its development is not well
understood.
Cervical Enamel Projection
Cervical enamel projections (CEPs) are ectopic deposits of
enamel apical to the CEJ with a tapering form and extending
toward or entering the furcation. Since connective tissue does
not attach to enamel, CEPs have been demonstrated to be an
etiologic factor in furcation defects ( Fig. 11.10 ). Bissada and
Abdelmalek analyzed molars in Egyptian skulls and showed
that CEPs were present in 8.6% of the cases. CEPs were present in
approximately 50% of the cases where the furcation was involved.41
he authors reported that CEPs were more frequently present in
mandibular second molars followed by maxillary second molars.
In another study CEPs were present in 67.9% of the studied
population (45.2% molars). Molars with furcation involvement
had CEPs in 82.5% of the cases, whereas molars without furcation
involvement had CEPs in 17.5% of the cases. he most afected
tooth was the mandibular irst molar followed by the maxillary
irst molar.42
he impact of CEPs on periodontal health depends on the
extent of the projection. In Masters and Hoski ns introduced
a classiication system for CEPs, which is still in use43:
F0 F1 F2 F3
AB CD
• Fig. 11.9 A, F0 indicates no furcation penetration with the Nabers probe. B, F1 grade or Class I
indicates horizontal penetration of the Nabers probe up to 3 mm. C, F2 grade or Class II indicates hori -
zontal penetration of the Nabers probe more than 3 mm, but not through the furcation. D, F3 grade or
Class III indicates through penetration of the Nabers probe from buccal to lingual.
• Fig. 11.10 Cervical enamel projection present on the furcation of a
mandibular molar. Note the furcation defect caused by lack of connective
tissue attachment to the apically located enamel leading to increased
bacterial colonization and apical migration in the furcation. (Courtesy Dr.
Tony Crivello.)
CHAPTER 11 Periodontology Applied to Operative Dentitry
Tooth Poition
Various parameters of tooth malposition have been correlated with
periodontal disease.48 he main inluence of tooth malposition is
the efect on plaque accumulation due to more diicult hygiene
around malpositioned teeth. However, when oral hygiene is properly
done, tooth malposition is not a signiicant factor causing plaque
accumulation and consequent gingival inlammation.49
Occluion
he role of traumatic occlusion in periodontal disease is extremely
controversial. Consensus exists, however, that traumatic occlusion
is not an initiating factor but can act as a contributory factor for
periodontal disease. Nunn and Harrel evaluated the efects of
traumatic occlusion on periodontal disease and concluded that Palatoradicular Groove
he radicular or palatal groove is a developmental anomaly in
which an infolding of the inner enamel epithelium and Hertwig
epithelial root sheath create a groove that passes from the cingulum
of maxillary incisors apically onto the root.46 Palatal grooves may
act as funnels, which facilitate the accumulation of bioilm in the
depth of the groove. he area is inaccessible to both patients and
clinicians, and the prognosis for involved teeth, with diagnosed
bone loss around the area, is poor. Hou and Tsai evaluated
maxillary incisors and reported that the palatal groove was present
in 30.2% of lateral incisors, 5.9% of central incisors, and 4% of
both maxillary incisors.47 When indicated, treatment consists of
odontoplasty to remove or reduce the groove. When odontoplasty
is not possible, the groove may be restored with a biologically
acceptable restorative material (see Materials, later in this chapter ).
E
D
C
B
A
• Fig. 11.11 Clinical case showing cemental tear (A) preoperatively, (B) upon surgical exposure, and
(C) fractured cement. The mesiofacial root area on tooth No. 9 after removal of cemental tear is shown
in D. Radiographic diagnosis may not always be possible (E). (Courtesy Dr. David Semeniuk.)
CHAPTER 11 Periodontology Applied to Operative Dentitry
aim for a 5-mm distance from bone to the restorative margin when
possible.56 he challenge is that periodontists have a tendency to
remove less bone than needed due to the nature of their specialty
(i.e., preservation of the periodontium).57 hus aiming for 5 mm
will direct the surgeon to achieve the necessary removal of the
minimum 3 mm. Other authors have also discussed that individual
variations in biologic width dimensions will be accounted for if
more than 3-mm distance is ensured after surgery.58 Several studies
have reported that subgingival margins of restorations, even without
overhangs, have more plaque accumulation, gingival inlammation,
and development of periodontal pockets than supragingival ones.59,60
In a 26-year prospective cohort, Schatzle and colleagues showed
a 0.5-mm increased mean loss of attachment in patients with
restorations with subgingival margins after 10 years of
function.61
It is important to remember that the periodontium biotype
plays a key role in the periodontal response. Normally if the
periodontium is thin and scalloped, recession will follow the
inflammatory process caused by the restoration margin. If
the periodontium is thick and lat and thus soft tissue stability is
more likely, there is a higher likelihood of a moatl ike lesion around
the tooth to appear on the alveolar bone, leading to increased
bleeding, sensitivity on probing, and pocket formation.53,62 Timely
recommendation of crown lengthening to avoid such issues is a
crucial step toward tissue health, predictable esthetics, and patient
satisfaction.
here are situations, however, where clinical crown lengthening
may not be indicated and alternative treatment options should be
explored. hese include limitations caused by position of the furca -
tion, reduced attachment levels, and esthetic issues. For instance,
a tooth with a short trunk may limit the amount of crown
lengthening that can be performed as the procedure could expose
the furcation and compromise tooth prognosis ( Fig. 11.12 ). In
that event, avoiding violation of biologic width may not be possible
and the surgical procedure may not be performed or may be only
partially performed, leading to a compromised restorative treatment.
In general, all subgingival margins compromise and impact the
periodontium. Herrero and colleagues found that in areas of diicult
access such as the lingual and distolingual surfaces of molars,
surgeons removed an average of 0.4 mm of bone short of the
3-mm goal. A higher degree of inlammation leading to bone loss
is expected in these areas since proper crown lengthening was not
performed.57
Another common scenario where biologic width is violated and
diicult to manage is crown fractures extending below the gingival
margin. Crown lengthening is often necessary for proper restoration
of fractured teeth ( Fig. 11.13 ). In the case of fracture of anterior
teeth, crown lengthening surgery will signiicantly impact the tooth
clinical and consequently esthetic display (as well as of the adjacent
teeth) due to the removal of bone and subsequent apical reposition -
ing of the gingival margin ( Fig. 11.14 ). here are situations where
orthodontic extrusion is indicated to minimally afect the gingival
margin levels in the anterior sextant or esthetic area. Crown
lengthening may follow the orthodontic extrusion. Camargo in
stated that forced tooth eruption via orthodontic extrusion
is the technique of choice when clinical crown lengthening is
necessary on isolated teeth in the esthetic zone.63
For optimal outcome, proper healing of the periodontal tissues
after crown lengthening is necessary. he type of periodontium
(thick and lat versus thin and scalloped) and the l ocation (anterior
versus posterior) generally dictate the extent of healing time. Direct
restorations can be made as soon as there is initial tissue shrinkage occlusal discrepancy is an independent risk factor for periodontal
disease.50 Records from 24 years showed that teeth with initial
occlusal discrepancies demonstrate signiicantly worse prognosis,
and deeper probing depths and mobility. T rauma from occlusion
has also been linked to higher risk for furcation involvement.51
Based on the evidence suggesting that traumatic occlusion may
inluence the course of periodontal disease, minor occlusal adjust -
ments with the purpose of achieving better periodontal treatment
outcomes are recommended.52
Periodontal Procedure Relevant to
Retorative Dentitry
Crown Lengthening
A healthy periodontium is important to achieve long-term success
and optimum comfort, function, and esthetics for any restorative
procedure. As mentioned earlier, the relationship between restora -
tions and periodontium must be respected for a successful treatment
outcome. Even if gingivitis or periodontitis are not present, one
should not proceed with restorative treatment without further
consideration of the future relationship between restoration and
supporting tissues. In this regard, biologic width preservation is
critical.
When violation of the biologic width—namely placement of
the restorative margin beyond the gingival sulcus and invading
the junctional epithelium and connective tissue boundaries—is
anticipated, crown lengthening of the tooth in question needs to
be performed so the margin of the restoration is coronal to these
biologic structures. As previously described, the mean depth of
the sulcus is 1.32 mm; thus placing a restoration beyond 1 mm
into the sulcus is potentially disruptive of the biologic width.
Crown lengthening is deined as the removal of bone tissue
with concomitant removal or repositioning of the soft tissue around
the tooth. he goal of this therapy is to increase the clinical crown
and consequently preserve the biologic width. Typically, crown
lengthening is needed to avoid impingement of the biologic width
often occurring due to presence of subgingival caries or deep
restorative margins. he procedure may also be recommended to
correct esthetic unpleasant situations such as a “gummy smile.”
Failing to recognize the need for crown lengthening prior to
restorative procedures often leads to invasion of biologic wi dth
leading to inlammation (gingivitis) and bone loss ( periodontitis),
pain associated with inlammatory remodeling of the periodontium,
local soft and hard tissue defects, compromised esthetics, and
problematic retention of restoration in some instances.
Padbury and colleagues suggested that the biologic width is
preserved when the restoration is placed allowing for approximately
2 mm for the connective tissue and junctional epithelium and
1 mm for the sulcus. Further, ideally an additional 0.5 to 1 mm
should be added coronally to create a safe distance from the alveolar
bone crest to the restorative margin. A 3to 4-mm distance from
gingival margin to the alveolar crest ensures periodontium healing
after tooth preparation with quick reestablishment of the junctional
epithelium and connective tissue integrity, which avoids continuous
inlammation around the tooth.53,54
Current research and clinical observations show that there is
variation in biologic width measurements among individuals and
teeth, and that the 3-mm distance is the minimum necessary to
avoid periodontal breakdown around subgingival restorative
margins.55 Wagenberg and colleagues, in fact, have suggested to
CHAPTER 11 Periodontology Applied to Operative Dentitry
gingiva tends to bulk postoperatively prior to moving coronally
and latten as maturation occurs in the irst 6 to 8 weeks. Further
lattening may continue to occur beyond the initial maturation
phase. In a thin and scalloped periodontium, there is usually
recession immediately after surgery and in some cases “creeping
attachment” occurs in the months after initial maturation. One
study demonstrated that probing depths stabilized at 6 weeks but if the margin is supragingival and hemostasis/trauma to the tissue
is not anticipated. For indirect full-coverage restorations, clinical
studies indicate that the clinician should wait approximately 6 to
8 weeks before proceeding with inal preparation and impression
in posterior teeth.64 In anterior esthetic cases, the periodontal
biotype needs to be taken into consideration before proceeding
with restorative treatment. In a thick and lat periodontium, the
C
B
A
• Fig. 11.12 A, Tooth No. 30 with secondary caries on the mesial
surface leading to invasion of biologic width (beyond the clinical gingival
sulcus). Note that tooth No. 29 has a restoration with deep and open
margin violating the biologic width on the distal surface. B, After compro -
mised crown lengthening surgery and crown replacement. To avoid furca -
tion exposure (note the short trunk of tooth No. 30), the amount of crown
lengthening was limited. C, Another clinical case showing an example of
a long trunk on teeth No. 30 and No. 31, which would allow for a non -
compromised crown lengthening surgery since furcation would likely not
be at a risk of exposure.
B
A
• Fig. 11.13 A, Endodontically treated bicuspid presents with a large
coronal subgingival fracture. B, Poor crown–root ratio can be appreciated
indicating that crown lengthening would not be recommended on this
tooth to expose the fractured surface for restoration. Extraction was
recommended.
• Fig. 11.14 Fractured anterior tooth No. 7. Esthetics must be carefully
considered when treatment planning the restoration of anterior fractured
teeth. Crown lengthening may compromise the esthetic outcome and be
contraindicated. (Courtesy Dr. Eduard Epure.)
CHAPTER 11 Periodontology Applied to Operative Dentitry
months, the periodontium and bone remodel on the site, moving
away from the fracture margin, creating a bony ledge and a crater
(moatlike defect) around the tooth. he area is likely to stay inlamed
and become uncomfortable for the patient if not corrected.
Inadequate Retention
Extensively compromised teeth due to extensive fractures and/or
caries lesions often need to be altered prior to inal restoration.
When there is a need to create a ferrule in a tooth that will receive
a post-and-core restoration, crown lengthening may be needed to
facilitate its placement without violation of the biologic width and
adequate retention form. here is an overall consensus that 1.5 to
2 mm of ferrule is necessary for adequate retention of crowns and
protection of the integrity of the remaining tooth structures. Crown
lengthening may not be necessary if adequate ferrule can be achieved
without violation of the biologic width. However, addit ional
retention may be necessary; otherwise gingivectomy may be per -
formed to temporarily remove gingival tissue.68
Gegauf highlighted that an attempt to gain adequate ferrule
via crown lengthening procedure can negatively afect the tooth
mechanical properties.69 he apical relocation of the crown margin
after crown lengthening procedures leads to a thinner cross section
in the ferrule area. Further, there is a reduction in the crown-to-root recession ranging from 2 to 4 mm continued to develop between
6 and 24 weeks.65 hus, in areas of esthetic concern, postponing
inal margin placement and restoration for 6 to 8 months may be
desirable to ensure gingival margin stability. To better predict results,
an accurate diagnosis of thick versus thin biotype should be done.66
Finally it is important to be knowledgeable of situations where
crown lengthening is not indicated. Besides the previously men -
tioned risk of exposing furcation and causing esthe tic issues in the
anterior dentition, other limitations/contraindications are teeth
with signiicantly reduced periodontal support; endodontically
infected teeth that should not be treated prior to resolution of the
periapical lesion; extensive need for osseous removal, which would
compromise the stability of adjacent teeth; and inadequate crownto-root ratio after surgery.
Gingivectomy
Unlike crown lengthening, gingivectomy does not involve hard
tissue but rather just gingival excess removal to expose the clinical
crown. For a successful gingivectomy procedure, careful treatment
planning after detailed examination is crucial. Diagnosis and
management of the etiology are critical for a positive outcome. In
the case of gingival overgrowth, the soft tissue should not rebound
provided the etiology for overgrowth is addressed (e.g., triggering
medications, local trauma) and good oral hygiene is exercised.
Plaque control is critical for overgrowth control in cases involving
drugs that may stimulate tissue reaction and where medication
replacement is not possible.67 In the case of altered passive eruption,
where there is excess of soft tissue due to altered apical migration
of the gingiva, the tissue removed does not regrow provided absence
of coronal positioning of the bone. When gingival tissue is removed
to expose the clinical crown but the removal alters the dimension
of the sulcus and junctional epithelium, the tissue regrows to
establish at least approximately 1 mm of junctional epithelium
and 1 mm of sulcus. However, this can be afected by genetically
predetermined dimensions. Crown lengthening would be indicated
to remove the bone and reposition the gingival margin apically.
Some of the clinical scenarios to consider gingivectomy versus
crown lengthening are (1) subgingival caries/access for proper
restoration, (2) tooth fracture, (3) inadequate retention, (4) altered
passive eruption, and (5) other esthetic concerns such as gingival
overgrowth or defects.
Subgingival Caries/Access for Proper Restoration
When subgingival caries present, at least 3 mm of sound tooth
structure are needed from the margin of the inal cavity preparation
(not the caries lesion) to the alveolar bone crest ( Fig. 11.15 );
otherwise crown lengthening is recommended. It is important to
emphasize that open lap and bone contour correction is warranted
if periodontal breakdown with evidence of osseous defect due to
caries impinging the biologic width is present.
Tooth Fracture
Crown lengthening is almost always necessary for subgingival
crown-root fractures, to avoid continuous periodontal breakdown
in the site. Subgingival fractures are normally already afecting
biologic width considering their presentation. In the unusual situ -
ations where the biologic width is adequate after a subgingival
fracture, it is very likely that crown lengthening will be necessary
after tooth preparation for a crown, for instance, because the crown
preparation is often placed more apically to where the fracture
happened. When the fracture is not treated for several weeks or
B
A
• Fig. 11.15 A, Subgingival caries on teeth No. 6, No. 28, and No. 29.
Ideally the cavitated areas need to be exposed surgically to allow for
proper restoration. Further, a 3-mm distance for biologic width establish -
ment is needed from the margin of the tooth preparation to the alveolar
bone crest to promote best tissue health. B, Tooth No. 6 with caries
excavated, immediately after crown lengthening procedure. (Courtesy Dr.
Bruno Herrera.)
CHAPTER 11 Periodontology Applied to Operative Dentitry
CEJ to the alveolar crest, there is enough keratinized tissue, and
there is no evidence of bone defect (see Fig. 11.16B and C ). he
location of the bone in relationship to the CEJ and the mucogingival
junction are important parameters in treatment of altered passive
eruption. hey can be determined with bone sounding and clinical
and radiograph examination. Gingivectomy is not advised when
the band of keratinized tissue is insuicient ( <3 mm).
Dital Wedge
Distal wedge is commonly performed on the distal surface of
molars (tuberosity or the retromolar pad) to facilitate hygiene,
access and help eliminate periodontal pockets, or facilitate access
for proper restorative treatment ( Fig. 11.17 ). he procedure is
either complete removal of the tissue (if there is abundant amount
of keratinized tissue even after removal) or partial ablation of tissue
(to spare keratinized tissue). In any case, after tissue removal, soft
tissue coverage of the bone and more coronal tooth exposure is
achieved. A direct restoration can be performed immediately after
the surgical procedure provided adequate operating ield isolation
is achieved.
Noncariou Cervical Leion and
Mucogingival Surgery
Noncarious cervical lesions (NCCLs) are characterized by the loss
of tooth structure at the cervical area of a tooth due to abfraction,
abrasion, and/or erosion ( Fig. 11.18 ). hese lesions are noncarious
but may need to be managed provided one or more of these factors
are present: (1) he patient is concerned with esthetics, (2) there
is substantial tooth sensitivity that does not resolve with other
treatment options (i.e., desensitizing agents), (3) the lesion is
progressing and there is risk of pulpal exposure, or (4) the lesion
is progressing and the tooth integrity is at risk.
To deliver the best possible treatment preserving the natural
contour and integrity of the gingival tissues around the afected
tooth or teeth, options other than restoration only are available
and should be considered. In the event of gingival recession and/
or lack of keratinized/attached gingiva with concomitant presence
of a NCCL, careful evaluation of the site should be performed to ratio that also may negatively afect the outcome of the treatment.
Orthodontic extrusion may be another option to expose tooth
structure in some clinical situations of inadequate retention. Yet
crown-to-root ratio and apical location of the ferrule also will
occur in orthodontic extrusion.
Altered Passive Eruption
Crown lengthening or gingivectomy can also be indicated for
esthetic reasons only or before restoring a tooth that has altered
passive eruption. Altered passive eruption is the diagnosis when a
signiicant amount of anatomic crown is covered by gingiva due
to failure of proper apical migration of the soft tissue that covers
the crown of the tooth. Often the patient displays a gummy smile
with squared-looking teeth ( Fig. 11.16A ).70 his condition afects
esthetics and also increases plaque accumulation as the sulcus depth
promotes easy apical plaque migration.71 Gingivectomy may be
performed when there is a distance of more than 3 mm from the
C
B
A
• Fig. 11.16 Altered passive eruption often results in a lat gingival
contour and squared-shaped anterior teeth (A) or uneven gingival con -
tours such as the case in B, where discrepancies can be noted between
teeth No. 7 and No. 10, and teeth No. 8 and No. 9. Case (B) with gingival
discrepancy corrected by gingivectomy (C). (A, Courtesy Dr. André Ritter;
B, C, Photo credit: Dr. Akshay Kumarswamy, Mumbai, India.)
• Fig. 11.17 Tooth No. 2 with ill-itting amalgam restoration at the sub -
gingival distal margin. Distal wedge should have been performed prior to
restoration to facilitate access for proper restorative treatment.
CHAPTER 11 Periodontology Applied to Operative Dentitry
determine the appropriate treatment: restoration, soft tissue coverage
(graft), or a combined approach.
Predictable soft tissue root coverage of recessions with subcutane -
ous connective tissue graft can be accomplished with recessions
that fall under the Miller classiication of Class I and Class II.72
he Miller classiication has been widely used to classify recessions
based on the amount of tissue loss in relationship to the muco -
gingival junction, width of the tissue loss around the facial or
lingual aspect of the tooth, and loss of soft and hard interproximal
tissue73 (Fig. 11.19 ):
• Class I: Marginal tissue recession that does not extend to the
mucogingival junction. here is no periodontal loss (bone or
soft tissue) in the interdental area, and % root coverage can
be anticipated.
• Class II: Marginal tissue recession that extends to or beyond
the mucogingival junction. here is no loss of interdental bone
or soft tissue, and % of root coverage can be expected.
• Fig. 11.18 Noncarious cervical lesions are characterized by the loss
of tooth structure at the cervical area of a tooth and multifactorial etiology.
Treatment may involve soft tissue grafting of the area depending on extent
of lesion and periodontal condition with or without concomitant tooth
restoration.
0*- 0*-
0*- 0*-&ODVV, &ODVV,,
&ODVV,,, &ODVV,9
• Fig. 11.19 Miller classiication of gingival recessions. Class I: recession does not extend to the muco -
gingival junction (MGJ). Class II: recession extends to or beyond the MGJ; % of root coverage can
be expected for Class I and II. Class III: recession extends to or beyond the MGJ with loss of interdental
tissue or there is malpositioning leading to inability to cover % of the root surface. Class IV: recession
extends to or beyond the MGJ where there is advanced loss of interdental tissues and root coverage is
not anticipated.
CHAPTER 11 Periodontology Applied to Operative Dentitry
attached gingiva band may be necessary to avoid gingival recession.79
his is particularly signiicant for patients with thin periodontium.
Despite this, teeth should always be moved inside of their alveolar
housing to minimize chances of recession. Recessions cannot be
predictably covered when the position of the tooth in the arch is
far outside the alveolar plate. Soft tissue grafting may be of diferent
types and have diferent indications such as free gingival graft,
connective tissue graft, pedicle lap, among others.
Efect of Retorative Treatment on the
Periodontium
In the previous section we reviewed the impact and indications
of surgical procedures in restorative dentistry such as crown
lengthening, gingivectomy, distal wedge, and mucogingival surgery.
Often these procedures are crucial prior to proper restorative
treatment. Conversely, it is also important to understand the impact
of restorative procedures on periodontal health to prevent peri -
odontal breakdown. It is critically important to understand the
possible efects of restorative therapy (e.g., biologic width violation,
materials, margins of restorations, provisional restorations, retraction
cord trauma) on the periodontium.
Biologic Width Violation
Much has already been discussed in this chapter abo ut the impor -
tance of biologic width preservation. Violation of the biologic
width is often a result of caries removal and consequent preparation
of the tooth for direct or indirect restorations leading to damage
of the junctional epithelium and the connective tissue above the
alveolar crest. he contact of the restoration margin with the
junctional epithelium or the connective tissue below the gingival
sulcus allows for bacterial colonization of the area. Recruitment
of inlammatory cells and chronic inlammation of the site follow.55
While polishing of the restoration may alleviate plaque accumulation
and inlammation, there is extensive evidence of inlammation
leading to bone resorption in sites with biologic width violation.
he inlammatory process is usually aggravated with indirect restora -
tions as the marginal gap of a well-itted crown is normally larger
than that of a direct restoration. Sorensen and colleagues reported
on marginal it in relation to percentage bone loss and gingival
low and found positive correlation between marginal discrepancy
of restorations and periodontal defects.80 In summary, proper
placement of the margin of the restoration (direct or indirect) in
respect of the biologic width is critical.
Material
Besides careful placement of restorations to avoid marginal over -
hangs, voids, and rough restorations in close proximity to the
periodontium, biocompatible materials should be favored.
Mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA) appears to have a signiicant
improved tissue response and bone formation compared to com -
posite resins, amalgams, and glass ionomers.81 he common response
from other materials is the formation of ibrous connective tissue
that will connect them to the alveolar bone. Despite this, MTA
is not the material of choice for situations where the material is
close to the gingiva, as it does not have the mechanical properties
required to sustain occlusal stresses.82 Further, a coronal restoration
in contact with soft tissues would not need to promote bone
growth but rather a healthy soft tissue response.• Class III: Recession that extends to or beyond the mucogingival
junction. here is loss of interdental bone and/or soft tissue or
there is malpositioning of the teeth leading to inability to cover
% of the root surface.
• Class IV: Marginal tissue recession that extends to or beyond
the mucogingival junction where there is advanced loss of
interdental tissues and root coverage is not anticipated.
After gingival grafting, full root coverage can usually be expected
up to the level of the interdental bone. However, soft tissue coverage
of a cervical lesion that is located mostly in enamel is not recom -
mended.74 Indeed, no true tissue–tooth attachment is expected to
happen between the grafted soft tissue and the tooth enamel to
help stabilize the graft. Further, such location is typically at a far
distance from the bone, which restricts vascular supply to support
the grafted tissue in that area. Clinical researchers have reported
that NCCLs, just like interdental tissue loss, are a signiicant negative
factor in the prognosis of gingival root coverage.75 he authors
did not elaborate on the possible reason. It is possible that occlusion
and hygiene factors are involved in the lower success of grafting
of NCCLs.
he following rationale is followed when treating a NCCL.
Lesions that exceed approximately 2 mm in axial depth typically
need restoration. his will depend on progression rate, symptomatol -
ogy, and desire to restore. Aside from diagnosing and treating the
etiology, fast-developing lesions should be restore d. Restoration
also may be indicated for NCCLs that continue symptomatic after
attempts to reduce sensitivity with desensitizing products. Soft
tissue grafting in addition to restoration may be recommended
when there is lack of attached gingiva or a thin tissue biotype.74
Grafting only is indicated in cases of limited tooth loss (lesion
depth <2 mm). hat is based on the need for grafting due to
recession or lack of keratinized/attached gingiva. While Miller
Class I and Class II cases have good prognosis, the long-term stability
has been questioned.75 hat said, the patient may opt for periodic
application of desensitizing products in lieu of the surgical proce -
dure. A randomized clinical trial evaluating the outcome of con -
nective tissue graft and resin-modiied glass ionomer restorations
for the treatment of gingival recession and NCCLs concluded that
graft alone or graft with restoration showed increased attachment
level and soft tissue coverage for up to 2 years in patients with
Miller Class I recessions.76
When considering mucogingival surgery, the keratinized tissue
and attached gingiva levels must be evaluated. here is a diference
between attached and keratinized gingiva. Keratinized gingiva
involves the attached and the free gingival tissue. Since the attached
gingiva is bound to the underlying periosteum, the clear presence
of keratinized gingiva is seen as protective of the periodontium
against inlammation and bone loss. Recommendations have been
made to increase the band of keratinized/attached gingiva prior
to subgingival restorations that will be in close proximity with the
gingival margin (or subgingivally after grafting). he presence of
a narrow keratinized tissue band (i.e., less than 2 mm) has been
linked to an increased chance of gingivitis.32 However, others have
found that gingival health can be maintained with little or no
keratinized tissue in the absence of plaque accumulation and
inlammation.77,78 Soft tissue grafting to increase the band of
keratinized/attached gingiva may be recommended in patients
with poor hygiene and restorations in close proximity to the gingival
tissues.
Another indication for mucogingival surgery includes teeth
that lack adequate band of keratinized/attached gingiva and that
will undergo orthodontic therapy. Increasing of the keratinized/
CHAPTER 11 Periodontology Applied to Operative Dentitry
compared to Ketac Fil (3M Oral Care, St. Paul, MN) and IRM
(Dentsply Sirona, York, PA).90
Gupta and colleagues showed that Geristore had superior
biocompatibility compared to MTA and glass ionomer when tested
on human periodontal ligament cells.89 A clinical study by Dragoo
showed that Geristore was not diferent in terms of probing depth
and gingival inlammation than other resin-based materials such
as Dyract (Dentsply Sirona) and Photac Fil (3M Oral Care).92 It
was concluded that a material with biocompatibility, dual-cure
capability, insolubility in oral luids, low coeicient of thermal
expansion, low polymerization shrinkage, and low mi croleakage
is ideal for subgingival restorations. Such properties are found in
Geristore, which appears to be the preferred material among clini -
cians for cases where teeth are in need of subgingival restorations93
(Fig. 11.20 ).
Proviional Retoration and
Retorative Margin
he margins of indirect restorations are often placed subgingivally
for esthetic purposes, to provide preparation margin in tooth
structure rather than in restorative material (restorative foundation),
or for additional retention. However, even when placed at gingival Gomes and colleagues reported that the periodontal response
to resin-modiied glass ionomers was more favorable than the
response to amalgam and composite resins in an animal study
after days.83 In another more recent study, Sakallioglu and
colleagues studied the release of inlammatory markers in gingival
crevicular luid in humans after restorations with metaloceramic,
composite resin, and amalgam restorations. Results showed a
signiicant increase in certain inlammatory peptides compared to
controls (enamel surface) for all groups with amalgam showing
the highest levels after 4 weeks.84
Known for its biocompatibility, Geristore (DenMat, Lompoc,
CA) is a dual-cure, hydrophilic resin-modiied glass ionomer often
recommended when the periodontium is extensively involved. Its
manufacturer recommends it as liner, in direct pulp capping, in
Class V and conservative Class I and Class II restorations, in root
caries lesions, in subgingival restorations for fractured roots and
resorption lesions, in root perforations, and as re trograde illing
material. Research has shown that Geristore has better or similar
adhesion to tooth structures than some of the other glass ionomers
and presents low microleakage.85-88 Its biocompatibility has been
extensively studied with mostly positive results being reported.89-91
Geristore has shown to allow for better growth and cell morphology,
and has improved toxicity proile of human gingival ibroblasts
C
B
A
• Fig. 11.20 A, Cervical caries lesion on teeth No. 26
and No. 27. B, The lesions exposed and restored with
Geristore. C, Two-month follow-up with excellent tissue
health. (Courtesy Dr. Luis Perez.)
CHAPTER 11 Periodontology Applied to Operative Dentitry
on supragingival margins. his early provisionalization can help
with the soft tissue contouring and maintenance or papilla regrowth
during the healing phase.96 Further, some have advocated immediate
provisionalization after crown lengthening surgery.97 Such practice
is only advised to extremely experienced periodontal-restorative
teams and mostly indicated for patients with well-known positive
tissue response to restorative procedures. Finally, to obtain a wellitting provisional, it is important to understand that the tooth
preparation/restoration margins need to be easily vi sualized and
have enough intracoronal depth to allow for thickness of material
without overhanging margins.
Besides provisional restorations, any inal indirect or direct
restoration (even well itting) harbors more plaque and bacteria
than enamel and challenges the supportive periodontium.98 hus
in the case of a poorly contoured restoration, periodontal breakdown
and recurrent caries at the restoration–tooth interface is probable
in the long term.
Retraction Cord and Impreion
When the tooth is receiving an indirect restoration, gingival displace -
ment is usually needed to adequately capture the preparation margins
with either physical or digital impression methods.99 his gingival
displacement, or retraction, can be done mechanically, chemically,
or surgically (electrosurgery or laser). Retraction cords have been
shown to cause a reversible gingival displacement that is greater
than other types of materials (i.e., paste or foam). Others have
found that all retraction techniques cause temporary gingival
displacement with inlammation with Ultrapak (Ultradent Products,
Inc., South Jordan, UT) cord without impregnation of hemostatic
agent causing most bleeding but fastest recovery compared to Magic
FoamCord (Coltène, Altstätten, Switzerland) and Expas yl (Kerr
Corporation, Orange, CA). In this study, all retraction techniques
caused an acute injury after 1 day of retraction, which took 1 week
to heal in the Ultrapak and the Magic FoamCord groups. he
Expasyl group had the highest gingival index of inlammation and
showed the slowest healing. Its use may also cause tooth sensitivity.
In another study, the Magic FoamCord system was a less traumatic
method of gingival retraction compared to cords in slightly sub -
gingival preparations. However, the material was less efective than
the single cord retraction technique in preparations with margins
deeper than 2 mm.
When evaluating gingival retraction cords versus electrosurgery,
Wostmann and colleagues did not ind any signiicant diference in
the quality of the marginal it of the crowns as lon g as the impression
technique utilized two (light and heavy) impression materials. To
date there is no comparison between laser, electrosurgery, cord, and
cordless materials in regard to gingival health and quality of impres -
sion. It is currently accepted that retraction systems cause some
temporary damage to the integrity of the gingival tissues; however,
the soft gingival tissue heals in a few days provided there is adequate
marginal adaptation of the temporary restoration.level or slightly into the sulcus, some inlammatory tissue reaction
will occur94 (Fig. 11.21A ). he presence of localized periodontal
pathology has been found with indirect metaloceramic restorations
independently of the supragingival or subgingival location of the
margin. However, marginal adaptation is correlated with severity
of inlammation.94 To minimize the probability of tissue recession
or chronic local inlammatory response, a well-adapted provisional
restoration should always be placed and tissue reaction ideally
observed for several weeks prior to inal impression and placement
of the inal restoration. A tissue that is healthy after the provisional
restoration is in place for several days or weeks is a good indication
of no violation of the biologic width and that the periodontium
will respond well to the inal restoration margins ( Fig. 11.21B ).
A well-adapted provisional restoration also will facilitate gingival
retraction and inal impression and ensure that the tissue will
rebound atraumatically (after impression).
When a poorly contoured provisional restoration is placed, the
inlammatory process starts and can be perpetuated after the inal
restoration is cemented as the area remains injured.95 It is important
to correct margins and roughness of any provisional as soon as
detected to prevent and/or reverse damage leading to loss of
periodontal attachment.
Further, placement of provisional restorations prior to proper
initial healing after crown lengthening or gingivectomy can be
problematic as it is not easy to determine the exact location where
the alveolar crest and the biologic width will be reestablished.
Despite the periodontal procedure performed, the result may still
be violation of the biologic width with development of an inlam -
matory lesion after surgery. When there is need for immediate or
early provisionalization after surgery, the restoration should rest
B
A
• Fig. 11.21 A, Full-coverage restorations on teeth No. 8 and No. 9 with
inadequate marginal preparation, crown adaptation, and invasion of bio -
logic width causing gingival inlammation. B, Improved tissue health after
crown lengthening to reestablish the biologic width and well-adapted
temporary restoration.
Summary
When planning restorations, thorough evaluation of periodontal
health, impact of restorative treatment on periodontium, and patient
perceptions of esthetics and understanding of oral health is war -
ranted. Respecting the periodontium boundaries while restoring
tooth structures is vital for the success of the restorative treatment
and the overall oral homeostasis. Ill-fitting restorations and undiagnosed periodontal defects in teeth that will be restored can
complicate treatment and lead to further disturbance of periodontal
health. Although periodontal disease is primarily caused by dental
plaque, there are modifying and signiicant alterations caused by
restorative treatment that contribute to the establishment and
progression of periodontal breakdown.
CHAPTER 11 Periodontology Applied to Operative Dentitry
26. Rosling B, Serino G, Hellstrom MK, et al: Longitudinal periodontal
tissue alterations during supportive therapy. Findings from subjects
with normal and high susceptibility to periodontal disease. J Clin
Periodontol 28(3): – , .
27. Hirschfeld L, Wasserman B: A long-term survey of tooth loss in
treated periodontal patients. J Periodontol 49(5): – , .
28. McFall WT, Jr: Tooth loss in treated patients with periodontal
disease. A long-term study. J Periodontol 53(9): – , .
29. Fardal O, Linden GJ: Tooth loss and implant outcomes in patients
refractory to treatment in a periodontal practice. J Clin Periodontol
35(8): – , .
30. Ochsenbein C, Ross S: A reevaluation of osseous surgery. Dent Clin
North Am 13(1):87– , .
31. Weisgold AS: Contours of the full crown restora tion. Alpha Omegan
70(3):77–89, .
32. Stetler KJ, Bissada NF: Signiicance of the width of keratinized
gingiva on the periodontal status of teeth with submarginal restora -
tions. J Periodontol 58(10): – , .
33. Ross IF , hompson RH, Jr: A long term study of root retention in
the treatment of maxillary molars with furcation involvement. J
Periodontol 49(5): – , .
34. Hamp SE, Nyman S, Lindhe J: Periodontal treatment of multirooted
teeth. Results after 5 years. J Clin Periodontol 2(3): – ,
.
35. Dannewitz B, Krieger JK, Husing J, et al: Loss of molars in peri -
odontally treated patients: a retrospective analysis ive years or more
after active periodontal treatment. J Clin Periodontol 33(1):53–61,
.
36. Hancock EB, Mayo CV, Schwab RR, et al: Inluence of interdental
contacts on periodontal status. J Periodontol 51(8): – , .
37. Jernberg GR, Bakdash MB, Keenan KM: Relationship between
proximal tooth open contacts and periodontal disease. J Periodontol
54(9): – , .
38. Moskow BS, Canut PM: Studies on root enamel (2). Enamel pearls.
A review of their morphology, localization, nomenclature, occurrence,
classiication, histogenesis and incidence. J Clin Periodontol
17(5): – , .
39. Hou GL, Tsai CC: Cervical enamel projection and intermediate
bifurcational ridge correlated with molar furcation involvements. J
Periodontol 68(7): – , .
40. Risnes S, Segura JJ, Casado A, et al: Enamel pearls and cervical
enamel projections on 2 maxillary molars with localized periodontal
disease: case report and histologic study. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral
Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 89(4): – , .
41. Bissada NF , Abdelmalek RG: Incidence of cervical enamel projections
and its relationship to furcation involvement in Egyptian skulls. J
Periodontol 44(9): – , .
42. Hou GL, Tsai CC: Relationship between periodontal furcation
involvement and molar cervical enamel projections. J Periodontol
58(10): – , .
43. Masters DH, Hoskins SW: Projection of cervical enamel into molar
furcations. J Periodontol 35:49–53, .
44. Chou J, Rawal YB, O’Neil JR, et al: Cementodentinal tear: a case
report with 7-year follow-up. J Periodontol 75(12): – ,
.
45. Ishikawa I, Oda S, Hayashi J, et al: Cervical cemental tears in older
patients with adult periodontitis. Case reports. J Periodontol
67(1):15–20, .
46. Gound TG, Maze GI: T reatment options for the radicular lingual
groove: a review and discussion. Pract Periodontics Aesthet Dent
10(3): – , quiz 76, .
47. Hou GL, Tsai CC: Relationship between palato-radicular grooves
and localized periodontitis. J Clin Periodontol 20(9): – ,
.
48. Geiger AM, Wasserman BH, T urgeon LR: Relationship of occlusion
and periodontal disease. 8. Relationship of crowding and spacing
to periodontal destruction and gingival inlammation. J Periodontol
45(1):43–49, .Reference
1. Schroeder HE, Listgarten MA: he gingival tissues: the architecture
of periodontal protection. Periodontol 13:91– , .
2. Ainamo J, Loe H: Anatomical characteristics of gingiva. A clinical
and microscopic study of the free and attached gingiva. J Periodontol
37(1):5–13, .
3. Ainamo A: Inluence of age on the location of the maxillary
mucogingival junction. J Periodontal Res 13(3): – , .
4. Ainamo J, Talari A: he increase with age of the width of attached
gingiva. J Periodontal Res 11(4): – , .
5. Ainamo A, Ainamo J: he width of attached gingiva on supraerupted
teeth. J Periodontal Res 13(3): – , .
6. Bosshardt DD, Selvig KA: Dental cementum: the dynamic tissue
covering of the root. Periodontol 13:41–75, .
7. Hassell TM: Tissues and cells of the periodontium. Periodontol
3:9–38, .
8. Nanci A, Bosshardt DD: Structure of periodontal tissues in health
and disease. Periodontol 40:11–28, .
9. Seo BM, Miura M, Gronthos S, et al: Investigation of multipotent
postnatal stem cells from human periodontal ligament. Lancet
: – , .
10. Taylor AC, Campbell MM: Reattachment of gingival epithelium
to the tooth. J Periodontol 43(5): – , .
11. Magnusson I, Listgarten MA: Histological evaluation of probing
depth following periodontal treatment. J Clin Periodontol 7(1):26–31,
.
12. Fowler C, Garrett S, Crigger M, et al: Histologic probe position
in treated and untreated human periodontal tissues. J Clin Periodontol
9(5): – , .
13. Gargiulo AW, Wentz FM, Orban B: Dimensions and relations of
the dentogingival junction in humans. J Periodontol 32: – ,
.
14. Vacek JS, Gher ME, Assad DA, et al: he dimensions of the human
dentogingival junction. Int J Periodontics Restorative Dent
14(2): – , .
15. Tal H, Soldinger M, Dreiangel A, et al: Periodontal response to
long-term abuse of the gingival attachment by supracrestal amalgam
restorations. J Clin Periodontol 16(10): – , .
16. Kokich VG: Esthetics: the orthodontic-periodontic restorative
connection. Semin Orthod 2(1):21–30, .
17. Sanchez IM, Gaud-Quintana S, Stern JK: Modiied lip repositioning
with esthetic crown lengthening: A Combined approach to treating
excessive gingival display. Int J Periodontics Restorative Dent
37(1):e130–e134, .
18. Bhola M, Fairbairn PJ, Kolhatkar S, et al: LipStaT: he lip stabiliza -
tion technique: Indications and guidelines for case selection and
classiication of excessive gingival display. Int J Periodontics Restorative
Dent 35(4): – , .
19. Coslet JG, Vanarsdall R, Weisgold A: Diagnosis and classiication
of delayed passive eruption of the dentogingival junction in the
adult. Alpha Omegan 70(3):24–28, .
20. Eke PI, Dye BA, Wei L, et al: Update on prevalence of periodontitis
in adults in the United States: NHANES to . J Periodontol
86(5): – , .
21. Williams RC, Ofenbacher S: Periodontal medicine: the emergence
of a new branch of periodontology. Periodontol 23:9–12, .
22. Mombelli A: Antimicrobial advances in treating periodontal diseases.
Front Oral Biol 15: – , .
23. Becker W, Becker BE, Berg LE: Periodontal treatment without
maintenance. A retrospective study in 44 patients. J Periodontol
55(9): – , .
24. Axelsson P , Lindhe J: he signiicance of maintenance care in the
treatment of periodontal disease. J Clin Periodontol 8(4): – ,
.
25. Wennstrom JL, Serino G, Lindhe J, et al: Periodontal conditions
of adult regular dental care attendants. A 12-year longitudinal study.
J Clin Periodontol 20(10): – , .
CHAPTER 11 Periodontology Applied to Operative Dentitry
72. Tatakis DN, Chambrone L, Allen EP , et al: Periodontal soft tissue
root coverage procedures: a consensus report from the AAP Regenera -
tion Workshop. J Periodontol 86(2 Suppl):S52–S55, .
73. Miller PD, Jr: A classiication of marginal tissue recession. Int J
Periodontics Restorative Dent 5(2):8–13, .
74. Allen EP , Winter RR: Interdisciplinary treatment of cervical lesions.
Compend Contin Educ Dent (Jamesburg, NJ : ) 32(Spec5):16–20,
.
75. Pini-Prato G, Magnani C, Zaheer F , et al: Inluence of inter-dental
tissues and root surface condition on complete root coverage following
treatment of gingival recessions: a 1-year retrospective study. J Clin
Periodontol 42(6): – , .
76. Santamaria MP , da Silva Feitosa D, Casati MZ, et al: Randomized
controlled clinical trial evaluating connective tissue graft plus
resin-modiied glass ionomer restoration for the treatment of gingival
recession associated with non-carious cervical lesion: 2-year follow-up.
J Periodontol 84(9):e1–e8, .
77. Wennstrom J, Lindhe J, Nyman S: Role of keratinized gingiva for
gingival health. Clinical and histologic study of normal and regener -
ated gingival tissue in dogs. J Clin Periodontol 8(4): – ,
.
78. Wennstrom J, Lindhe J: Role of attached gingiva for maintenance
of periodontal health. Healing following excisional and grafting
procedures in dogs. J Clin Periodontol 10(2): – , .
79. Geiger AM: Mucogingival problems and the movement of mandibular
incisors: a clinical review. Am J Orthod 78(5): – , .
80. Sorensen SE, Larsen IB, Jorgensen KD: Gingival and alveolar bone
reaction to marginal it of subgingival crown margins. Scand J Dent
Res 94(2): – , .
81. Schwartz RS, Mauger M, Clement DJ, et al: Mineral trioxide
aggregate: a new material for endodontics. J Am Dent Assoc
(7): – , .
82. Nielsen MJ, Casey JA, VanderWeele RA, et al: Mechanical properties
of new dental pulp-capping materials. Gen Dent 64(1):44–48,
.
83. Gomes SC, Miranda LA, Soares I, et al: Clinical and histologic
evaluation of the periodontal response to restorative procedures in
the dog. Int J Periodontics Restorative Dent 25(1):39–47, .
84. Sakallioglu EE, Lutioglu M, Sakallioglu U, et al: Gingival crevicular
luid levels of neuropeptides following dental restorations. J Appl
Biomater Funct Mater 13(2):e186–e193, .
85. Ashcraft DB, Staley RN, Jakobsen JR: Fluoride release and shear
bond strengths of three light-cured glass ionomer cements. Am J
Orthod Dentofacial Orthop (3): – , .
86. Arora R, Deshpande SD: Shear bond strength of resin-modiied
restorative glass-ionomer cements to dentin–an in vitro study. J
Indian Soc Pedod Prev Dent 16(4): – , .
87. Nup C, Boylan R, Bhagat R, et al: An evaluation of resin-ionomers
to prevent coronal microleakage in endodontically treated teeth. J
Clin Dent 11(1):16–19, .
88. Stockton LW, Tsang ST: Microleakage of Class II posterior composite
restorations with gingival margins placed entirely within dentin. J
Can Dent Assoc 73(3): , .
89. Gupta SK, Saxena P , Pant VA, et al: Adhesion and biologic behavior
of human periodontal ibroblast cells to resin ionomer Geristore: a
comparative analysis. Dent Traumatol 29(5): – , .
90. Al-Sabek F , Shostad S, Kirkwood KL: Preferential attachment of
human gingival ibroblasts to the resin ionomer Geristore. J Endod
31(3): – , .
91. Al-Hiyasat AS, Al-Sa’Eed OR, Darmani H: Quality of cellular
attachment to various root-end illing materials. J Appl Oral Sci
20(1):82–88, .
92. Dragoo MR: Resin-ionomer and hybrid-ionomer cements: part II,
human clinical and histologic wound healing responses in speciic
periodontal lesions. Int J Periodontics Restorative Dent 17(1):75–87,
.
93. Gultz JP , Scherer W: he use of resin-ionomer in restorative pro -
cedures. N Y State Dent J 64(6):36–39, .49. Ingervall B, Jacobsson U, Nyman S: A clinical study of the relationship
between crowding of teeth, plaque and gingival condition. J Clin
Periodontol 4(3): – , .
50. Nunn ME, Harrel SK: he efect of occlusal discrepancies on
periodontitis. I. Relationship of initial occlusal discrepancies to
initial clinical parameters. J Periodontol 72(4): – , .
51. Wang HL, Burgett FG, Shyr Y: he relationship between restoration
and furcation involvement on molar teeth. J Periodontol
64(4): – , .
52. Burgett FG, Ramjord SP , Nissle RR, et al: A randomized trial of
occlusal adjustment in the treatment of periodontitis patients. J
Clin Periodontol 19(6): – , .
53. Padbury A, Jr, Eber R, Wang HL: Interactions between the gingiva
and the margin of restorations. J Clin Periodontol 30(5): – ,
.
54. Ingber JS, Rose LF , Coslet JG: he “biologic width”–a concept in
periodontics and restorative dentistry. Alpha Omegan 70(3):62–65,
.
55. Matthews DC, Tabesh M: Detection of localized tooth-related
factors that predispose to periodontal infections. Periodontol
34: – , .
56. Wagenberg BD, Eskow RN, Langer B: Exposing adequate tooth
structure for restorative dentistry. Int J Periodontics Restorative Dent
9(5): – , .
57. Herrero F , Scott JB, Maropis PS, et al: Clinical comparison of
desired versus actual amount of surgical crown lengthenin g. J
Periodontol 66(7): – , .
58. Pontoriero R, Carnevale G: Surgical crown lengthening: a 12-month
clinical wound healing study. J Periodontol 72(7): – ,
.
59. Jansson L, Blomster S, Forsgardh A, et al: Interactory efect between
marginal plaque and subgingival proximal restorations on periodontal
pocket depth. Swed Dent J 21(3):77–83, .
60. Orkin DA, Reddy J, Bradshaw D: he relationship of the position
of crown margins to gingival health. J Prosthet Dent 57(4): – ,
.
61. Schatzle M, Land NP , Anerud A, et al: he inluence of margins
of restorations of the periodontal tissues over 26 years. J Clin
Periodontol 28(1):57–64, .
62. Almeida AL, Esper LA, Sbrana MC, et al: Relationship between
periodontics and restorative procedures: surgical treatment of the
restorative alveolar interface (rai)–case series. J Indian Prosthodont
Soc 13(4): – , .
63. Camargo PM, Melnick PR, Camargo LM: Clinical crown length -
ening in the esthetic zone. J Calif Dent Assoc 35(7): – ,
.
64. Dowling EA, Maze GI, Kaldahl WB: Postsurgical timing of restorative
therapy: a review. J Prosthodont 3(3): – , .
65. Bragger U, Lauchenauer D, Lang NP: Surgical lengthening of the
clinical crown. J Clin Periodontol 19(1):58–63, .
66. De Rouck T, Eghbali R, Collys K, et al: he gingival biotype
revisited: transparency of the periodontal probe through the gingival
margin as a method to discriminate thin from thick gingiva. J Clin
Periodontol 36(5): – , .
67. Moitt ML, Bencivenni D, Cohen RE: Drug-induced gingival
enlargement: an overview. Compend Contin Educ Dent (Jamesburg,
NJ : ) 34(5): – , .
68. Hempton TJ, Dominici JT: Contemporary crown-lengthening
therapy: a review. J Am Dent Assoc (6): – , .
69. Gegauf AG: Efect of crown lengthening and ferrule placement on
static load failure of cemented cast post-cores and crowns. J Prosthet
Dent 84(2): – , .
70. Alpiste-Illueca F: Altered passive eruption (APE): a little-known
clinical situation. Med Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal 16(1):e100–e104,
.
71. Dello Russo NM: Placement of crown margins in patients with
altered passive eruption. Int J Periodontics Restorative Dent 4(1):58–65,
.
CHAPTER 11 Periodontology Applied to Operative Dentitry
. Prasanna GS, Reddy K, Kumar RK, et al: Evaluation of eicacy of
diferent gingival displacement materials on gingival sulcus width.
J Contemp Dent Pract 14(2): – , .
. Al Hamad KQ, Azar WZ, Alwaeli HA, et al: A clinical study on
the efects of cordless and conventional retraction techniques on
the gingival and periodontal health. J Clin Periodontol
35(12): – , .
. Beier US, Kranewitter R, Dumfahrt H: Quality of impressions after
use of the Magic FoamCord gingival retraction system–a clinical
study of abutment teeth. Int J Prosthodont 22(2): – ,
.
. Wostmann B, Rehmann P , T rost D, et al: Efect of diferent retracti on
and impression techniques on the marginal it of crowns. J Dent
36(7): – , .94. Passariello C, Puttini M, Virga A, et al: Microbiological and host
factors are involved in promoting the periodontal failure of metalo -
ceramic crowns. Clin Oral Investig 16(3): – , .
95. Dragoo MR, Williams GB: Periodontal tissue reactions to restorative
procedures. Int J Periodontics Restorative Dent 1(1):8–23, .
96. Zucchelli G, Mazzotti C, Monaco C: A standardized approach for
the early restorative phase after esthetic crown-lengthening surgery.
Int J Periodontics Restorative Dent 35(5): – , .
97. Tseng SC, Fu JH, Wang HL: Immediate temporization crown
lengthening. Compend Contin Educ Dent (Jamesburg, NJ : )
32(3):38–43, .
98. Waerhaug J: Presence or absence of plaque on subgingival restorations.
Scand J Dent Res 83(1): – , .
99. Nemetz H, Donovan T, Landesman H: Exposing the gingival
margin: a systematic approach for the control of hemorrhage. J
Prosthet Dent 51(5): – , .
Digital Dentistry in Operative Dentistry
DENNIS J. FASBINDER, GISELE F. NEIVA
Digital technology, computerized dentistry, and digital
dentistry are general terms used to describe the clinical
application of computer-assisted design, computer-assisted
machining (CAD/CAM) . he restorative dentistry application of
CAD/CAM technology is the fabrication and delivery of permanent
restorations for teeth and implants. For the past 30 years the
incorporation of dental CAD/CAM into direct patient care has
provided a way for dentists to deliver esthetic ceramic restorations
in a single dental appointment.
here are three sequences involved in the CAD/CAM process.1
An intraoral scanner or camera is used to accurately record the
hard and soft tissue geometry of the patient’s intraoral condition
to a computer program in the irst sequence. his is commonly
referred to as a digital impression. A proprietary software design
program is used to create a virtual restoration (the volume proposal)
in the second sequence. he software programs have the capability
of controlling and editing the various parameters of the restoration
such as emergence proile, proximal contact, and occlusal relation -
ships. Once the proposal of the restoration has been completed,
a computer-controlled device is used to produce the restoration
in the third sequence. he most common device uses a subtractive
process to machine (i.e., grind or mill, depending on whether
carbide burs or diamonds are used) the inal restoration from a
preformed block of a variety of restorative materials. Understanding
these three sequences provides a basis for deciding how best to
implement the technology in the dental oice and also creates a
simple way to categorize various systems in the marketplace.
Digital impression systems are designed to accurately record
the intraoral geometry and then transmit the iles to a dental labora -
tory for design and fabrication of the desired restoration. here is
minimal if any opportunity for the dentist to design any aspect
of the restoration on digital impression systems. hey were developed
to leverage the digital recording process to take advantage of the
comfort and eiciency of not using conventional impression
materials as well as the convenience and accuracy of digital transmis -
sion of the case to the dental laboratory.
Chairside CAD/CAM systems employ all three sequences of
the CAD/CAM process in the dental oice. hey also record
intraoral scans but provide, in addition, a software program for
designing restorations as well as milling units to fabricate th e restora -
tion during a single dental appointment. hey are designed to
leverage the eiciency of a single appointment procedure for the
delivery of ceramic restorations. Chairside CAD/CAM systems
are the primary focus of the chapter because they allow the dentist
complete control of the design, fabrication, and delivery of the
restoration in the oice during a single appointment.Clinical Application
T reatment planning considerations for CAD/CAM restorations
are not signiicantly diferent from ceramic restorations done with
conventional impression materials and techniques. h e CAD/CAM
system represents an alternative means of restoration fabrication,
not the restoration per se. he type of restoration (inlay, onlay,
crown), the choice of material to be used, the desired occlusal
relationships, and ability to isolate the tooth preparation for delivery
of the restoration are several primary factors to consider rather
than the restoration fabrication process itself. A case in point is
that the predictable ability to isolate a subgingival margin for
adhesive cementation is a much more important factor to consider
than whether the ceramic restoration is fabricated with a conven -
tional or digital impression technique. Nonetheless, there are a
few speciic considerations relative to the use of digital impressions.
he relative size of the camera may be a concern for patients with
a restricted ability to open wide. Generally, if there is sui cient
vertical space to complete the tooth preparation with a dental
handpiece, there is suicient space for use of a digital camera.
However, patients with a severe gag relex may appreciate the use
of a digital impression more than conventional impression since
there is no physical contact with the intraoral tissues by a tray or
impression material when recording a digital impression.
Chairide CAD/CAM Sytem
Dr. Francois Duret conceptualized the irst chairside CAD/CAM
system in . he irst functioning chairside CAD/CAM pro -
totype was introduced in the 1980s through the collaboratio n
between a Swiss prosthodontist, Dr. Werner Mörmann, and an
Italian electrical engineer, Marco Brandestini. Dr. Mörmann’s vision
was to use CAD/CAM technology to deliver esthetic ceramic
restorations with improved longevity in a single appointment that
avoided the deleterious consequences polymerization shrinkage
caused in composite restorations.2,3 he CEREC 1 unit marked
the introduction of the CEREC system in with the irst
clinical trials reported in .4 he system has evolved through
a series of hardware and software innovations and upgrades that
culminated with the introduction of the irst color-streaming
powder-free intraoral camera in , the CEREC Omnicam ( Fig.
12.1).5,6 he Omnicam is the imaging camera of the CEREC AC
acquisition unit. he Omnicam is connected to a chai rside computer
with the three-dimensional design software and a liquid crystal
display (LCD) monitor. he CEREC system is electronically
connected to a milling unit. he newest version is a dry grinding
CHAPTER 12 Digital Dentitry in Operative Dentitry
has an intraoral laser scanner, mobile Design Center with Denta -
Logic software, and a separate milling unit with a dedicated CAM
server computer . he milling unit has two opposing electric motors
that automatically change between three different diamonds
depending on the speciics of the restoration dimensions. he
milling unit has a dedicated computer server, which allows inde -
pendent operation separate from the Design Center (after comple -
tion and transmission of the case design) ( Fig. 12.2 ).
The CS is a powder-free intraoral scanner that wa s
introduced in . he Carestream system allo ws for in-oice
design using CS Solutions Restore software and in-oice fabrication
using the CS milling unit. he digital iles may also be and wet milling unit that is the irst in-oice means by which to
dry mill zirconia. Single-visit, full-contour, milled zirconia restora -
tions are then further processed by sintering and glazing the restora -
tion in the CEREC SpeedFire sintering furnace. his is the irst
in-oice zirconia sintering furnace that can sinter preshaded CEREC
zirconia material (CEREC Zirconia) in 10 to 15 minutes, as
compared to the multiple hours that are generally necessary for
sintering laboratory processed zirconia restorations.
An increasing number of chairside systems have been introduced
since the late 2000s. he E4D Dentist System (D4D Technologies)
was introduced in with its DentaLogic software ofering a
true three-dimensional virtual model.7 he E4D Dentist System
• Fig. 12.1 CEREC OmniCam and MCX milling chamber. (Courtesy Dentsply Sirona.)
• Fig. 12.2 PlanFit chairside CAD/CAM system. (Courtesy D4D Technologies.)
CHAPTER 12 Digital Dentitry in Operative Dentitry
A concept unique to CAD/CAM restorations has been termed
“undermilling” or “overmilling. ” hese terms have been applied
to both grinding and milling processes. Any preparation geometry
smaller than the dimension of the milling instruments presents a
potential problem. Either the instrument must cut away more
restorative material to ensure the restoration seats completely
(overmilling) or it does not remove the smaller geometry (undermill -
ing), leaving restorative material that will prevent complete seating
of the restoration. Utilization of a preparation geometry with smooth
contours, gently lowing curves, and rounded transition angles
helps to limit the potential for overmilling and ensure an accurate
internal adaptation of the restoration.
Crown
Tooth preparation for CAD/CAM-fabricated crowns is essentially
the same as for laboratory-fabricated ceramic cro wns. he margin
design for an all-ceramic crown requires a bulk of ceramic at the
margin to avoid the risk of ceramic chipping or fracture. his is
best accomplished with a shoulder, sloped shoulder, or heavy chamfer
margin ( Fig. 12.3 ). All of these margin geometries are equally
useful for chairside CAD/CAM crowns as long as the internal
angles are rounded (i.e., not sharp or angular) to facilitate internal
adaptation of the crown. he occlusal and axial reduction require -
ments are determined based on the speciic material properties of
the ceramic material selected for the crown. Axial reduction for
CAD/CAM ceramic crowns should be 1 to 1.2 mm for the
monolithic ceramic materials as there is no opaque inner coping
that needs to be covered (veneered). A greater variation in occlusal uploaded to a dental laboratory via CS Connect as they are compat -
ible with a number of commercial laboratory design programs
such as 3Shape (3Shape) and Exocad (Exocad Gmbh). Some of
the unique features of the intraoral scanner include a disposable
tip and a guiding light, which indicates a successful scan. he
Carestream system has chairside capability for only a limited number
of applications, including inlays, onlays, and crowns.
Chairside CAD/CAM systems are able to produce inlays, onlays,
veneers, and crowns. Some systems also have the ability to fabricate
short-span ixed partial dentures as well as temporary restorations
in the dental o ice. Additional applications, such as implant
abutments, ixed partial dentures, and orthodontic appliances, are
unique to speciic systems ( ).
Tooth Preparation Principle for
CAD/CAM Retoration
Guidelines for tooth preparation for all-ceramic restorations are
generally based on the speciic geometries and thickness dimensions
required to provide optimum strength for the selected ceramic
material. For example, the occlusal reduction for a full-contour
zirconia crown is less than that required for a leucite-reinforced
or feldspathic porcelain crown, even if both materials are fabricated
with a chairside CAD/CAM system. However, there are s everal
preparation guidelines that enhance the accuracy of the CAD/
CAM restoration due to their inluence on the imaging and fabrica -
tion process, such as smooth contours, rounded transitions, and
uniform pulpal loor.
Clinical Applications for Chairside CAD/CAM Systems
System Inlays/Onlays Crowns Veneers FPDs Implant Abutment Orthodontic Application CBCT Compatible
CEREC (Dentsply Sirona)
BlueCam X X X X X X X
OmniCam X X X X X X X
PlanFit (Planmeca) X X X X – – X
CS Solutions (Carestream) X X X – – – X
B
A
• Fig. 12.3 A and B, Examples of chairside CAD/CAM crown preparations.
CHAPTER 12 Digital Dentitry in Operative Dentitry
Inlay and Onlay
CAD/CAM inlay and onlay preparations are primarily adhesive-style
preparations that rely on the adhesion of the resin cement to dentin
and enamel for retention of the restoration ( Fig. 12.5 ). hese
preparations are divergent and relatively nonmechanically retentive
in design as this provides a more conservative preparation than
the requirement for mechanical resistance through grooves, slots,
or boxes. he internal aspect of the preparation should avoid sharp
divots or concavities, and all internal angles should be rounded
(Fig. 12.6 ). Occlusal r eduction should be uniform and of suicient
thickness to provide optimum strength of the selected ceramic
material similar to crown preparations. Preparation should allow
for a minimum of 1.5 mm of ceramic thickness in the central
fossa and over nonfunctional cusps, and 2 mm over functional
cusps. All cavosurface margins should be strategically placed away
from the contact position of the opposing cusp(s) and be well
deined (smooth) for easy identiication in the design software.
Beveled margins must be avoided, as thin areas of ceramic are
prone to fracture.8,9 Similarly, the preparation isthmus should be
at least 2 mm in faciolingual width so as to avoid inlay/onlay
fracture ( Fig. 12.7 ).
CAD/CAM onlay preparations do not require the creation of
a ferrule with the ceramic restoration as used with metal castings
(Fig. 12.8 ). On the contrary, a ferrule may actually interfere with reduction may be expected as a function of the material selected.
Most glass ceramic materials require a minimum of 1.5 mm occlusal
reduction in the central issure area and over nonfunctional cusps
and 2 mm over functional cusps ( Fig. 12.4 ). Laboratory-based ( in
vitro) research studies suggest that full-contour zirconia crowns
may be fabricated with an occlusal thickness of 1 mm without
compromising the strength of the crown. Additionally, the manu -
facturer of lithium disilicate blocks has recently announced that
e.maxCAD crowns now only require a 1-mm occlusal reduction;
however, this claim still requires independent validation. All angles
of the preparation should be rounded to facilitate accurate internal
adaptation and needless overcutting of the internal surface of the
crowns during milling.
It is not uncommon to identify signiicant undercuts in a crown
preparation as a result of prior large restorations or caries excavation.
Undercuts will be accurately recorded by the digital camera and
be present in the calculated virtual model in the CAD software
program. However, the milling process will not duplicate an y
internal undercuts in the preparation that might prevent seating
of the restoration. hese undercuts would subsequently be illed
in with the resin cement. Alternatively, undercuts could be blocked
out using the software program during design of the restoration.
his process is not recommended, however, as it could ultimately
result in an internal inaccuracy as the digital model is altere d.
herefore, if blockout is necessary, it is best accomplished with an
appropriate dentin substitute material, as indicated, prior to digital
scanning.
B
A
• Fig. 12.4 A and B, Examples of the occlusal clearance for chairside
CAD/CAM crown preparations.
• Fig. 12.5 Onlay preparations for teeth #3 and #4 relying primarily on
the adhesive bond of the resin cement for retention of the restoration.
• Fig. 12.6 Full cuspal onlay preparation for tooth #3 and MODL onlay
for #4 with smooth and rounded internal angles.
CHAPTER 12 Digital Dentitry in Operative Dentitry
of esthetic concern, a modiication of the facial butt-joint margin
is necessary . he cavosurface margin may be modiied with a
football-shaped diamond at a 45-degree angle, creating opportunity
for a transition of ceramic thickness over the underlying enamel
while maintaining a bulk of ceramic at the margin for physical
strength of the ceramic ( Fig. 12.10 ). An in vitro study on ceramic
preparations for conservative restoration of endodontically treated
teeth reported a signiicant improvement in the marginal and
internal it of the ceramic restoration with this modiied-margin
design relative to both a ferrule and 90-degree butt-joint margin.10
Chairide CAD/CAM Clinical W orklow
he clinical wor klow to design and fabricate a chairside CAD/
CAM restoration is relatively similar for all currently available
systems, with noticeable diferences in the unique cameras, software
programs, and milling chambers of marketed systems (Fig. 12.11A–L
worklow sequence). he tooth preparation, including the margins,
must be visible by retraction of soft tissues and isolated from
moisture contamination so that the camera may accurately capture
a digital image of the preparation. he opposing arch is also
recorded, as well as a scan of the dentition in maximum intercuspa -
tion from the facial aspect. The computer software virtually
articulates the opposing models using the scan of the facial surfaces
so the appropriate occlusal relationships for the restoration may
be designed. he restoration design is initiated by identifying the
margins of the planned restoration to identify the limits of the
restoration design. he software utilizes data from adjacent and
opposing teeth to generate a proposed (virtual) restoration, which
may then be edited by a series of tools unique to each software
program. he design software enables control of the emergence
proile of the restoration, occlusal anatomy, planned occlusal
contacts, and size and intensity of proximal contacts. Once the
design of the restoration is complete, it is transm itted to the milling
unit so the fabrication process may create the volumetric shape of
the restoration out of an industrially produced block of ceramic
material. Although a variety of chairside fabrication processes may
be imagined, subtractive grinding or milling processes of ceramic
blocks are accomplished based on the volumetric design created
with the software design program. Most restorations may be designed
and milled within 10 to 15 minutes to allow for delivery of the
restoration at the same appointment. Extended machining times
may be required for more complex geometries of ixed partial
dentures or implant restorations. Slower machining may be preferred
for thin margins, such as for porcelain veneers, in order to prevent proper seating of the restoration due to undermilling of the relatively
parallel walls and/or sharp transitions. Alternatively the system
may signiicantly overmill the intaglio surface of the restoration,
thinning the restoration further. Both undermilling and overmilling
are detrimental to the inal onlay restoration. Consequently, a
butt-joint margin is preferred as it allows for proper thickness of
the ceramic material at the margin, reducing the incidence of
marginal fracture ( Fig. 12.9 ). Unfortunately, this marginal design
often causes a visible demarcation between the tooth and the restora -
tion. Hence, when the blend of the restoration and the tooth is
• Fig. 12.7 Inlay preparation for tooth #13 and onlay preparation for
tooth #14 with smooth lowing outline form and crisp cavosurface margins.
• Fig. 12.8 Ferrule margin design with opposing walls for mechanical
retention more appropriate for cast-metal restorations.
• Fig. 12.9 Preferred butt-joint margin design for ceramic onlay
preparation.
• Fig. 12.10 Modiied butt-joint margin with a football-shaped diamond
for improved esthetic blending of the onlay margin.
CHAPTER 12 Digital Dentitry in Operative Dentitry
C
B
A
• Fig. 12.11 Chairside CAD/CAM worklow using the CEREC system. A, Preoperative view of tooth
#19. B, All-ceramic crown preparation for tooth #19. C, Case identiication in the Administrative Phase. chipping during fabrication. Certain systems allo w for ine machin -
ing modes, which slow the advancement of the block at each pass
of the diamonds/burs (or allow for a smoother second machining
pass), so as to reine the surface contour. Final glaze iring and/or
external surface polishing follows clinical conirmation of the
anatomy and marginal adaptation of the resultant r estoration. he
inal restoration is adhesively cemented with resin cement.
Chairside CAD/CAM software pr ograms also ofer various
design techniques that provide the opportunity to copy a pretreat -
ment or prototype tooth form onto the recorded tooth preparation.
he copy function minimizes the need for restoration editing
following the proposal of the restoration, which is especially useful
in clinical situations requiring the restoration of fractured abutment
teeth for removable partial dentures (RPD). Existing rest seat and
proximal contours are copied from the pretreatment tooth and
subsequently applied to the recorded tooth preparation. he new ceramic restoration will then have very good adaptation to the
existing RPD. he copy-design process is also very useful for anterior
restorations through use of a diagnostic wax-up containing strategi -
cally planned contours of the restorations. hese contours may be
virtually copied onto the recorded preparation, digitally perfected,
and then transmitted for milling.
Chairide Retorative Material
Dental material manufacturers produce monolithic materials for
chairside CAD/CAM restorations generally referred t o as “blocks.”
he blocks are dense, homogeneous materials that have been
industrially produced under ideal conditions so as to limit the
presence of internal laws (porosity or voids). Limited inclusion
of laws enables maximization of the physical properties of the
T ext continued on p.
CHAPTER 12 Digital Dentitry in Operative Dentitry
E
D
D, Intraoral digital scan of the mandibular left quadrant. E, Virtual mounting of the
opposing digital models. • Fig. 12.11, cont’d
Continued
CHAPTER 12 Digital Dentitry in Operative Dentitry
G
F
F, The Model Axis is set for the model. G, The crown margin is identiied. • Fig. 12.11, cont’d
CHAPTER 12 Digital Dentitry in Operative Dentitry
I
H
H, Biogeneric proposal of the crown. I, Visualization of the occlusal contacts for
reinement. • Fig. 12.11, cont’d
Continued
CHAPTER 12 Digital Dentitry in Operative Dentitry
K
J
J, Visualization of the proximal contact for reinement. K, Crown proposal in the
proposed mill block (Celtra Duo). • Fig. 12.11, cont’d
CHAPTER 12 Digital Dentitry in Operative Dentitry
4. Composite materials that have a resin matrix
5. Full-contour zirconia that may be cemented to the tooth
6. Provisional materials used for temporary restorations
The adhesive ceramic category includes both fine-grained
feldspathic porcelain and leucite-reinforced por celain. hese materi -
als contain a signiicant glass component resulting in i ncreased
translucency allowing them to have an improved “chameleon”
efect. he chameleon efect may be described as the ability to
relect the color of the surrounding tooth structure and thus blend
into the existing tooth shade ( Fig. 12.12 ). hese materials have a
moderate lexural strength on the order of to megapascals
(MPa). he glass component of these materials allows them to be
etched with hydroluoric acid for micromechanical adhesive bonding.
Adhesive bonding is critical to their long-term success because the
glass matrix makes them brittle. hese materials do not have enough
inherent physical strength to be cemented with resin-modiied
glass ionomer or traditional glass ionomer cements. he adhesive
resin cement not only provides retention for the restoration but,
by virtue of its adhesive properties, contributes to the physical
strength of the ceramic to resist fracture by limiting lexure under material. he blocks are attached to mandrels that are speciic to
the various brands of chairside CAD/CAM milling units.
he irst CAD/CAM block was created as a result of the col -
laboration between Dr. Werner Mörmann and the Vita Corporation.
he Vita Mark I blocks were originally created out of feldspathic
porcelain and eventually evolved into the current generation of
feldspathic blocks, Vita Mark II. Since then the CAD/CAM market
has expanded to include multiple formulations of ceramic
materials.
Chairside CAD/CAM materials may be divided among a number
of categories based on material composition for ease in understand -
ing their properties and clinical applications.11,12 hese categories
include ( ):
1. Adhesive ceramics (feldspathic, leucite-reinforc ed) that must
be etched and adhesively bonded to the tooth structure
2. High-strength ceramics (lithium disilicate, zirconia reinforced
lithium silicate) with improved strength properties compared
to the adhesive ceramic materials
3. Resilient ceramics that do not require a porcelain furnace and
must be adhesively bonded to the toothRestorative Material Options for Chairside CAD/CAM Systems
Material Brand CEREC PlanFit CS Solution
Adhesive ceramic
Leucite-reinforced IPS EmpressCAD (Ivoclar) X X –
Feldspathic Vita Mark II (Vita) X X X
Sirona Blocs (Dentsply Sirona) X – –
High-strength ceramic
Lithium disilicate IPS emaxCAD (Ivoclar) X X –
Zirconia-reinforced lithium-silicate Celtra Duo (Dentsply Sirona) X – –
Lithium-silicate Obsidian (Glidewell) – X –
Resilient ceramic (resin nano ceramic) Lava Ultimate (3M) X X X
Enamic (Vita) X X X
Cerasmart (GC America) X – –
Composite resin Paradigm MZ100 (3M) X – –
Brilliant Crios (Coltene) X – –
Zirconia (full contour) CEREC Zirconia (Dentsply Sirona) X – –
Provisional acrylic materials TelioCAD (Ivoclar) X X –
Vita CAD-Temp (Vita) X – –
L
L, Delivered Celtra Duo ceramic crown for tooth #19. (C–K, Courtesy Dentsply
Sirona.)• Fig. 12.11, cont’d
CHAPTER 12 Digital Dentitry in Operative Dentitry
iring also creates optimum translucency for the material ( Fig.
12.14 ). Celtra Duo (Dentsply Sirona) is a zirconia-reinforced lithium
silicate (ZLS) material that is another example of ceramic with high
strength. he ZLS microstructure has high content of ultraine
glass ceramic crystals ( <1 μm) and 10% zirconia content. It is
provided by the manufacturer in a fully crystallized state that may
be either hand polished or glaze ired in a ceramic furnace prior to
delivery. Hand polishing the restoration results in a material that
has a lexural strength of MPa, while glazing it in a porcelain
oven results in a restoration with a lexural strength of MPa.
Celtra Duo is available in shades A1, A2, A3, A3.5, and B2 in
both high and low translucencies ( Fig. 12.15 ). NICE! (Straumann)
is another fully crystallized zirconia-reinforced lithium silicate
block that has recently been introduced for chairside CAD/CAM
restorations.
he Resilient Ceramic category of chairside CAD/CAM blocks
[Lava Ultimate (3M), Enamic (Vita), and Cerasmart (GC America)]
includes materials that have a resin matrix (instead of a glass matrix)
that, according to manufacturers, allows greater force absorption
capability without fracture. he added feature of these materials
is that no additional iring is required allowing for a ver y eicient
delivery process following fabrication of the restoration. All three
materials (Lava Ultimate, Cerasmart, and Enamic) exhibit lexural
strength properties similar to human dentin, and are indicated for
single-unit restorations. In contrast, the low stifness properties of
these materials may be considered disadvantageous from a bonding
perspective, as marginal seal debonding due to material lexure
might occur.17 Therefore treating the intaglio surface of the occlusal load. Vita Mark II (Vita) and Sirona Blocks (Dentsply
Sirona) are both feldspathic porcelain blocks with a ine-grained
particle size that averages 4 microns and a lexural strength of
MPa.13,14
he leucite-reinforced glass ceramic was initially introduced
as ProCAD (Ivoclar) and later evolved into IPS Empr essCAD
(Ivoclar) with a similar crystal structure as IPS Empress 1 (Ivoclar).
EmpressCAD has a iner particle size of 1 to 5 microns that is
evenly dispersed 35% to 45% by volume using a proprietary
manufacturing process. It comes in two levels of translucency as
well as multishaded blocks.13 he manufacturer-reported lexural
strength is MPa, which is within the range of what is reported
independently in the literature. EmpressCAD also has a l ight
scattering behavior that allows for a natural chameleon efect
(Fig. 12.13 ).
here are several higher strength glass ceramic materials available
for chairside CAD/CAM restorations. IPS e.maxCAD (Ivoclar)
is composed of lithium disilicate and has a signiicantly greater
lexural strength and fracture toughness than other adhesive glass
ceramics.15,16 he manufacturer provides the IPS e.maxCAD block in
a partially crystallized state ( MPa, 40% crystalized by volume) to
allow for easier and more eicient grinding of the material. After the
restoration has been fabricated, it must be subjected to a two-stage
iring cycle in a ceramic furnace under vacuum to complete the
crystallization process and achieve the maximum lexural strength
potential of the material ( MPa). he resulting glass ceramic
restoration has a grain size of approximately 1.5 microns with a 70%
crystal volume incorporated in a glass matrix. he crystallization
D
C
B
A
• Fig. 12.12 Vita Mark II (Vita) onlay for tooth #30. A, Preoperative view of tooth #30. B, Vita Mark II
onlay delivered. C, Vita mark II onlay at the 3-year recall. D, Vita mark II onlay at the 5-year recall.
CHAPTER 12 Digital Dentitry in Operative Dentitry
C
B
A
• Fig. 12.13 IPS EmpressCAD (Ivoclar) restoration. A, Onlay
preparation for tooth #19. B, IPS EmpressCAD onlay delivered. C,
IPS EmpressCAD onlay at the 2-year recall.
D
C
B
A
• Fig. 12.14 IPS emaxCAD (Ivoclar) crown for tooth #30. A, Preoperative view of tooth #30. B, IPS
emaxCAD crown delivered. C, IPS emaxCAD crown at 2-year recall. D, IPS emaxCAD crown at 4-year
recall.
CHAPTER 12 Digital Dentitry in Operative Dentitry
improving the fracture resistance of the material d ue to its capability
of undergoing plastic deformation.20 he manufacturer recommends
the material for inlays, onlays, and crowns and repor ts that lexural
strength of Enamic is MPa, which is signiicantly lower than
Lava Ultimate or Cerasmar t. his is in line with the results of an
independent study (approximately ± 25 MPa).17
Composite resin block materials are gaining in interest as the
eiciency of chairside designing and milling a CAD/CAM restora -
tion has improved. he chairside CAD/CAM worklow allows for
easier control of proximal contours, contacts, and occlusal r elation -
ships for larger, more complex multisurface composite restorations
compared to incremental hand placement of direct composite
materials. Paradigm MZ100 (3M) is a composite block based on
Z100 composite chemistry and relies on a proprietary processing
technique to maximize the degree of cross-linking in the bis-GMA
polymer-based composite material. It has zirconia-silica iller, which
is radiopaque, and is 85% illed by weight with an average particle
size of 0.6 micron.21 he manufacturer reported lexural strength
of Paradigm MZ100 is MPa. An independent study reported
slightly higher value ± 30 MPa, which was not signiicantly
diferent than the lexural strength reported for EmpressCAD.17
Brilliant Crios (Coltene) is a recently introduced reinforced
composite block containing amorphous silica and glass ceramic
particles in a cross-linked methacrylate matrix.
he most recent material innovation for chairside CAD/CAM
restorations was the introduction, in , of CEREC Zirconia restoration with sandblasting technique as well as selecting a totaletch approach combined with adhesive cementation is considered
to be imperative. Because resilient ceramics are less dense they
mill faster, with a smaller incidence of margin chipping during
milling compared to glass-containing materials.17
Lava Ultimate (3M) is a nanoceramic material that contains
20 nanometers (nm) size silica particles, 4 to 11 nm size zirconia
particles, and agglomerated nanosize particles of silica and zirconia,
all embedded in a highly cross-linked polymer matrix with an
approximately 80% ceramic load. Lava Ultimate has a reported
lexural strength of MPa and it is indicated for inlays and
onlays but not for crowns ( Fig. 12.16 ).17,18
Cerasmart (GC America) is described by the manufacturer as
a lexible nanoceramic with a resin matrix containing homoge -
neously distributed nanoceramic iller particles. he material is
a high-density composite resin with 71% silica and barium glass
nanoparticles iller by weight.17 he reported lexural strength
of Cerasmart is MPa and it is indicated for inlays, onlays,
and crowns.17
Enamic (Vita) is described by the manufacturer as a resin-based
(14 wt%) hybrid ceramic comprised of a dual interpenetrating
structure of a leucite-based and zirconia-reinforced cerami c network
(86 wt%). he mechanical properties of the material are in between
glass ceramics and highly illed composites.19 he ceramic network
provides wear resistance; however, it makes the mate rial more brittle
and susceptible to fracture. he polymer network is capable of
D
C
B
A
• Fig. 12.15 Glazed Celtra Duo (Dentsply Sirona) crown for teeth #4 and #5. A, All-ceramic crown
preparations for teeth #4 and #5. B, Facial view of all-ceramic crown preparations from the facial. C,
Delivered glazed Celtra Duo crowns for teeth #4 and #5. D, Facial view of delivered Celtra Duo glazed
crowns.
CHAPTER 12 Digital Dentitry in Operative Dentitry
MPa; therefore it is suitable for crowns as well as short-span
ixed partial dentures (FPDs) that may be cemented with traditional
cements.
A unique property of zirconia is that it shrinks volumetrically
approximately 22% to 24% when sinter ed. he CEREC software
program automatically compensates for the degree of shrinkage
in the milled restoration. When the restoration design is ready for
milling, the bar code on the zirconia block is input into the software
program. he bar code contains the precise amount of expected
shrinkage of the particular zirconia block as determined by the
manufacturer. he software virtually expands the designed restoration
by this degree and an enlarged restoration is milled. he CEREC
software automatically programs the SpeedFire furnace to sinter
the milled zirconia restoration and iring shrinkage results in a
inal restoration that accurately its the preparation. he sintering
process takes 10 to 15 minutes for crowns and more than 25
minutes for FPDs. Subsequent glaze iring and surface color
characterization is optional. Glazing of the zirconia restoration
may be accomplished in the SpeedFire furnace or in a conventional
porcelain furnace.
CAD/CAM blocks for provisional restorations are also avail -
able for chairside fabrication of long-term provisional crowns and
FPDs. he chairside CAD/CAM process avoids the air-inhibited
layer present on conventional self-cure or VLC acrylics as well as
polymerization shrinkage. Vita CAD-Temp blocks (Vita) are made
from a highly cross-linked, microilled polymer and are available
in extended block sizes, including 40 mm and 55 mm lengths, to
accommodate multiple unit FPDs. Telio CAD (Ivoclar) is a millable
cross-linked polymethyl methacrylate block that is part of the Telio
System (a self-curing composite, desensitizer, and cement). he
Telio CAD material is also available in 40 mm and 55 mm size
blocks.
Accuracy of Digital Impreion
It is axiomatic that the accuracy of the inal restoration depends
on the accuracy of the recorded dimensions of the tooth preparation.
his is true for both conventional and digital impressions. he
accuracy of the margin it and internal adaptation of any restoration
is limited by the geometry of the tooth preparation and the limita -
tions of the recording medium. he tooth preparation must be
well isolated from moisture contamination and adjacent soft tissues
if an accurate digital impression is to be made.
Current technology will not allow the digital capture of
the tooth preparation through saliva, blood, or soft tissue.
A simple way to think about digital impressions is that the
camera can only accurately record what is clearly visible to the
eye of the operator. Careful control of the scanning environ -
ment ensures an accurate surface reproduction with the digital
impression.
Conventional impression materials require lateral and cervical
retraction of the soft tissues for an accurate impression. Lateral
space must be adequate to ensur e suicient impression material
to resist tearing at the margin. Cervical space, genera lly 1 mm
cervical to the margin, is required for accurate assessment of the
recorded margin in the impression. Digital impressions have the
advantage that soft tissues only need be retracted laterally in order
to visualize the margin.
Digital impressions provide excellent immediate feedback relative
to the recorded tooth preparation. Digital magniication of the
image, in many cases up to 20 times lifesize, facilitates critical
evaluation of the tooth preparation while the patient is still in the (Dentsply Sirona). his material is a precolored, full-contour
zirconia that may be processed eiciently for a single-appointment
delivery. he fast production time is a result of the simultaneous
introduction of the SpeedFire (Dentsply Sirona) furnace that is able
to sinter the zirconia restorations in under 20 minutes. Zirconia
has a lexural strength and fracture toughness that is generally
at least three times as great as glass ceramic materials.22 CEREC
zirconia has a manufacturer reported lexural strength of over
C
B
A
• Fig. 12.16 Lava Ultimate (3M) onlay for tooth #14. A, Onlay prepara -
tion for tooth #14. B, Lava ultimate onlay delivered for tooth #14. C, Lava
Ultimate onlay at the 3-year recall.
CHAPTER 12 Digital Dentitry in Operative Dentitry
higher than that of the other methods ( P < 0.05). he mean
internal it was 29 ± 7 μm for Lava COS, 88 ± 20 μm for CEREC
AC, 50 ± 2 μm for iTero, 36 ± 5 μm for single-step putty-wash
technique, and 35 ± 7 μm for two-step putty-wash technique.
here was no signiicant diference in the mean internal it for all
groups ( P > 0.05) except the CEREC AC ( P < 0.05).
Another study compared the it of Lava DVS zirconia crowns
fabricated using Lava COS digital impressions to Vita Rapid
Layering Technique crowns using digital impressions with the
CEREC AC system.25 T wo posterior crowns were fabricated for
each of 14 patients using each digital impression technique on the
same tooth preparation. he replica technique was used with all
crowns to measure the clinical adaptation and margin it. he
study reported that crowns made with the Lava COS system had
a statistically signiicant better mean marginal it (51 ± 38 μm)
when compared to crowns fabricated using the CEREC system
(83 ± 51 μm); however, this di ference in it was below the accepted
clinical threshold of μm and therefore it may not be clinically
relevant.
Lee et al. investigated the margin it of ceramic crowns from
two diferent digital impression systems and the CEREC chairside
CAD/CAM system.26 Crowns were fabricated from digital impres -
sions using the Lava COS and Cercon systems and from digital
impressions using the CEREC BlueCam and compared to PFM
crowns made with a conventional impr ession technique. he mean
marginal gaps were 70.5 ± 34.4 μm for the PFM crowns, 87.2 ±
22.8 μm for Lava, 58.5 ± 17.6 μm for Cercon, and 72.3 ± 30.8 μm
for CEREC BlueCam. here wer e no signiicant diferences in the
marginal it among most of the groups except that Cercon crowns
presented signiicantly smaller marginal gaps than Lava crowns ( P
< 0. ). However, once again this diference in it was below the
accepted clinical threshold of μm and therefore may not be
clinically relevant.
Another study investigated diferent chairside CAD/CAM
systems relative to margin it of ceramic crowns.27 hree lithium
disilicate crown fabrication techniques were included: CEREC 3D
BlueCam, E4D laser scanner, and a lost-wax, heat-pr essed technique
(IPS Empress 1). Microcomputed tomography was used to measure
margin discrepancies on the crowns. Heat-pressed crowns had a
mean vertical misit of 36.8 ± 13.9 μm and CEREC crowns had
mean vertical misit of 39.2 ± 8.7 μm, both of which were statisti -
cally signiicantly smaller than the mean vertical misit recorded
for the E4D crowns, 66.9 ± 31.9 μm (P < 0.05). In addition, the
authors suggested that clinically acceptable it should be equal or
less than 75 μm. he percentage of crowns with a vertical misit
under the 75 μm reported was 83.8% for CEREC and heat-pressed
technique, whereas only 65% of the E4D crowns had vertical
misit under that value, potentially indicating better it accuracy
for CEREC and heat-pressed technique.
Ender and Mehl evaluated the in vivo precision of i mpressions
using conventional and digital methods.28 he conventional methods
used were metal full-arch tray or triple tray with PVS material. In
addition, eight digital impression systems were also evaluated: Lava
T rue Deinition Scanner and Lava COS (3M ESPE), iTero (Cadent),
T rios (3Shape), T rios Color (3Shape), as well as CEREC BlueCam
(Software 4.0), CEREC BlueCam (Software 4.2), and CEREC
Omnicam (Dentsply Sirona). Five subjects each received three
quadrant impressions with each of the impression methods. he
impressions were superimposed within each test impression group,
for each patient, using CAD software (Geomagic Qualify 12, 3D
Systems). A perfect match (misit of zero) would indicate ideal
precision, with increasing values from zero gradually indicating chair. Preparation corrections may be accomplished immediately.
Additionally, inadequately captured areas may be immediately
reimaged without the need to redo the entire impression, as is the
case with conventional impression materials.
Reearch Relative to CAD/CAM Sytem
Dentists have ongoing concern that restoration adaptation to tooth
preparations allows for optimal clinical performance. he CEREC
system was the initial chairside CAD/CAM system introduced to
the dental marketplace and has over 30 years of both laboratory
and clinical research documenting the relative accuracy of the it
of CEREC chairside CAD/CAM restorations. Digital camera
technology has evolved from a single image capture process
(RedCam) to the LED-based BlueCam to the present video version
(OmniCam). he it of CEREC restorations have consistently
been considered accurate irrespective to the version of the image
capturing device used. Cook and Fasbinder compared marginal
it and internal adaptation of crowns fabricated on virtual models
made from the CEREC 3 infrared laser camera (RedCam) and
CEREC BlueCam .10 No signiicant diference was found in the
margin it and internal adaptation of CEREC crowns fabricated
with either RedCam or B lueCam. he average marginal gap was
67 ± 18 μm for all groups evaluated.
Marginal adaptation (or margin it) plays a critical role in
long-term clinical performance of CAD/CAM restorations; when
the adaptation of the restoration to the preparatio n is poor it leads
to greater discrepancies at the margin. Restoration adaptation has
been thoroughly investigated in the literature. Whe reas some internal
space is necessary to accommodate the resin cement, most authors
are in agreement that margin openings under μm would be
desirable. A systematic review evaluated the it and margin adapta -
tion of CAD/CAM restorations.23 T wo electronic databases were
searched for articles published between and and
cross-matched against predetermined inclusion and exclusion criteria.
A total of studies were reviewed and 90 were selected for the
meta-analysis, including data on 26 diferent CAD/CAM systems.
he authors concluded that restorations fabricated using CAD/
CAM systems have better internal it than restorations fabricated
using traditional methods. he marginal gap of crowns, made
from a variety of primarily ceramic materials, ranged from 10 to
μm, often with gaps less than 80 μm. It was reported that
the limitation of CAD/CAM systems is not achieving a precise
margin it, but the reliability of doing so over a large set of
restorations.
Margin it is also an indicator of accuracy of restorations. An
in vitro study by Seelbach et al. compared the accuracy of ceramic
crowns fabricated from scans using Lava COS, CEREC AC, and
iTero digital impr essions with two diferent conventional impression
techniques.24 A stainless steel master model was scanned 10 times
each with the Lava COS and iTero (Cadent) systems, and zirconia
crowns were made from each digital impression. he master model
was scanned 10 times with the CEREC AC (BlueCam) system
and 10 EmpressCAD crowns were fabricated. Ten putty-wash
impressions using a single step and a two-step tech nique were
made and zirconia crowns were made from each impression. here
was no statistically signiicant diference in the marginal it of the
crowns fabricated using Lava COS (48 ± 25 μm), CEREC AC
(30 ± 17 μm), iTero (41 ± 16 μm), and the single-step putty-wash
technique (33 ± 19 μm), whereas the mean margin it for the
two-step putty-wash technique (60 ± 30 μm) was signiicantly
CHAPTER 12 Digital Dentitry in Operative Dentitry
by using both a replica technique and visual examination looking
at common criteria for ceramic r estorations. he quality of the
preparation inluenced the accuracy of the margin it in ways that
were statistically signiicant. Ideal preparations had a mean margin
it of 38.5 ± 9 μm, fair preparations had 58.3 ± 12 μm, and poor
preparations had 90.1 ± 23 μm. A second in vitro study measured
the margin it and internal adaptation of E4D fabricated emaxCAD
crowns.32 Mean margin its varied from 79.32 ± 63.18 μm for
buccal margins to 50.39 ± 35.98 μm for lingual margins. Additional
independent studies are warranted for a more precise assessment
of margin it and internal adaptation of PlanFit and CS Solutions
restorations.
Clinical Longevity of CAD/CAM Retoration
he clinical performance of chairside CAD/CAM restorations has
been studied so as to assess relative longevity in the oral environment.
Long-term randomized clinical trials are considered the most robust
study design for the purpose of proper assessment of clinical longev -
ity. However, there is considerable amount of variation in the
dental literature when searching for independent randomized studies
on clinical longevity of chairside CAD/CAM restorations. he
vast majority of the publications report on the long-term clinical
performance of CEREC restorations primarily because the CEREC
System has been available since the early 1990s whereas other
systems have been more recently introduced. Systematic reviews
represent invaluable tools to synthesize the results of these multiple
and varied clinical studies; however, the conclusions of systematic
reviews are only as valuable as the quality of the studies they seek
to combine.
Wittneben and coworkers evaluated the clinical performance
of CAD/CAM restorations in a systematic review.33 he authors
performed an electronic search of all publications on clinical
performance of CAD/CAM restoration between and .
Studies were selected following speciic inclusion criteria. he
included publications comprised 14 prospective and 2 retrospective
studies on the chairside CEREC System (CEREC 1 and 2) as well
as the laboratory system Celay, providing follow-up data from 2
to 10 years. he search yielded data on a total of restorations
with a mean exposure time of 7.9 years. he restorations included
mostly posterior crowns, but some studies evaluated inlays , onlays,
endocrowns, and anterior crowns. A total of failures were
reported, at a rate of 1.75% failure per year. he most common
modes of failure described were fractures of the re storation or
tooth. he estimated survival rate for CEREC single-tooth restora -
tions was 91.6% (95% CI: 1.22%–2.52%). Restorations fabricated
with feldspathic porcelain had the highest 5-year survival rate,
which contrasted with the lowest 5-year survival rate for glass
ceramic. At 5 years, ceramic onlays performed equally as successful
as crowns; however, the authors identiied a signiicant lack of
randomized studies as well as a shortage of scientiic evidence
longer than 3 years.
Among the CEREC literature, several of the studies published
data on CAD/CAM generated feldspathic porcelain restorations.
Posselt and Kerschbaum conducted a retrospective study on the
clinical performance of inlays and onlays for patients
in a private practice setting. A total of 35 failures were reported
over 9 years. he Kaplan-Meier survival probability reported was
97.4% at 5 years and 95.5% at 9 years for CEREC inlays and
onlays. According to the authors, failure rate was not signiicantly
inluenced by restoration size, tooth vitality, previous presence of
deep caries, type of tooth treated, or whether the restoration was poorer precision. he precision for all methods ranged from 18.8
± 7.1 μm for the metal full-arch tray to 58.5 ± 22.8 μm with the
triple tray. he conventional metal full-arch tray had statistically
best precision of all groups, followed by T rue Def (21.7 ± 7.4 μm),
T rios (25.7 ± 4.9 μm), T rios Color (26.1 ± 3.8 μm), and group
BlueCam 4.0 (34.2 ± 10.5 μm). N o statistically signiicant diference
was found between BlueCam 4.2 (43.3 ± 19.6 μm), OmniCam
(37.4 ± 8.1 μm), Lava COS (47.7 ± 16.1 μm), iTero (49 ±
12.4 μm), and conventional triple tray impressions (58.5 ±
22.8 μm). he authors concluded that despite signiicant diferences
found, all of the digital impression systems were capable of produc -
ing quadrant impression with precision that was clinically
acceptable.
Hack and Patzalt measured the ability of six intraoral scanners
to accurately capture a single molar abutment tooth in vitro.29 he
scanners tested included iTero, T rue Def, PlanScan, CS ,
T rios, and CEREC Omnicam. A master typodont model of a
single crown preparation was scanned with a highly accurate
industrial benchtop scanner, and the digital ile from the benchtop
scanner was compared to the digital scans of the intraoral scanners
using a CAD software program (Geomagic Qualify). Precision
was measured by superimposing the benchtop scanner digital ile
onto the digital iles recorded by each scanner and evaluated for
three-dimensional deviations. Similar to a previously mentioned
study, a perfect match (misit of zero) would indicate ideal precision,
with increasing values from zero gradually indicating poorer preci -
sion. he authors reported most accurate precision values for the
T rios (4.5 ± 0.9 μm), followed by T rue Def (6.1 ± 1 μm), iTero
(7 ± 1.4 μm), CS3500 (7.2 ± 1.7 μm), CEREC OmniCam (16.2
± 4 μm), and PlanScan (26.4 ± 5 μm). Statistically signiicant
differences were reported between all scanners and CEREC
Omnicam ( P < 0.05) as well as between all scanners and PlanScan
(P < 0.05). he authors concluded that, even though there were
diferences in levels of accuracy, all scanners investigated produced
clinically acceptable accuracy.
A more recent systematic review also evaluated the marginal
it of single-unit all-ceramic crowns fabricated after conventional
and digital impressions. he search included studies published
from January through December . From the original
63 articles that were identiied, 12 were selected (both in vitro and
in vivo ) after applying the inclusion and exclusion criteria. For in
vitro studies mean marginal it of crowns fabricated after conven -
tional impressions was 58.9 μm (95% CI: 41.1–76.7 μm), whereas
for digital impressions it was 63.3 μm (95% CI: 50.5–76 μm).
However, for in vivo studies the results were reversed with mean
marginal it of crowns fabricated after digital impressions 56.1 μm
(95% CI: 46.3–65.8 μm), whereas for digital impressions it was
79.2 μm (95% CI: 59.6–98.9 μm). he authors reported low
overall risk of bias of the included studies as well as moderate
heterogeneity, mostly due to the variety of intraoral scanners and
ceramic materials in the studies included. he result of the metaanalysis indicated no statistically signiicant diference in marginal
gap of single-unit ceramic restorations fabricated after conventional
or digital impressions. he authors suggested that the digital
worklow exceeds clinically acceptable standards and performs equal
to conventional impressions.30
he PlanFit and CS Solutions systems have been more recently
introduced for chairside CAD/CAM restorations and have very
limited published research on margin it and internal adaptation.
One study measured the marginal it of E4D fabricated crowns
on typodont preparations completed by 62 diferent clinicians.31
Each of the crown preparations was judged as good, fair, or poor
CHAPTER 12 Digital Dentitry in Operative Dentitry
in margin adaptation was noted when inlays of both materials were
compared to baseline values due to margin wear of the adhesive
luting cement over time . Composite inlays had fewer fractures
in 10 years, with a calculated survival rate of 95% for Paradigm
MZ100 inlays versus 87.5% for Vitablocks Mark II . he calculated
annual failure rates were 0.5% for composite inlays and 1.25% for
ceramic inlays.39
he vast majority of publications report on feldspathic CAD/
CAM materials because they were the irst blocks available for
chairside milling. More recent studies have evaluated newer CAD/
CAM materials. A randomized clinical study compared leucitereinforced (Paradigm C, 3M ESPE) and feldspathic (Vita Mark
II, Vita) CEREC onlays cemented with a self-etching, self-adhesive
resin cement (RelyX Unicem, 3M ESPE). No statistically signiicant
diferences in the clinical performance were noted between the
two materials at 3 years .40 his trend continued to be observed at
the 5-year follo w-up as no statistically signiicant diference was
noted in margin adaptation between the two materials either at 5
years or when results were compared to baseline values. However,
an increased trend for localized crevice formation was noted over
time and a statistically signiicant diference was found between
baseline and 5-year data for both materials when mo re discriminative
criteria were applied.41
Chairside CAD/CAM systems were initially limited to the
fabrication of inlays and onlays since crowns were not possible
with the milling instruments irst introduced; therefore most of
the initial studies focus on chairside all-ceramic inlays and onlays.
With the advent of newer materials and evolution of the milling
systems, an increased number of publications focus on chairside
CAD/CAM crowns. Reich and coworkers reported a short-term
clinical study on the performance of chairside CAD/CAM IPS
e.maxCAD crowns fabricated with the CEREC system. Forty-one
full-contour e.maxCAD crowns were placed in 34 patients and
39 were available for the 24-month recall. Kaplan-Meier analysis
revealed a 2-year survival rate of 97.4%. However, the failures
observed were not due to crown fracture; one crown exhibited
secondary caries and two crowns received root canal treatment.42
In contrast, a large longitudinal clinical study evaluated the clinical
performance of IPS e.maxCAD CEREC crowns at 2, 4, and
5 years.43-45 All crowns were fabricated and delivered at a single
appointment. he irst 62 crowns were placed with either a selfetching bonding agent and resin cement or a self-adhesive resin
cement. he last group consisted of 38 crowns that were delivered
using an experimental self-etching, self-curing cement . No crown
failures were reported during the irst 24 months, therefore the
2-year survival rate was %. A total of ive failures were recorded
at 5 years, four crowns debonded (three of which had been delivered
with the experimental cement that never made it to market), and
one crown fractured, for a 95% survival rate at 5 years. his study
is currently ongoing and the optimistic trends continue to be
observed.
here is considerable published clinical research on chairside
CAD/CAM technology that has revealed it to be a valuable tool
for the delivery of high-quality restorations delivered during a
single appointment. he ability to adhesively bond ceramic restora -
tions at the time of restoration fabrication minimi zes the occurrence
of postoperative sensitivity while allowing for more conservative
tooth preparation as no preparation retention is requir ed to retain
a temporary restoration. Research studies have assessed an extensive
variety of resin-based, porcelain, glass ceramic, and high-strength
ceramic materials that may be used to provide restorative solutions
for inlays, onlays, veneers, and full crowns.located in the maxilla or mandible. he most common type of
failure reported was tooth extraction.34 A 10-year prospective clinical
trial on feldspathic CEREC 1 inlays and onlays reported a KaplanMeier survival probability of 90.4% after 10 years for restora -
tions placed in private practice. he restorations were placed in
patients (62 female, 46 male). he mean age of the patients
was 37 years (range 17 to 75 years). All patients presented with
good dental care and a low risk for caries. he restorations were
fabricated chairside using Vita MK I feldspathic ceramic and were
delivered with adhesive technique with luting composite resin
instead of resin cement. A total of 15 restorations (8%) failed in
10 years, primarily due to either restoration or tooth fracture.35
In a follow-up report of that study, the authors reported less than
3% drop in survival rate for the same restorations at 17 years,
with reported Kaplan-Meier survival probability of 88.7%. Six
restorations failed during the 7-year period between evaluations,
once again primarily due to either restoration or tooth fracture.36
Compared to clinical studies using early versions of the CEREC
system, these more recent studies reported better survival
probabilities.
he clinical survival of CAD/CAM restorations is inluenced
by the adhesive cementation, which in turn is maximized with the
presence of enamel margins. his was well demonstrated by a
longitudinal study on clinical performance of nonretentive feld -
spathic CAD/CAM overlays (occlusal veneers). A single operator
placed CEREC overlays paying particular attention to keeping
preparation margins within enamel whenever possible. After 8
years of follow-up, paired onlays were available for evaluation
and the calculated survival rate was 99.3%. he only two fractures
observed in this study were on maxillary premolars of one patient
with occlusal parafunction.37 he clinical success of these restorations
was likely due to the predictable bonding that is often achieved
whenever the all-ceramic preparation is within enamel. In addition,
an experienced operator may have in luenced such remarkable
performance, as more inexperienced operators did not achieve
similar results. For example, a short-term prospective randomized
controlled clinical trial looked at the clinical performance of 68
paired feldspathic CEREC onlays (Vitablock Mark II) that were
cemented with a self-adhesive cement (RelyX Unicem, 3 M ESPE).
he inluence of selective enamel etching was evaluated so each
patient had one onlay cemented with the self-etch technique and
the other one after selective etching. Statistically signiicant changes
were observed for marginal adaptation and marginal discoloration
between baseline and 2 years but no statistically signiicant diference
in clinical performance was recorded between the two diferent
cementation groups. T wo onlays debonded, one from each group;
two onlays fractured from the self-etch group. he 2-year failure
rate for CEREC feldspathic onlays was 5.1% for the self-etch
technique and 1.7% for the selective etching group. he authors
concluded that selective enamel etching did not statistically sig -
niicantly inluence the results.38 However, the failure to ind
signiicance could be attributed to the short follow-up time.
Long-term clinical trials indicate that failures tend to continue to
increase over time.
A long-term randomized clinical trial was designed to access
the longitudinal performance of 80 inlays machined from either
a composite resin material (Paradigm MZ100) or feldspathic
ceramic (Vitablocks Mark II), cemented with a dual-cured resin
cement (RelyX ARC) using a total-etch bonding technique. At
the 10-year recall 89% of the inlays were available for evaluation .
No statistically signiicant diference in margin adaptation was
evident between the two materials; however, a signiicant decrease
CHAPTER 12 Digital Dentitry in Operative Dentitry
19. Della Bona A, Corazza PH, Zhang Y: Characterization of a polymeriniltrated ceramic-network material. Dent Mater 30(5): – ,
.
20. El Zhawi H, Kaizer MR, Chughtai A, et al: Polymer iniltrated
ceramic network structures for resistance to fatigu e fracture and wear.
Dent Mater , pii: S0109- (16) -1. 1. Rusin RP: Properties and applications of a new composite block for
CAD/CAM. Compend Contin Educ Dent 22(6 Suppl):35–41, .
22. Guazzato M, Albakry M, Ringer SP , et al: Strength, fracture toughness
and microstructure of a selection of all-ceramic materials. Part II.
Zirconia-based dental ceramic. Dent Mater 20: – , 2004b.
23. Boitelle P , Mawussi B, Tapie L, et al: A systematic review of CAD/
CAM it restoration evaluations. J Oral Rehabil 41: – , .
24. Seelbach P , Brueckel C, Wostmann B: Accuracy of digital and
conventional impression techniques and worklow. Clin Oral Investig
17(7): – , , 1. . [Epub
ahead of print].
31. Renne W, McGill ST, VanSickle Forshee K, et al: Predicting marginal
it of CAD/CAM crowns based on the presence of or absence of
common preparation errors. J Prosthet Dent : – , .
32. Plourde J, Harsono M, Fox L, et al: Marginal and internal it of
E4D CAD/CAM all-ceramic crowns. J Dent Res 90(SpecA): ,
.
33. Wittneben JG, Wright RF , Weber HP , et al: A systematic review of
the clinical performance of CAD/CAM single-tooth restorations. Int
J Prosthodont 22(5): – , .
34. Posselt A, Kerschbaum T: Longevity of chairside Cerec inlays
and onlays. Int J Comput Dent 6(3): – , .
35. Otto T, De Nisco S: Computer-aided direct ceramic restorations: a
10-year prospective clinical study of Cerec CAD/CAM inlays and
onlays. Int J Prosthodont 15(2): – , .
36. Otto T, Schneider D: Long-term clinical results of chairside Cerec
CAD/CAM inlays and onlays: a case series. Int J Prosthodont
21(1):53–59, .
37. Arnetzl GV, Arnetzl G: Reliability of nonretentive all-ceramic CAD/
CAM overlays. Int J Comput Dent 15(3): – , .
38. Schenke F , Federlin M, Hiller KA, et al: Controlled, prospective,
randomized, clinical evaluation of partial ceramic crowns inserted
with RelyX Unicem with or without selective enamel etching. Results
after 2 years. Clin Oral Investig 16(2): – , , 1. Beuer F , Schweiger J, Edelhof D: Digital dentistry: an overview of
recent developments for CAD/CAM generated restorations. Br Dent
J : – , .
2. Mörmann WH, Brandestini M, Lutz F , et al: Chairside computer-aided
direct ceramic inlays. Quintessence Int 20: – , .
3. Mörmann WH: Chairside computer-generated ceramic restorations:
the CEREC third generation improvements. Pract Periodontics Aesthet
Dent 4(7):9–16, .
4. Mörmann WH, Gotsch T, Krejci I, et al: Clinical status of 94 CEREC
ceramic inlays after 3 years in situ. In Mörmann WH, editor:
International symposium on computer restorations , Chicago, ,
Quintessence, pp – .
5. Mehl A, Hickel R: Current state of development and perspectives
of machine-based production methods for dental restorations. Int J
Comput Dent 2:9–35, .
6. Mormann WH: he evolution of the CEREC system. J Am Dent
Assoc (9 Suppl):7S–13S, .
7. Severance G, Swann L: he Take Care approach to treatment planning,
preparation and design for CAD/CAM restorations. Oral Health
99(3):47–52, .
8. Qualtrough AJ, Cramer A, Wilson NH, et al: An in vitro evaluation
of the marginal integrity of a porcelain inlay system. Int J Prosthodont
4: – , .
9. Wilson NHF , Wilson MA, Wastell DG, et al: Performance of
Occlusion in butt-joint and bevel-edged preparations: ive-year results.
Dent Mater 7:92–98, .
10. Cook KT, Fasbinder DJ: Marginal and internal adaptation of CAD/
CAM endocrown preparation designs [abstract ]. J Dent Res
91(specialA): .
11. Fasbinder DJ: Materials for chairside CAD/CAM restor ations.
Compend Contin Educ Dent 31(9): – , .
12. Fasbinder DJ: Chairside CAD/CAM: an overview of restorative
material options. Compend Contin Educ Dent 33(1):50–58, .
13. Charlton DG, Roberts HW, Tiba A: Measurement of select physical
and mechanical properties of 3 machinable ceramic materials.
Quintessence Int 39: – , .
14. Buso L, Oliveira-Júnior OB, Hiroshi Fujiy F , et al: Biaxial lexural
strength of CAD/CAM ceramics. Minerva Stomatol 60(6): – ,
.
15. Albakry M, Guazzato M, Swain MV: Biaxial lexural strength, elastic
moduli, and x-ray difraction characterization of three pressable
all-ceramic materials. J Prosthet Dent 89(4): – , .
16. Belli R, Geinzer E, Muschweck A, et al: Mechanical fatigue degradation
of ceramics versus resin composites for dental restorations. Dent
Mater 30(4): – , .
17. Awada A, Nathanson D: Mechanical properties of resin-ceramic CAD/
CAM restorative materials. J Prosthet Dent (4): – , .
18. Albero A, Pascual A, Camps I, et al: Comparative characterization
of a novel CAD/CAM polymer-iniltrated-ceramic network. J Clin
Exp Dent 7(4):e495–e500, .
CHAPTER 12 Digital Dentitry in Operative Dentitry
40. Fasbinder DJ, Neiva GF , Dennison JB, et al: Clinical evaluation of
CAD/CAM-generated ceramic onlays. J Dent Res 90(SpecA): Abstract
# . .
41. Fasbinder DJ, Neiva GF , Dennison JB, et al: Clinical evaluation of
CAD/CAM-generated onlays: 5-year report. J Dent Res 92(SpecA):
abstract # . .
42. Reich S, Fischer S, Sobotta B, et al: A preliminary study on the
short-term e icacy of chairside computer-aided design/computer-aided
manufacturing-generated posterior lithium disilicate crowns. Int J
Prosthodont 23(3): – , .43. Fasbinder DJ, Dennison JB, Heys D, et al: A clinical evaluation of
chairside lithium disilicate CAD/CAM crowns. A two-year report.
J Am Dent Assoc :10S–14S, .
44. Fasbinder DJ, Dennison JB, Heys D, et al: Clinical evaluation of
lithium disilicate chairside CAD/CAM crowns at four years. J Dent
Res 91(SpecA): abstract # . .
45. Fasbinder DJ, Dennison JB, Heys D, et al: Five-year clinical evaluation
of lithium disilicate chairside CAD/CAM crowns. J Dent Res
94(SpecA): abstract # . .
Dental Biomaterials
TERENCE E. DONOVAN, TAISEER A. SULAIMAN, GUSTAVO MUSSI STEFAN OLIVEIRA,
STEPHEN C. BAYNEa, JEFFREY Y. THOMPSONa
This chapter discusses dental biomaterials with the practicing
dentist and dental student in mind. As such, it is not meant
to be an in-depth review of materials that would be of
interest to material scientists. he chapter discusses dental biomateri -
als from the perspective of the clinician trying to make a decision
about, for example, what composite resin material, dental adhesive
system, or impression material is best for his or her practice in
order to provide optimum care for patients.
hese decisions are often important because, in addition to
clinical time, materials themselves are very expensive and the cost
of premature failure of a restoration and subsequent replacement
is considerable. Most materials are brought to the marketplace
with little or no clinical testing. Practicing dentists are basically
doing the clinical testing for manufacturers. Under standing the
basic nature and composition of dental materials can allow clinicians
to make educated decisions related to new materials and avoid
catastrophic outcomes ( Fig. 13.1 ).
Contemporary dental practitioners are expected to practice
“evidence-based” dentistry.1-4 he evidence-based diagram ( Fig.
13.2) shows the top of the hierarchy is iltered information from
meta-analyses and systematic reviews of published randomized
controlled trials (RCTs). However, the reality is that it takes at
least 10 years from the introduction of a new material before
5-year RCTs are published. Most currently published
systematic reviews are of limited value to the clinician, because
the clinical trials included in the reviews are usually very weak and
poorly designed.5 hus in the absence of good “evidence,” it is
essential that dentists understand the composition of commonly
used dental materials and the functions of each component of
those materials.
Dental materials have a number of important physical and
mechanical properties that will be described in the next section.
One of the most important properties is “technique sensitivity.”
A material is described as technique sensitive when diferent
operators get diferent outcomes when using that material. Materials
that are low in technique sensitivity are desirable, and manufacturers
strive to develop materials that are not technique sensitive. A good
example of this is seen with dental adhesives. Dental adhesives
have evolved over many years and as many as seven generations
have been described. For many years, the fourth generation of
dental adhesives was identiied as the best system, but dentists
have had variable results with it, as it required three separate steps
(etch, prime, bond) and involved the vague concept of “moist” dentin. hese materials were indeed “technique sensitive.” Subse -
quent generations attempted to simplify the bonding procedure
and make it less technique sensitive, but in fact made it less efective.
Dentists who understood the fourth generation of bonding agents
and who were meticulous in their technique achieved excellent
clinical results. hose who did not understand these materials and/
or were less meticulous in their technique got less successful
outcomes.
One material that is very low in technique sensitivity is silver
amalgam ( Fig. 13.3 ). A short time after placement of a silver
amalgam restoration, oral luids penetrate the microscopic space
between the amalgam and tooth structure.6 his process, called
percolation, results in the deposition of corrosion products and
efectively seals the interface between the amalgam and the tooth.
his process of “self-sealing” occurs irrespective of the skill and
knowledge of the operator, which makes silver amalgam one of
the least technique sensitive materials.
he discussion on technique sensitivity leads to the concept
that there are two parts to the successful use of dental materials:
material selection and material manipulation. Dentists must select
the most appropriate restorative material based on knowledge of
the disease process, knowledge of materials appropriate for dealing
with the dental defect, and knowledge of expected outcomes of
the proposed intervention. Appropriate material manipulation
of the selected material requires knowledge about t he material
and meticulous attention to details such as isolation, bonding
technique, incremental buildup, curing time, matrix selection,
and many other variables. hus, both material selection and
proper manipulation of the selected material are critical to clinical
success.
Dentists have variable approaches to their adoption of new
materials and procedures. Some are very conservative and patiently
wait for high quality of evidence prior to using a new material or
technique. Others, described as “early adopters,” eagerly utilize
every new material or technique the instant it comes on market,
and others are between the two extremes. here is room in the
profession for all three groups, but it is clear that early adopters
must have an excellent knowledge and understanding of both the
selection and the manipulation of dental materials.
THE BOTTOM LINE
1. Understanding the composition and nature of dental materials
is important to obtain optimum clinical outcomes.
2. Materials are brought to the market with almost no clinical
testing.aDrs. Bayne and hompson were inactive authors in this edition.
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
Phyical, Mechanical, and Optical Propertie
A number of important physical and mechanical properties of
dental materials can be identiied. his section will discuss some
of these properties and illustrate how they might be important to
the long-term clinical success of a restoration. he discussion will
also attempt to answer the question, “Does a comparison of physical
properties of dental materials help predict clinical success or failure?”2
his section is not meant to be an exhaustive description of all of
the physical and mechanical properties that can be evaluated in
dental materials. he reader is referred to any of the excellent
contemporary textbooks on dental materials for that discussion.
Rather, it is intended to be a brief description of several properties
of dental materials that might be critical for clinical success.
One important point to be considered when evaluating studies
on physical and mechanical properties is that materials should be
tested in the mode in which they are used. Many in vitro studies
fail to do this. One example is dental cements. Clinically cements
are used in thin ilms between 15 and microns. It is physically
impossible to test a sample of this dimension, so tests on dental
cements are done on samples that are not clinically relevant. hus
any in vitro data generated that is related to physical and mechanical
properties of dental cements should not be used to infer signiicant
clinical implications.
he following is an incomplete list and description of physical
and mechanical properties of dental materials and some examples
of why they are important.
Dimensional Change. Dimensional change is the percent
shrinkage or expansion of a material, which usually occurs as a
result of the setting reaction. One example is with composite resin.
Basically composite resin materials consist of inert iller particles
in a matrix of resin, usually mostly bisphenol A glycidyl methacrylate
(Bis-GMA). he resin material undergoes a polymerization reaction
as it sets, with individual monomers joining to become long-chain
polymers that then cross-link to form the polymer matrix. During
the process, the material undergoes polymerization shrinkage. With
contemporary hybrid composite resin materials, the shrinkage is
between 2.4% and 2.8%. If not accounted for in the placement
technique, this amount of shrinkage can lead to clinically signiicant
contraction gaps between the margin of the preparation and the
composite resin restoration. This can result in microleakage,
postoperative sensitivity, and recurrent caries.
Another example is with elastomeric impression mate rials. hese
also set with a polymerization reaction that results in shrinkage.
his shrinkage can be controlled with use of custom impression
trays that provide a 1to 2-mm cross-sectional thickness of the
material and proper use of tray adhesives, which ensures the direction
of shrinkage is toward the tray.7 Use of stock trays results in excessive
thicknesses of impression material that may result in undesirable
distortion of the impression.
hermal Coeicient of Expansion (COE). he COE is deined
as the amount a material expands per unit length if heated 1 degree
higher. Waxes have the highest COE of all dental materials. When
the lost wax process is used, wax patterns should be invested as
soon as possible after margination to ensure that there is no distor -
tion of the wax pattern due to normal fluctuations in room
temperature ( ).
This property can be very important when dealing with
materials that have cores with veneering materials. An example
is metal-ceramic crowns. he feldspathic porcelain veneer, which
provides excellent esthetic result with such restorations, is very
brittle and must be supported with a rigid material (metal alloy). 3. Premature clinical failures of dental restorations are extremely
costly to dental practices.
4. he evidence base for restorative materials is not robust.
5. he relative technique sensitivity of a material is an important
attribute.
6. Both material selection and material manipulation are
important.
• Fig. 13.1 Fractured porcelain veneer.
• Fig. 13.2 Evidence-based medicine pyramid.
• Fig. 13.3 Amalgam restorations.
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
high thermal conductivity are good conductors of hot and cold,
and could be a factor in postoperative sensitivity . his is the rationale
for placing bases and/or liners with cavity preparations that are
close to the pulp. Bases and liners have low thermal conductivity
and thus are eicient insulators (see ).
here is speculation by some that these bases and liners are not
needed because dentin itself is a good insulator. However, often
the thickness of dentin over the pulp may be minimal, so it is
usually recommended that the thickness of remaining dentin plus
the thickness of the base or liner should be at least 2 mm.When fabricating metal-ceramic restorations the crowns must be
heated to a high temperature several times to sinter the veneering
ceramic. hen the units must be cooled to bench temperature.
If the COEs of the metal alloy and veneering porcelains are not
closely matched, stresses can build up in the veneering porcelain
that result in cracking or fracture of the ceramic. his can occur
at the time of fabrication or later in clinical service. Generally the
COE of the metal alloy is reduced with the addition of platinum,
and the COE of the porcelain is increased with the addition of
sodium. Whatever the mechanism used, it is clear the COEs of
both the core and veneering material must be closely matched
(Fig. 13.4 ).
It is often thought that the COEs of restorative materials must
be matched with the COE of tooth structure. If they are not
matched, the ingestion of hot beverages (e.g., cofee) and cold
foods and beverages (e.g., ice cream and beer) could result in
uneven expansion and contraction of the restoration and tooth,
resulting in microleakage. he reality is foods and beverages do
not surround the tooth/restoration complex for a long enough
time frame to efect any signiicant change in the temperature of
the tooth restoration.
hermocycling of tooth restoration samples is frequently done
during in vitro studies, and many incorrectly believe this is intended
to mimic intraoral conditions. Samples are alternately placed in
water at 5°C and 55°C for a speciied dwell time. his is generally
done to artiicially age the samples and to stress the bond being
tested. his thermocycling takes advantage of the difering COEs
of the restorative material and tooth structure to stress the bond
and accelerate the failure rate to shorten the nece ssary testing time.
Percolation. he process of luids entering the microscopic
space between a restorative material and the wall of the cavity
preparation is called percolation. This is not a beneficial
process with materials such as composite resins, but works wonder -
fully with materials such as silver amalgam. When percolation
occurs with amalgam, corrosion products build up at the toothrestoration interface and efectively seal it, usually 6 weeks after
placement of the amalgam. With modern high copper amalgams
with reduced gamma-2 phase, this phenomenon occurs but takes
slightly longer to create an efective seal ( Fig. 13.5 ; ).
hermal Conductivity. hermal conductivity is the rate at which
thermal changes are conducted through a material. Materials with Linear Thermal Co eicient of Expansion
of Dental Materials in the Temperature
Range 20°C to 50°C
Material Coeficient ( × /°C)
Human teeth 8–15
Ceramics 8–14
Glass ionomer base 10–11
Gold alloys 12–15
Dental amalgam 22–28
Composites 25–68
Unilled acrylics and sealants 70–
Inlay wax –
• Fig. 13.4 Metal-ceramic restorations.
• Fig. 13.5 Teeth numbers 12, 13, 14, 15 restored with amalgam res -
torations. Percolation = corrosion product = seal. Thermal Conductivity of Diferent
Materials Used in Dentistry
MaterialThermal Conductivity
(cal/sec/cm2[°C/cm])
Unilled acrylics 0.
Zinc oxide–eugenol cement 0.
Human dentin 0.
Human enamel 0.
Composites 0.
Ceramic 0.
Zinc phosphate cement 0.
Dental amalgam 0.
Gold alloys 0.
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
silverware ( Fig. 13.7 ). It does not result in physical breakdown of
the alloy. It is important to note that the term “noble metal”
connotes that the metal is resistant to tarnish in the oral cavity.
he major noble metals used in dentistry are gold, platinum, and
palladium. Others are rhodium, ruthenium, iridium, and osmium.
Alloys should contain a minimum 45% noble metal to prevent
intraoral tarnishing. Chromium is a metal that prevents tarnish
in base metal alloys. One metal that is precious but not noble is
silver.
Corrosion is chemical or electrochemical dissolution of metals
in oral luids. he varying pHs in the oral environment create the
possibility of corrosion, although in fact it is a rare occurrence.
Corrosion of prefabricated metal endodontic dowels with fractured
endodontically treated teeth has been seen occasionally. In these
cases it is believed that fracture of the endodontically treated tooth
occurred irst, allowing contact of oral luids with the post resulting
in corrosion. he other possibility is that the corrosion occurred
irst followed by fracture due to the production of corrosion products
(Fig. 13.8 ).
Solubility. Solubility is the relative tendency to dissolve in oral
luids. his was a major problem with the irst direct esthetic
restorative material, silicate cement. his cement was a powder It is interesting to note that amalgam is an excellent thermal
conductor whereas composite resin is an efective insulator; however,
the incidence of postoperative sensitivity is signiicantly higher
with composite resin restorations than with amalgam restorations.
his demonstrates that the phenomenon of postoperative sensitivity
is multifactorial and complex, and not due to thermal conductivity
alone.
Layered zirconia restorations experience a rate of veneer chipping
about eight times that of metal-ceramic restorations. he etiology
of this chipping is multifactorial, but one of the potential causes
is the thermal conductivity of the zirconia core. he thermal
conductivity is extremely low, and zirconia can be considered an
insulator. he consequence of this is that when a layered zirconia
restoration is removed from the sintering oven, the core cools very
slowly and the veneering ceramic cools past its glass transition
temperature while the core continues to cool and shrink. he net
result of this interaction is that stress is built up in the veneering
ceramic, which is later released via clinical chipping of the veneering
material. New iring cycles involving slower cooling rates seem to
have reduced the incidence of chipping in recent years.8
Creep. Creep is deined as time dependent plastic deformation
of a material under static load or constant stress. his property is
important with silver amalgam. Conventional low copper amalgam
materials have high creep values and exhibit poor marginal integrity
over time as the amalgam creeps into a thin layer and then breaks
of creating marginal ditching. Contemporary high copper amalgams
have low creep values and maintain good marginal integrity as a
function of time.
Creep is one of the few properties that has a demonstrated
ability to predict clinical performance. Amalgam materials with
low creep values perform well clinically when compared with
amalgams with high creep values.
Electrical Properties. he three major electrical properties in
dentistry are galvanism, tarnish, and corrosion. Galvanism occurs
whenever diferent metals are in contact with one another in the
presence of an electrolyte (saliva). Clinically, this can occur when
a gold crown is placed adjacent to an existing amalgam restoration
or vice versa. Gold crowns adjacent to metal-ceramic crowns can
have a similar result as there are over diferent commercially
available porcelain bonding alloys. he clinical symptoms resemble
an “electrical shock” or the presence of a metallic taste. hese
symptoms typically are self-limiting and are not considered serious
problems ( Fig. 13.6 ).
Tarnish is a surface phenomenon resulting in unesthetic dis -
coloration of dental alloys, similar to tarnish of commonly used
• Fig. 13.6 The generation of electrical currents due to contact of dis -
similar metals in an electrolyte is known as galvanism.
• Fig. 13.7 Tarnish of silverware. Dental alloys may undergo the same
discoloration in the oral environment.
• Fig. 13.8 Example of corrosion due to electrochemical dissolution in
water.
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
Radiation of another wavelength may be preferentially absorbed
(e.g., x-rays). Composites that contain lithium, barium, strontium,
or other good x-ray absorbers may appear radiopaque (radiodense)
in dental radiographs. Materials that are good absorbers (for whatever
form of radiation) are described as opaque.
he appearance of a dental restoration is a combination of
events of surface relection, absorption, and internal scattering.
he scattering simply may delect the path of the radiation during
transmission (refraction), or it may relect the radiation internally
from varying depths back out of a solid to the observer (translu -
cency). Enamel naturally displays a high degree of translucency;
translucency is a desirable characteristic for restorative materials
attempting to mimic enamel. A tooth that is isolated and kept
from any contact with oral moisture (saliva) soon develops a transient
whiter appearance. Refractive index is the angle of changed path
for a standard wavelength of light energy under standard conditions
(Fig. 13.10 ).
Compressive Strength, T ensile Strength, Diametral T ensile
Strength, Flexural Strength, and Fracture Toughness. All of these
are mechanical properties of materials that are tes ted utilizing
nonclinical samples and thus are only useful when comparing the
tested material to a known standard. Compressive strength tests
use cylindrical samples. Tensile tests can be done with certain
materials such as wires but cannot be used with materials such as
dental cements. Diametral tensile strength tests use discs and apply
the force to an edge. Because these tests do not test the material
in the mode in which it is used, data obtained from the tests are
of little value in predicting clinical performance but may be useful
in comparing a new product to a standard ( Fig. 13.11 ).
Flexural strength testing has become popular for evaluating
new ceramic materials. Many of the newer ceramics such as lithium
disilicate and monolithic zirconia have vastly improved lexural
strength compared to feldspathic porcelain or leucite reinforced
ceramic. However, that data in itself does not automatically ensure
improved clinical performance, because ceramic crowns do not
fracture because of a lack of strength. hey fracture because of
inherent defects called Griith laws, which are incorporated into
the restorations during fabrication. hese defects propagate under
occlusal stress and due to static fatigue, and eventually result in
catastrophic failure. These newer materials may well provide
improved clinical performance because the techniques used in
fabrication (pressing and machining) result in fewer inherent defects,
and the phase transformation capability of zirconia prevents defects
from propagating after initiation.liquid system, the powder being ground alumino-silicate glass and
the liquid phosphoric acid. When mixed, it formed a paste that
was inserted into the prepared cavity and when set and inished
provided a restoration suitable for class III restorations that was
expected to provide only 3 to 5 years of service. he reason for
this short time of service was that silicate cements were soluble in
oral luids. An unexpected beneit of this problem was that as the
alumino-silicate glass dissolved, it released high concentrations of
luoride. When the partially dissolved restoration was removed for
replacement, recurrent caries was never found due to this high
level of luoride release ( Fig. 13.9 ).
Conventional nonresin-based dental cements had variable levels
of solubility; for example, zinc-oxide eugenol (ZOE) cements that
are often used for provisional restorations are quite soluble in oral
luids. From a practical standpoint, this means that provisional
restorations should not be cemented for more than 6 weeks if
ZOE is used. At that time, the provisional restorations should be
removed, cleaned, and recemented.
he relative solubility of conventional nonresin cements made
it necessary to provide precisely itting deinitive restorations. Cast
gold restorations provide an extremely long time of service cemented
with zinc-phosphate cement, providing they have precision of it.
Poorly itting cast gold restorations provide a short term of service
as they are simply chunks of metal in a sea of cement.
Solubility of dental cements is typically measured with a 24-hour
in vitro solubility test where a sample of cement is immersed in
a solute for 24 hours and the amount of dissolved cement is
calculated.9 Long-term (6 months) in vivo solubility tests are
preferred. hese types of studies indicate that there are small
diferences between cements in long-term solubility, but importantly
ind there are signiicant diferences among patients in regard to
solubility. Some patients dissolve considerable amounts of cement,
while other patients demonstrate minimal solubility. he causes
of this phenomenon are not known.
Glass ionomer cements perform poorly in 24-hour in vitro
solubility testing because they are quite soluble in the irst 24
hours after mixing. However, they perform very well in 6-month
in vivo testing, and in fact are the best of the conventional nonresin
cements in that parameter. his means they must be protected
from saliva immediately after cementation using excellent isolation
and coating with petroleum jelly or varnish.
Optical Properties. Optical properties of bulk materials include
interactions with visible light that involve relection, refraction,
absorption (and luorescence), or transmission. he radiation
typically involves diferent intensities for diferent wavelengths (or
energies) over the range of interest (spectrum). Any of these
interactive events can be measured using a relative scale or an
absolute scale. When the electromagnetic radiation is visible light,
the amount of relection can be measured in relative terms as gloss
or in absolute terms as percent relection. Visible light absorption
can be measured in absolute terms as percent absorption (or
transmission) for every wavelength (in the visible spectrum). Color
is a perception by an observer of the distribution of wavelengths.
he same color sensation may be produced by diferent absorption
spectra (metamerism). An individual’s eye is capable of sensing
dominant wavelength, luminous relectance (intensity), and excita -
tion purity. Variations among individuals’ abilities to sense these
characteristics give rise to varying perceptions of color.
he quality of color is measured by the Commission Interna -
tionale de l’Eclairage system as tristimulus values and reported as
color diferences ( ΔL*, Δa*, and Δb*) compared with standard
conditions.
• Fig. 13.9 Class III cavity restored with silicate cement after 3 years.
Notice the poor resistance to solubility and color change. No evidence of
recurrent carries.
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
material will deform when placed under stress. A material with a
high elastic modulus will be stif; a material with a low elastic
modulus will be lexible.
Ceramic materials have a very high elastic modulus and are
very brittle. hese materials are frequently bonded to a core material
to support the ceramic veneer and prevent fracture. It is critical
that the core material have an elastic modulus equal to or higher
than that of the ceramic material, because if the core material
lexes, the ceramic will fracture.
Another area where the modulus of elasticity of a material is
important is in the restoration of noncarious cervical lesions
(NCCLs). One potential etiology of NCCLs is tooth lexure leading
to cervical breakdown. T raditionally, materials with a low elastic
modulus such as microilled composite resins and resin modiied
glass ionomers have been more successful in restoring NCCLs
than stif materials such as hybrid composite resins.10 Contemporary
adhesive systems are now highly illed and, because they have a
low elastic modulus, can act as stress breakers during tooth lexure,
permitting successful restoration with stifer composite resins.
Load-to Failure T esting Versus Fatigue T esting. he traditional
approach to testing the strength of dental restorations is load-tofailure testing. With load-to-failure testing, a restoration is fabricated
and cemented/bonded to the prepared tooth or die and then loaded
with a testing machine and the forces increased until the restoration
fractures. If the load at which the restorations fail exceeds the
maximum bite force in the area of the restoration, it is then deemed
that materials will provide excellent clinical performance. Data
generated from load-to-failure testing can be very misleading and
do not provide predictive information on clinical performance.
Several problems with load-to-failure testing can be identiied.
Clinically, teeth and restorations generally fail by defect propagation.
Load-to-failure testing does not take this into account. he loads
at which failure occurs with load-to-failure testing are much higher
than the loads at which clinical failure occurs.11 he failures with WAVELENGTHINTENSITY
WAVELENGTHINTENSITY
Incident light rays Reflected light raysOBSERVER Source
SUBSTRATEInternal
reflection
(translucency)
Transmission /H11005
1/OpacityTranslucency
TransparencyRefractive index /H11005
change in path at
surfaces./H11021/H11021 Internal
scatteringAbsorption /H11022/H11022
• Fig. 13.10 Schematic summary of interactions of electromagnetic
radiation with materials. The color perceived by the observer is the result of
several interactions between substrate and incoming radiation producing
relection, internal scattering, absorption, luorescence, and transmission.
Compression
Tension
Torsion
Flexure
Diametral compression,
diametral tensionShear
ATorsionCompression
Tension
FlexureShear
B
• Fig. 13.11 Examples of directions of loading. A, Uniaxial loading of cylinder. B, Uniaxial loading of a
mesioocclusal amalgam restoration. Fracture toughness determination may be one of the most
valuable in vitro tests because it evaluates failure initiating from
a predetermined defect. It is possible that materials with improved
fracture toughness may show improved clinical performance.
Elastic Modulus. Elastic modulus is a measure of the relative
stifness or rigidity of a material ( Fig. 13.12 ). he elastic modulus
is the ratio of stress over strain and is the slope of the straight-line
portion of a stress-strain diagram. It is a measure of how the
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
on a restoration, but rather they fail by defect propagation due to
low occlusal forces over a long period of time. In order to make
in vitro testing more clinically related, fatigue testing using cyclic
loading machines has become increasingly popular ( Fig. 13.13 ).
Fatigue testing using cyclic loading is considerably more relevant
than load-to-failure testing because it much more closely mimics
the clinical situation. Fortunately, many major research organizations
have made the considerable investment in cyclic loading machines
and more and more fatigue studies are appearing in the peer reviewed
literature. It is important to note that dental fatigue testing is in
its infancy and many factors need to be considered when attempting
to bring the study environment closer to the clinical situation.
Some of the variables that need to be considered include loading
force, number of cycles, loading frequency, and ant agonist material.
Whether or not to include a simulated periodontal ligament is an
important consideration. Whether to fatigue under water or dry
is also a consideration. With ceramic materials, it is critical to
fatigue under water as it has been proven that ceramic materials
fail at half the load under water as in air . his is because of the
presence of static fatigue with ceramic materials under water or
saliva. he use of thermocycling, the type of abutment or die
material, the use of vertical plus lateral movements, and the use
of anatomic versus lat samples are all important considerations
when designing a fatigue study.
he bottom line is that load-to-failure studies have no clinical
relevance whatsoever and should not be published. While recogniz -
ing that designing appropriate fatigue studies is challenging, it is
clear that these types of studies are going to play an increasingly
important role in dental materials research.
Wettability. Wettability is a measure of the ainity of a liquid for
a solid as indicated by the spreading of a sessile drop ( Fig. 13.14 ).
his might be best explained by the state of a raindrop on a
freshly waxed car. It will bead up, indicating a high contact angle
and low wettability. Similarly, placing a drop on air abraded versus
polished metal will result in a spreading drop (low contact angle;
good wettability) on the former and a beaded drop (high contact
angle; poor wettability) on the latter.
Early versions of addition reaction silicone impres sion material
were extremely hydrophobic and difficult to pour. Modern load-to-failure testing initiate at the occlusal surface of the restoration
being tested while clinically restorations fail by defect propagation
from defects at the tooth cement surface. Finally, the fracture
pattern of failed restorations with load-to-failure testing results in
the restoration fracturing in multiple fragments. Clinically, failure
usually occurs with the restoration breaking into two pieces.
One major argument against load-to-failure testing is tha t restora -
tions do not fail because the patient bites down wi th incredible force
Load
Fracture
DEFORMATION (mm)
Total
deformationLOAD (kg)
Plastic
deformationElastic
deformation
Breaking
strength,
ultimate
strength
Toughness,
area under entire curve
to point of fracture Resilience,
area under curve to
point of elastic limitElastic limit,
proportional limit,
yield point
STRAIN (mm/mm)STRESS (MPa)Modulus, elastic modulus, stiffness,
slope of straight line
CBA
• Fig. 13.12 Schematic summary of mechanical properties with respect
to amalgam restoration in function. A, Occlusal loading of Class I amalgam
restoration. B, Load/deformation curve describing behavior of amalgam.
C, Normalization of load/deformation curve to stress-strain curve with
important characteristics of curve indicated. (Mechanical responses
depend on temperature and strain rate involved.)
• Fig. 13.13 Eight-chamber chewing simulator.
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
the composite resin increment, curing through ceramics, and
distance of the light from the resin.
Bond Strength T esting. In the adhesive era there is a need to
test the bond of one material to another, and the bond of materials
to enamel and dentin. here have been hundreds of studies
published on bond strength in recent years. hese studies are
useful for comparing the relative bond strength of product X to
product Y but have relatively low ability to predict clinical
performance.12
he most common bond strength test is the shear bond strength
test. his test is used frequently because it is easy to perform, but
the clinical relevance is minimal. Another approach is the micro -
tensile bond strength test. his test became popular because it was
initially thought that 8 to 10 samples could be obtained from a
single tooth; however, subsequent evaluation determined that data
from these samples needed to be combined and in reality only 1
sample was obtained from each tooth. his bond strength test is
extremely technique sensitive and produces data with wide standard
deviations. It is not clear that the predictive data from microtensile
bond strength testing is more predictive of clinical performance
than shear bond testing.
It is clear that many bonds are quite strong initially but dete -
riorate over time. hus it is imperative that bond strength testing
must include initial testing plus testing after storage in water,
thermocycling, or fatigue.
Biologic Properties. Biologic properties of biomaterials are
concerned with toxicity and sensitivity reactions that occur locally,
within the associated tissue, and systemically. It is possible to evaluate
local toxic efects on cells by clinical pulp studies or by tissue
culture tests. Unset materials may release cytotoxic components;
however, in clinical situations this problem is rarely evident. T wo elastomeric impression materials contain nonionic surfactants,
which render them more hydrophilic and considerably easier to
pour because the surface is more wettable and forms a lower contact
angle with liquids.
Hardness T esting. he surface hardness of a material is often
of interest and is determined by use of some form of indenter.
Basically the indenting tool is dropped onto the surface of the
material with a speciied load, and the size of the defect created
on the material is measured using a microscope. here are diferent
hardness tests that are optimally used with speciic materials. hese
include Knoop, Vickers, Barcol, Brinell, and Rockwell hardness
testing ( Fig. 13.15 ). he diference between these testers is the
shape and material of the indenter and the force used.
One area where hardness testing is frequently used is in determin -
ing the degree of polymerization of composite resin materials. he
harder the surface, the greater the degree of conversion. Studies
generally compare the hardness of the top surface (closest to the
light) and the hardness of the bottom surface. Some of the variables
that have been tested include intensity of the light, thickness of
nonwettingΘ > 90° Θ < 90°
wetting
• Fig. 13.14 Schematic drawing of the contact angle determining wet -
tability. Contact angles less than 90 degrees are considered to be wetting
and hydrophilic. Contact angles larger than 90 degrees are considered
nonwetting and hydrophobic.
• Fig. 13.15 Shapes of hardness indenter points (upper row) and the indentation depressions left in
material surfaces (lower row). The measured dimension M that is shown for each test is used to calculate
hardness. The following tests are shown: Brinell test—a steel ball is used, and the diameter of the inden -
tation is measured after removal of the indenter. Rockwell test—a conical indenter is impressed into the
surface under a minor load (dashed line) and a major load (solid line), and M is the difference between
the two penetration depths. In the Vickers or -degree diamond pyramid test, a pyramidal point is
used and the diagonal length of the indentation is measured. In the Knoop test, a rhombohedral pyramid
diamond tip is used and the long axis of the indentation is measured. (From Anusavice KJ, Shen C, Rawls
RH: Phillips’ science of dental materials, ed 12, Elsevier, St. Louis, .)
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
second amalgam war, claims and counterclaims were made, and
eventually organized dentistry accepted the belief that amalgam
was safe. he irst American Dental Association (ADA) Speciication
(#1) for a dental material was established for silver amalgam, and
Stock later went on to repudiate his own writings.
he composition of silver amalgam did not change substantially
from the publication of Black’s formula until the 1960s when high
copper amalgam was introduced to the profession by two Canadian
researchers ( Fig. 13.17 ).
As subsequent clinical research would clearly demonstrate, the
high copper formulations that are almost exclusively used today
are clinically superior to the conventional amalgam materials that
had been used up to that time. As Greener has explained, the
discovery of high copper amalgam was a case of “serendipity of
the highest order,” yet it remains as one of the most important
advances in dental materials in the past 50 years.6
Advantages of Silver Amalgam
Silver amalgam has been and will continue to be such a popular
restorative material because it possesses a number of well-deined
advantages. It is one of the easiest of all restorative materials to
manipulate, it can be placed into the prepared cavity in a plastic
state, and then it can be carved and shaped to physiologic form
before it hardens. Once hardened, it has excellent physical properties
that allow it to perform well in the long term as a restorative
material in posterior teeth. It is strong enough to provide very
predictable long-term service in conservative restorations, and is
also valuable as an interim restorative material in very lar ge
restorations.
he basic strength of silver amalgam, coupled with the fact
that it can be placed relatively rapidly in a single appointment,
make it a very cost-efective material. It is less expensive by a wide
margin than any of the alternative restorative materials.
Silver amalgam has one additional important advantage: its
ability to automatically seal the cavity preparation. his ability, important clinical factors determining toxicity are the exposure
time and the concentration of the potentially toxic substance.
Generally, restorative materials harden quickly or are not readily
soluble in tissue luids (or both). Potentially toxic products do not
have time to difuse into tissues. Even more importantly, the
concentration makes the poison. Some authorities believe that if
the amount of material involved is small, the pulp or other tissues
can transport and excrete it without signiicant biochemical damage.
Others believe there is no threshold. A threshold level for toxicity
is one below which no efect can be detected.
his section is not meant to be an exhaustive description of all
physical and mechanical properties of dental materials. It is intended
to highlight some of the more important properties and to describe
some clinical examples where these properties might be important.
Even though these properties are important, it is imperative to
understand that in vitro studies of physical and mechanical proper -
ties are poor indicators of clinical performance. As fatigue studies
become more sophisticated and clinically relevant, in vitro studies
may become more predictive.
THE BOTTOM LINE
1. A large number of physical and mechanical proper ties of dental
materials can be evaluated with in vitro testing.
2. When testing materials, whenever possible they should be tested
in the mode in which they are used.
3. Bond strength studies have little relevance to clinical performance.
4. Static in vitro studies of physical and mechanical properties
yield minimal data that are predictive of clinical performance.
5. Ceramic materials should be fatigue tested under water.
6. Fatigue testing with cyclic loading is promising but complex.
Direct Retorative Material
Silver Amalgam
Silver amalgam has been used for the restoration of teeth for well
over a century.6 It has been the most popular restorative material
over that period of time, having been used in over 75% of single
tooth restorations placed in the past years (see Fig. 13.3 ).
he use of silver amalgam in North America has diminished
somewhat in recent years due to a dramatic reduction in caries
rate coupled with a high interest in esthetics and concern for the
potential toxicity of mercury.
Nonetheless, silver amalgam will continue to be an important
restorative material for many years to come. It will likely be especially
valuable in many of the developing countries where dental caries
continues to be a major problem and where resources required to
deliver alternative (more sophisticated) restorative dentistry options
are not available. Additionally, silver amalgam continues to be one
of the best materials available for core buildups of extensively
damaged teeth to support crowns and ixed partial dentures.
Silver amalgam has had a fascinating and controversial history
ever since its introduction to North America by the Crawcour
brothers in the 1830s. he actions of these charlatans resulted in
the irst amalgam war and the infamous “amalgam pledge” that
was inally rescinded in . A period of scientiic investigation
followed, championed by individuals such as Flagg and Hickock,
and culminated in G.V. Black’s publication of his formula for
silver amalgam in ( Fig. 13.16 ).
In the 1930s the writings of a German physician, Stock, stimu -
lated research into the biocompatibility of silver ama lgam, and
speciically the efects of mercury. In what could be called the
• Fig. 13.16 G.V. Black. Father of operative dentistry. (From Kock CRD:
History of dental surgery, vol 1, Chicago, , National Art Publishing.)
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
It is useful to understand the chemical reactions that occur
with both types of amalgam, as such an understanding will explain
the diferences in their clinical performance.
A set amalgam is a true eutectic, and micrographic evaluation
reveals three distinct phases: gamma, gamma-1, and gamma-2.
he reaction for conventional amalgam may be written as follows:
gamma merc uryg amma gamma -g amma -
AgSn Hg AgSn AgHg () () () () (+→ ++ 12
SSnHg)
he gamma phase, which consists of unreacted silver and
tin, is the major component of the unreacted alloy and is also
present in the set amalgam. It is suspended in a matrix of gamma-1,
which is the reaction product of silver and mercury. he gamma
phase is very strong and corrosion resistant, whereas the gamma-1
phase is less strong and is more corrosion susceptible. he gamma-2
phase, the reaction product of tin-mercury, is also suspended in
the gamma-1 matrix. It is the weakest and most corrosion susceptible
of the three phases. he major diference between conventional
and high copper amalgams is the near elimination of the gamma-2
phase in the high copper amalgams. Elimination of this phase
produces a much stronger and clinically superior restoration.
Laboratory studies show that high copper amalgams display
less creep than conventional amalgams. he main clinical manifesta -
tion of this superiority is improved edge strength, which results
in a lack of marginal ditching over the long term ( Fig. 13.18 ).
he chemical reaction for high copper amalgams may be written
as follows:
gamma copperm ercury gamma gamma -
AgSn AgCu Hg AgSn A () () () () (++ →+ 1
ggHg CuSnCuSn
) ()+
With such amalgam formulations, where the alloy contains 9%
to 30% copper, the copper will preferentially react with the tin
and thus prevent formation of the gamma-2 phase. Again, the
elimination of this gamma-2 phase strengthens the resultant
amalgam and is clinically manifest in improved marginal integrity
and minimal marginal ditching over time.
he discovery of high copper amalgams was basically an accident.
he metallurgists who developed the irst commercial product
added small metal spheres to the irregularly shaped alloy particles
in an attempt to “dispersion strengthen” the set amalgam. he
concept was that the spheres would it into the interstices between
the larger irregular particles and this would make the amalgam
stronger. hey happened to use copper spheres for this initial
product, and it was the elimination of the gamma-2 phase as a
result of the added copper that resulted in the improved clinical
performance of the alloy, rather than the imagined dispersion
strengthening. In fact, it has never been demonstrated that dispersion
strengthening is a viable modality.which is a result of the buildup of corrosion products at the interface
between the amalgam and the cavity margins, makes silver amalgam
unique among restorative materials. A seal can be produced with
excellent technique with some of the alternative materials, but
none are as user friendly as amalgam, which creates a seal inde -
pendent of the operator. Several months are required before the
seal becomes complete, especially with high copper amalgam
formulations; but once attained, it is a very efective barrier against
recurrent caries.
Because it requires some time for the seal resulting from deposition
of corrosion products to materialize, a method of obtaining a
temporary seal at the time of placement is recommended. his used
to be accomplished by placing two or three coats of copal varnish
on the enamel and dentin surfaces of the prepared cavity. his copal
varnish created an initial seal that would eventually be replaced by
the percolation process as corrosion products gradually formed at
the interface. In contemporary practice copal varnish is obsolete,
and sealing the cavity with a desensitizing agent such as Gluma
Desensitizer or G5 prior to amalgam placement is indicated.
Composition
Silver amalgam is supplied to the dentist as a powder or metallic
pellets that are then mixed together with liquid mercury in a
high-speed triturator to form a plastic mass that can be placed
into a prepared cavity. he plastic material allows suicient working
time for successful placement and then sets to form a strong and
durable restoration that can provide long-term clinical service.
Amalgam formulations difer from one another both chemically
in terms of chemical composition and physically in terms of the
size and shape of the alloy particles that are mixed with mercury.
hese physical and chemical variations result in diferences in
handling characteristics of the material and in the clinical results
that are ultimately attained.
From a chemical standpoint, amalgam can be divided into two
groups, conventional amalgam , which is similar to Black’s formula -
tion, and high copper amalgam , which represents the state of the
art. lists the components of both types of amalgam
alloy prior to mixing with mercury and also indicates the function
of each component.
• Fig. 13.17 Dispersalloy (dispersed phase alloy) high copper amalgam.
(Courtesy Dentsply.)Amalgam Alloy Composition
Element Alloy % Principal Function
Ag 70% Strength
Sn 16% Expansion
Cu 13% Strength
Zn 1% Deoxidizer
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
there is no clinical data that would support that. It may also allow
preparation of the freshly placed amalgam 15 minutes after insertion
in those situations where it is being used as a build-up prior to
crown fabrication. he gains in inal compressive strength are likely
of minor importance.
Evaluation of Silver Amalgam Materials
Dental materials are generally initially evaluated in the laboratory
and subsequently in patients in controlled clinical trials. Laboratory
tests are of minimal value in diferentiating clinical performance
between diferent alloys. he only laboratory test that has proven
to be of predictive value in the clinical setting is that of “creep.”
Alloys with low creep values typically demonstrate excellent marginal
integrity over time in clinical trials.13 Generally high copper
amalgams display low creep values and are clinically successful
alloys.
hus an amalgam alloy should be selected on the basis of proven
clinical performance. Other variables, such as quality control, and
handling characteristics also may play a role in the decision to
select a given alloy. hus today it would be a reasonable choice to
select a high copper formulation that has a consistency and rate
of set that is desired by the individual practitioner. In fact, the
intelligent practitioner may well choose to keep a couple of diferent
formulations on inventory and choose the appropriate formulation
to match the speciic clinical situation.
For example, many prefer an admixed zinc containing alloy for
the majority of conventional restorations where a dry ield can be
maintained and where achieving good interproximal contact is
desirable. hey would choose a spherical zinc containing alloy in
those situations where a dry ield can be maintained but using
strong condensation force is diicult, for example when restoring
a Class V lesion on the distobuccal of a maxillary second molar.
Such a formulation is also desirable when building up an extensively
B
A
• Fig. 13.18 A, Conventional amalgam restoration. B, High copper
amalgam restoration. Compressive Strength (MPa) of Diferent
Brands of Amalgam Alloys After 1 Hour
and 24 Hours
Alloy 1 hr 24 hrs
Velvalloy 18, 55,
Dispersalloy 33, 64,
Phasealloy 12, 65,
Tytin 34, 75,
Valiant 47, 76,
Open Contact
• Fig. 13.19 Open proximal contact in a Class II amalgam restoration.
Commercial amalgams can also difer from one another in the
shape of the alloy particles. he two major types are admixed alloys
and spherical alloys. Both types of alloys produce clinically successful
restorations, but the handling characteristics of each are very
diferent.
With traditional amalgam materials, the alloy particles are formed
by cutting a block of alloy with a lathe. his method forms relatively
large, irregular particles. With admixed alloys, small spheres formed
by atomizing the liquid alloy are added to the mix in the hope
that a denser inal amalgam will result. Such an alloy is termed
an admixed alloy, and is the most common material in use today.
Such alloys require considerable force during condensation of
the amalgam to ensure optimum packing of the material and
intimate adaptation of the amalgam to the cavity walls. Strength
of these alloys is time dependent, and 24-hour compressive strength
is considerably greater than 1-hour strength ( ). hese
alloys should be carved and burnished, and inal polishing should
be delayed for at least 24 hours.
Spherical alloys handle much diferently than admixed alloys.
Generally speaking they require slightly less mercury in the initial
mix due to the small size of the spherical particles. he consistency
of the mix is often described as “buttery,” and the amalgam is
easily placed into the cavity and adapted to the cavity walls with
a minimum of pressure. However, because the fresh amalgam mix
will not resist a moderate amount of condensation pressure, it is
somewhat diicult to attain an adequate proximal contact in Class
II restorations ( Fig. 13.19 ). With experience, this deiciency can
be overcome with excellent clinical technique.
Spherical amalgams attain much higher early (1 hour) strengths
than do admixed amalgams, and the inal (24 hours) compressive
strengths are also generally higher. he gain in early strength may
possibly reduce the incidence of isthmus fractures due to occlusal
force exerted shortly after placement of the amalgam; however,
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
after 24 hours. here are no solid clinical data that support the
routine polishing of amalgam restorations, but certainly highly
polished restorations are more comfortable for the patient and will
be less likely to retain bacterial plaque. Polishing amalgams also
indicates a certain amount of pride in workmanship and is a source
of great personal satisfaction.
Bonded Amalgam
With adhesive dentistry becoming so popular in rece nt years, many
innovative techniques in all areas of restorative dentistry have been
proposed. One of the most intriguing is the concept of “bonded”
amalgams. his technique has the advantages of forming an instant
seal of the prepared cavity, a more conservative preparation design,
and the potential to strengthen the prepared tooth and reduce the
long-term incidence of cuspal fracture.14 he word potential is
stressed because the concept of tooth strengthening has not been
proven clinically at the time of writing.
Bonded amalgams utilize any one of the current generation of
enamel/dentin bonding agents to seal the dentin and “bond” the
amalgam to the prepared tooth. he amalgam is condensed into
polymerizing dual cure resin that is placed on conditioned dentin
and etched enamel. he amalgam or the oxide of amalgam will
chemically bond to the resin, and the resin is bonded to the tooth
structure primarily by micromechanical retention. hus the resin
will partially retain the amalgam in place, reducing the need to
create retentive undercuts in the tooth. Elimination of these
undercuts, which have been shown to weaken cusps, coupled with
the potential strengthening efect may improve the long-term
prognosis of these restorations. Clinical research thus far has shown
that bonded and nonbonded amalgams perform equally well. here
seems to be little advantage to bonding amalgams, and the technique
is more complex and time consuming.
THE BOTTOM LINE
1. Silver amalgam has been an important restorative material for
many years and will continue to be an important material for
years to come.
2. Advantages of silver amalgam are excellent physical properties,
cost, long-term service, and the ability to self-seal the cavity.
3. Amalgam is the most user-friendly material in restorative
dentistry.
4. High copper amalgams are superior to conventional amalgams
demonstrating excellent marginal integrity over time. his is
due to elimination of the gamma-2 phase (tin-mercury).
5. It is easier to create a good proximal contact with admixed
versus spherical alloys.
6. Spherical alloys can be prepared 15 minutes after insertion and
are indicated for amalgam core buildups.
7. Proper condensation of the amalgam is the most important
manipulative variable.
8. Bonding amalgam to tooth structure is possible, but there is
minimal clinical beneit.
Mercury and Silver Amalgam
Silver amalgam contains between 43% and 52% mercury when it is
freshly mixed, prior to condensation into the prepared cavity. he
procedures of condensation, precarve burnishing, and carving remove
a portion of this mercury. he remainder of the mercury remains
in the inished restoration. Because high doses of mercury vapor
can cause serious systemic illness, this mercury remaining in silver broken down tooth prior to preparing that tooth for a cast crown.
Here the high early strength is useful, as is the ease of condensation
especially when small slots, potholes, and small undercut areas are
utilized as the primary retentive features. Finally, a nonzinc spherical
alloy is useful in those situations where adequate moisture control
is not possible, such as certain Class V situations and surgical
endodontics where amalgam is used to seal the small prepared
cavity in the root apex.
Manipulation of Silver Amalgam
he quality of a given mix of silver amalgam is controlled by the
quality of the product as supplied to the dentist, and can be modiied
by the manipulation of that product by the dentist. he manipulative
variables include the mercury/alloy ratio, trituration, condensation,
and carving and inishing of the restoration.
In general terms, the less mercury that remains in the inal
restoration, the better it will be both in terms of strength and
corrosion resistance. hus the initial mix should be made with
only as much mercury as is required to make an adequate mix.
With most admixed alloys this will be about 50% mercury, whereas
with spherical alloys it will be slightly less. Proper condensation
and carving technique will remove a signiicant amount of mercury
from the material, thus enhancing inal strength. In the past care
had to be taken with mercury dispensers to maintain control of
the mercury/alloy ratio, but today the majority of practitioners
utilize precapsulated products. his is beneicial in that it allows
precise control of the mercury/alloy ratio, minimizes handling of
the mercury, and minimizes the mercury vapor aerosol created
during trituration.
Mixing the amalgam is called trituration. Adequate trituration
of the amalgam is essential to produce a workable mass and to
ensure optimum physical properties. Each brand of amalgam has
speciic instructions regarding optimum time and speed of tritura -
tion. he instructions are speciic for each brand of amalgamator.
he longer and the faster an amalgam is mixed, the more rapidly
it will set. he manufacturers’ guidelines for mixing should be
followed and can be modiied slightly to obtain a faster or slower
setting material.
Condensation of the amalgam is probably the most critical
manipulative variable. Adequate condensation results in intimate
adaptation of the amalgam to the cavity walls, as well as a denser
material to maximize strength. he prepared cavity is always
overilled and carved back to proper anatomic contour. his is
because condensation results in a mercury-rich supericial layer,
which is removed during the carving procedure. he resultant
amalgam surface has considerably less mercury and subsequently
superior physical properties.
he most common error made by dentists is under condensation.
his results in poor adaptation to the cavity walls, increased
microleakage, and recurrent caries. he inal amalgam is weaker
and more fracture prone, and cannot be polished nearly as well
as a properly condensed amalgam.
With the high copper formulations currently in use, both
precarve and postcarve burnishing is recommended. his is generally
accomplished with a large, egg-shaped burnisher. he amalgam is
carved after achieving a irm set, with careful attention being paid
to eliminating all marginal lash and carving the amalgam lush
with the margins of the cavity preparation. Any marginal lash
will eventually fracture, and it is rare that it fractures right at the
margin. Inevitably, marginal ditching will occur.
After carving back to anatomic form, the restoration is lightly
burnished to a smooth sheen. he restoration may be polished
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
developed countries, has resulted in a drastic reduction in the use
of silv er amalgam. he reduction in the caries rate is a remarkable
achievement, and the desire for more esthetic restorative materials
is understandable. However, the widespread practice of removing
functional amalgam restorations in the name of patient safety is
to be deplored. his results in unwarranted loss of tooth structure,
unnecessary expense, and, especially if the replacement restoration
is tooth colored, limited longevity.
Perhaps a brief review of the classical and contemporary literature
on the topic of mercury in silver amalgam will clarify the issue.
For those who would prefer to simply receive the bottom line on
this issue, it is this: here is absolutely no scientiic evidence to
indicate that silver amalgam restorations pose a health risk of any
kind to patients. here is a large body of well-conducted and
controlled scientiic literature to support this statement. Unwar -
ranted removal of amalgam restorations in order to prevent or
cure systemic health conditions is wrong and in fact is considered
unethical in many jurisdictions.
Classical Research
here are a number of classic studies that had established the safety
of silver amalgam to the satisfaction of the scientiic community
up until the indings of the 1980s. he broad body of this research
has been the subject of an excellent review by Bauer and First in
, and only a few classic papers will be reported here.18 he
irst of these was conducted primarily to repudiate the writings of
Stock, published in .19 A selenium sulide mercury detector
was used to determine if mercury vapor was released from the
surface of silver amalgam. he solubility of amalgam in a number
of acidic solutions was also tested. No mercury vap or was detected,
nor was there any tendency of the amalgam to dissolve in any of
the solutes tested. he results of this study corroborated the com -
monly held belief that the mercury in silver amalgam is chemically
reacted and tied up within the body of the amalgam restoration.
A second study that was part of a multifaceted evaluation of
industrial mercury measured urinary mercury in patients with
multiple amalgam restorations versus patients with no amalgam
restorations.20 No diferences in urinary mercury were found, lending
credence to the belief that mercury from silver amalgam did not
contribute to the overall body burden of mercury.
As part of an in-depth study of mercury in amalgam, Frykholm
radioactively labeled mercury and then placed multiple amalgam
restorations in a number of patients.21 He then monitored the
amount of radioactivity in the urine over time. The level of
radioactivity rose after the restorations were placed, and then
dropped back to zero after 8 days. his indicated that there is a
small but measurable exposure to mercury vapor when amalgams
are placed, but the mercury is then excreted a few days after
placement.
hus, based on these studies, years of use of the material with
few reported side efects, and numerous other studies, most authori -
ties were conident of the safety of silver amalgam. However, new
studies reported in the 1980s and 1990s have questioned that
conclusion.
Research Questioning the Safety of Silver Amalgam
In researchers at the University of Iowa reported that small
amounts of mercury vapor were released from the surface of amalgam
restorations when patients chewed gum.22 his inding has since
been conirmed by other researchers.23 Presumably, suicient heat
is generated during mastication that a miniscule amount of mercury
vapor is released intraorally. A portion of this mercury vapor will amalgam restorations has been a source of continued controversy
for over a century.6,15 his controversy continues unabated today
in spite of a total lack of scientiic evidence demonstrating a link
between silver amalgam and systemic disease. In fact, quite to the
contrary, ample scientiic data support the continued use of silver
amalgam and document its enviable record of safety.
Historical Review
Amalgam has been the source of controversy ever since it was irst
introduced to North America by the Crawcour brothers in .
hese charlatans from France placed their version of amalgam,
called “Royal Mineral Succedaneum,” into the teeth of patients at
carnivals and medicine shows. he material, which was derived
from ilings from silver coins mixed with large amounts of mercury,
tended to expand signiicantly on setting. his resulted in an
incredibly high incidence of postoperative pain, tooth fracture,
and elevated occlusal contacts. hese postoperative sequelae, coupled
with the use of a potentially toxic material such as mercury, pre -
cipitated the irst amalgam war.
he debate raged furiously for many years, dividing organized
dentistry into two main camps. One group—naturally intrigued
with the possibilities of a truly plastic material that could be placed
into the mouth in a softened state, conformed to the cavity prepara -
tion in the tooth, and then hardened—sought to continue to use
the material and to experiment with modiied formulations. he
other group—which comprised the main body of organized dentistry
at the time—chose to outlaw amalgam and in fact drafted the
now infamous “Amalgam Pledge.” he essence of the pledge was
that the signer agreed to never consider using silver amalgam.
Anyone wishing to belong to the organization was required to sign
this pledge.
In the Amalgam Pledge was rescinded and a period of
scientiic experiment began, led by individuals such as Hickock,
Flagg, and others. his period culminated in when Black
published his formula for amalgam alloy. his alloy, and minor
variations thereof, was the type essentially used by all North
American dentists until the serendipitous discovery of modern
high copper alloy by Innes and Youdelis in .16 Because silver
amalgam is relatively strong, inexpensive, and essentially user
friendly, it became the most popular restorative material for posterior
teeth in the latter half of the 20th century and co ntinues to be
used extensively today. In spite of this popularity and tremendous
utility, silver amalgam has had to survive periodic attacks relative
to its safety.
A second amalgam war resulted from the writings of a German
medical doctor named Stock. His writings appeared in the European
medical literature and consisted of anecdotal reports related to
mercury toxicity in patients with silver amalgam restorations. No
controlled scientiic data was reported, and in fact Stock later
repudiated that information in his own articles in the 1940s.
However, at the time, his statements were suiciently provocative
that scientists initiated a number of studies that would eventually
help to establish the safety of this ine material.
In the 1990s, renewed controversy surrounding amalgam resulted
in what might be called the third amalgam war. his particular
episode in the turbulent history of amalgam has been precipitated
by a combination of renewed scientiic investigation coupled with
an unprecedented amount of charlatanism and media hype.17 To
the uninformed, the safety of silver amalgam is once again in
question. his doubt concerning its safety, coupled with an everincreasing demand by the public for tooth-colored posterior restora -
tions and a concomitant decrease in the incidence of caries in
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
made tremendous strides in the past century, by insisting that all
proscribed therapies be based on data from contr olled scientiic
studies. Adhering to the scientiic method has been essential in
developing sound techniques of diagnosis and predictable therapeutic
modalities. To be guided by anecdotal reports would be tantamount
to returning to the days of witchcraft and medicine shows.
It is important to understand that what is of consequence in
this discussion is mercury vapor. Liquid mercury and particulate
amalgam are of no importance except to the extent that mercury
vapor may be emitted from their surface. High levels of mercury
vapor can produce deinite neurologic symptoms and be toxic to
certain target organs such as the kidney. hese efects are essentially
toxic in nature. T rue allergy or hypersensitivity to mercury is
extremely rare. It is often claimed that certain individuals are
“hypersensitive” to mercury; however, this is an inappropriate use
of the term. he implication is that these individuals and perhaps
their neurologic and/or immune systems are negatively afected
by extremely low doses of mercury. here is virtually no scientiic
evidence to support this claim.
he critical factor in evaluating the scientiic literature related
to mercury in amalgam is to determine the actual amount of
mercury exposure a patient might receive from his or her amalgam
restorations. Mercury, like most elements or therap eutic agents,
has a classic dose-response curve ( Fig. 13.20 ). With these therapeutic
agents at very low doses, no clinical manifestations are observed;
at slightly higher doses a therapeutic efect may be seen, with
untoward side efects increasing as the dose is increased. At even
higher doses, toxic efects become apparent. In the worst-case
scenario the mercury exposure to a patient with amalgams in all
of their posterior teeth would represent a dose in the irst category,
and virtually no clinical manifestations would be evident.
his statement may be made with absolute assurance when
comparing the exposure of mercury that would occur from silver
amalgam to that allowed a worker who has occupational exposure
to mercury vapor. As with other potentially toxic materials, a safe
level of mercury vapor that can be tolerated without untoward
efects has been established by industrial safety boards. hat level
is known as the threshold limit value (TLV) . his level has been
adjusted downward over the years as more and more is known undoubtedly be absorbed into the bloodstream. his fact has been
accepted by the scientiic community, but considerable debate has
occurred concerning the actual amount of mercury that is released
and whether or not it represents a risk for the patient. his will
be discussed in some depth in the subsequent section.
Additional research has established that patients with multiple
amalgam restorations have slightly higher blood mercury levels
than do patients with no amalgam restorations.24 Autopsy studies
have also shown that patients with multiple amalgam restorations
have slightly elevated levels of mercury in the kidneys and in
certain areas of the brain.25,26 Again, the debate hinges on the
question of whether these relatively minor elevations of mercury
have any demonstrable clinical consequence. At this time, the
evidence supporting the safety of amalgam is overwhelming, and
there is not a shred of scientiic data to support the negative
viewpoint.
Much of the emotional outcry against silver amalgam has resulted
not from scientiic data reported in peer reviewed journals, but
from anecdotal stories and sensationalized media coverage of such
anecdotal information. Such anecdotal data are simply not admissible
in scientiic circles. In these case histories, pati ents have experienced
a vague series of symptoms, and an approximate diagnosis is made
but not necessarily conirmed. Solid baseline data are never recorded,
and some treatment, in this case usually removal of some or all of
the existing amalgam restorations, is performed. Rarely is this done
in a controlled manner; and often the treatment is carried out
concomitantly with a number of additional therapies, including
a regime of various medications, alteration in diet, etc. he patient
may report some short-term amelioration in symptomatology, again
in a very subjective manner. his improvement may or may not
be real; if real, it could be a result of any one of the therapies that
have been utilized or it could be the result of a placebo efect. No
attempt seems to have been made to gather long-term data or to
present that data in the scientiic literature.
Critique of Anti–Amalgam Research
Most of the hysteria regarding mercury and amalgam has resulted
from the anecdotal accounts mentioned previously. hese reports
have virtually no scientiic validity. Medicine and dentistry have
• Fig. 13.20 Dose-response curves.
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
Brodsky published a classic epidemiologic article regarding the
pregnancy outcome of dental personnel.35 Using a large patient
sample of women either employed in a dental oice or married
to a dentist, the outcome of pregnancy was compared to that of
a nondental group. he underlying assumption of the study was
that dental personnel are exposed to much higher concentrations
of mercury vapor than are the general population. hus, if mercury
vapor exposure in the concentrations experienced in dental oices
was a problem, a diference in pregnancy outcome bet ween the
two groups would be expected to emerge. he results of the study
indicated that there was absolutely no diference between the two
groups in any of the indices evaluated (spontaneous abortion,
stillbirth, birth defects, etc.). It must be emphasized that the levels
of mercury vapor to which dental personnel are routinely exposed,
while usually within the established TLV, are far greater than those
that any patient would ever be exposed to as a consequence of his
or her amalgam restorations.
Directly related to this inding is the general health of American
dentists. he American Dental Association has conducted sur veys
on the health of its member dentists for a number of years. he
data are gathered at the annual meetings of the ADA. hese surveys
have unequivocally demonstrated that, in spite of their chronic
exposure to higher than normal levels of mercury vapor, American
dentists are slightly healthier than the general population. If indeed
low levels of mercury vapor exposure were etiologic of various
autoimmune and other disorders, one would expect an epidemic
of such maladies to occur in the dental population. Such is clearly
not the case.
Concern has been expressed regarding the potential for mercury
in amalgam to suppress the level of circulating lymphocytes in the
bloodstream. Most of this concern is based on a report that
purported to demonstrate that patients with amalgams had sup -
pressed numbers of T lymphocytes.36 he scientiic validity of this
report has been questioned particularly in terms of sample size
(three patients) and lack of controls. A recent study with ample
numbers of patients has reported absolutely no diference in white
blood cell populations (including T lymphocytes) in patients with
and without amalgam restorations.37 As mentioned, additional
research has noted that the function of several organ systems is
completely normal in patients with multiple amalgams and id entical
to that of patients with no amalgams.
Mercury is a neurotoxin that has been speculated to play a role
in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer disease. An evaluati on of
Roman Catholic nuns from 75 to years of age indicated that
existing amalgams are not associated with lower per formance scores
on eight diferent cognitive function tests.38 Data-related amalgam
status and dental history were correlated with mercury levels in
the brain at autopsy of 68 patients with Alzheimer disease and a
control group of 33 subjects without the disease.39 here was no
signiicant association with the number, surface area, or history
of having amalgam restorations with diferences in brain levels of
mercury or Alzheimer disease.
It has also been speculated that long-term exposure to low levels
of mercury vapor from amalgams can cause or exacerbate neuro -
degenerative diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, multiple
sclerosis, and Parkinson disease. An extensive review evaluated
existing epidemiologic investigations and concluded that these
studies had failed to provide evidence of a role of am algam in
these degenerative diseases and there is no clear evidence supporting
the removal of amalgams.40
Several countries have suggested that women should not receive
dental amalgams during pregnancy because it could possibly result about mercury vapor and its efects. hat level is currently either
50 μg/m3 (U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration
[OSHA]) or 25 μg/m3 (World Health Organization [WHO]) and
represents the amount of mercury vapor that can be safely allowed
in the air for workers who spend 8 hours/day, 40 hours/week in
that environment. he worst dose a patient could receive from 10
or 12 amalgam restorations would be about 1/ of the current
TLV.27
he actual dose that a patient might receive from amalgams
has been the focus of a spirited debate in the literature. Vimy and
colleagues calculated that the dose could be as high as 10 μg/day,
but their results have been assaulted by other researchers; and it
is generally accepted that this number is at least 10 times higher
than reality.28-30 It must be understood that the machines utilized
to measure intraoral mercury are not designed to do that, but are
used to measure mercury vapor in the air of a well-ventilated room.
hus certain calculations are required to convert the number
retrieved from the mercury detector to the actual dose to the
patient. Flow rates, respiration rates, and other factors must also
be accounted for. When these factors are considered, Mackert
concluded that the maximum potential dose to a patient would
be in the area of 1.2 μg/day.29 his number is in close agreement
with the adjusted calculations of Berglund, an independent
researcher who estimated the dose at 1.7 μg/day.30
hus, the dose of mercury vapor to a patient from 10 or 12
amalgam restorations is extremely low and has virtually no clinical
consequences. To put it into perspective, the amount of mercury
vapor a patient could absorb per day from his or her amalgams
would be 1/10 to 1/20 of that which they receive from a normal
healthy diet.31 Recently, calculations related to dose have estimated
that for the most sensitive of patients to demonstrate even minor
symptoms of mercury poisoning, patients would have to have
to amalgam restorations in place.32 Of course, this is patently
impossible and illustrates that the doses of mercury vapor received
by patients from their amalgam restorations are indeed miniscule.
A great deal has been made in the media of studies in sheep
and in primates, which purport to demonstrate extremely high
concentrations of mercury in the kidneys and other organs as a
result of amalgam placement. Reduced organ function in these
animals has also been reported. Rather than criticizing these
extremely lawed studies, it is more pertinent to review existing
human data on mercury concentration in these end organs and
the function of these organs. From the autopsy stud ies mentioned
previously, the concentration of mercury in the kidneys of humans
with 10 to 12 amalgam restorations has been shown to be 0.38 μg/
mg, which is 12 to 20 times less than that reported in the animal
studies.25 More importantly, an evaluation of enzyme function, a
critical index of overall organ function, has demonstrated that
patients with multiple amalgams have no diminution of normal
kidney function.33 In fact, this study demonstrated that there was
no diference between patients with multiple amalgams and patients
with no amalgam restorations in terms of kidney function.
Research Supporting the Continued Use of
Silver Amalgam
It is clear that there is no scientiic data to indicate that silver
amalgam poses any signiicant health risk for patients. It is equally
clear that there is an impressive body of research that demonstrates
that amalgam is completely safe. he articles by Langan and Fan,
as well as the more recent paper by Mackert, review the contem -
porary literature published subsequent to Bauer’s initial review
article.27,34
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
curbs imposed on the use of silv er amalgam. he group declared
that the use of amalgam should be reduced in coming years through
improved preventive measures and that research shou ld be encour -
aged to develop materials that will work as good or better than
amalgam.
An analysis of the data presented in this section leads to
the conclusion that mercury in silver amalgam restorations
poses absolutely no problem for dental patients. his conclu -
sion has been reached by experts in the field, by consumer
interest groups, and by thorough reviews by governmental
agencies.
Impact of Unwarranted Amalgam Removal
A small minority of the profession currently recommends to their
patients that their existing serviceable amalgam restorations should
be removed as a health precaution. his is not only incorrect, but
also unscrupulous, dishonest, and unethical. Removal of an amalgam
restoration requires loss of additional tooth structure—sometimes
considerable amounts of tooth structure if an indirect restora -
tion that requires a certain amount of “draw” is to replace the
amalgam. his additional loss of tooth structure, coupled with the
inevitable inherent operative trauma, can result in compromise of
the pulpal tissues and eventually in the necessity for endodontic
therapy.
he restorative alternatives to silver amalgam all carry with
them certain disadvantages. Cast gold, while undoubtedly the inest
possible posterior restorative service, is rather expensive (currently
10 times the cost of amalgam) and time consuming.52 he cost of
well-done cast gold restorations is simply prohibitive for many
patients. he tooth colored alternatives are also more expensive,
with direct composite resin restorations costing about 3 times the
cost of an amalgam, while indirect resin or porcelain inlays are
closer to 10 times as expensive. None of these tooth colored
alternatives has a clinical track record of success equal to that of
amalgam, and some of the procedures must be considered to be
essentially experimental at this time. Suice it to record here that
some of the problems with them are fracture, excessive wear,
microleakage at the cervical margin, and extreme technique
sensitivity.
One other tragic situation that has occurred frequently in recent
times is the false hope given to patients sufering from incurable
diseases such as multiple sclerosis and other autoimmune conditions
that by removing their amalgam restorations they would be cured.
Amalgam is not the cause of such ailments; nor is amalgam removal
the cure. he authors have personally met many individuals inlicted
with such dreaded diseases who have undergone great sufering
and expense in having their amalgams removed only to have the
symptoms continue.
THE BOTTOM LINE
1. Small amounts of mercury vapor are released from the surface
of silver amalgam restorations during mastication.
2. he amount of mercury vapor released is very small and poses
no risk to the integrity of the restoration or to the systemic
health of the patient.
3. here are virtually no published scientiic papers validating the
belief that mercury in silver amalgam is potentially dangerous
to patients.
4. here is an ample and growing body of research th at demonstrates
the safety of silver amalgam.
5. his research plus the over -year history of use of the material
supports its continued use.in children with low birth weight. A population-based case control
study of over women with low-birth-weight infants and ove r
women who had normal-birth-weight infants found no
evidence that silver amalgam illings placed during pregnancy
increased low-birth-weight risk.41 A recent Norwegian study of
over , pregnancies that occurred between and
evaluated the number of amalgams in the mother’s teeth and
pregnancy outcome.42 Investigators found no relation between the
number of amalgam restorations and the incidence of preterm
birth, low birth weight, malformation, or stillbirth.
A number of independent health agencies have extensively
reviewed the issues of safety and eicacy of silver amalgam in
recent years and have all concluded that available data do not
justify either the discontinuance of use of amalgam or the removal
of existing amalgam restorations. hese agencies include the Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) in and , WHO along
with the FDI World Dental Federation in , the N ational
Institutes of Health (NIH) and the National Institute of Dental
Research in , and the U.S. Public Health Service in .43,44
he National Council Against Health Fraud warns consumers
about dentists recommending unnecessary removal of serviceable
amalgam restorations and states, “Promoting a dental practice as
mercury-free is unethical because it falsely implies that amalgam
illings are dangerous and that mercury-free methods are superior.”45
he Life Sciences Research Oice, a nonproit scientii c organiza -
tion in Bethesda, Maryland, released results of its independent
review of all articles published on this topic between and
. Among published articles, were accepted based on
the scientiic methodology. he report concluded that “there is
little evidence to support a causal relationship between silver illings
and human health problems.”46
T wo very important randomized controlled clinical trials were
published in the Journal of the American Medical Association in
.47,48 One was called the New England Children’s Amalgam
T rial and the other, the Casa Pia Children’s T rial. Both studies
included over children who received multiple restorations of
either composite resin or amalgam. One of the trials was 5 years
in duration, the other 7 years. hey measured subtle neurobehavioral
efects to determine if there were any negative efects due to
amalgam. Both studies basically found that there were no neu -
robehavioral efects that could be attributed to amalgam. In fact
the very scant data suggested that composite resin may have more
efects than amalgam, but the data were of very low scientiic
validity.49-51 he studies also showed that composite resin restorat ions
needed to be repaired or replaced 7 times more than amalgam
restorations and that composite resin restorations were 2.5 times
more likely to have recurrent caries.
Environmental Impact
Concerns have been raised regarding the impact mercury in amalgam
has on the environment. Major environmental sources of mercury
include volcanoes (50%), coal combustion (33%), and gold produc -
tion (6%). Amalgam’s only contribution in this area is in waste
disposal, largely through mercury resulting from crematories, and
is less than 1% of the total. Many jurisdictions require dental
oices to utilize sophisticated amalgam separators, and a
FDA regulation requires all oices in the United States to install
such separators within 3 years.
In January , a number of nations signed the Min amata
Convention in Geneva. his meeting was convened to discuss the
inluence of mercury on health and the environment. Discussions
on amalgam were a small part of that meeting, and there were no
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
had problems resulting from polymerization shrinkage even though
the amount of that shrinkage was substantially less than the shrink -
age of PMMA materials. Composite resin materials have evolved
constantly over the past 50 years and contemporary composite
resin materials are vastly superior to the original material in both
clinical performance and esthetic potential.
Composition of Composite Resin Materials
here are three main components of all composite resin materials
(Fig. 13.22 ). hese are the resin matrix; iller particles, which vary
in composition, size, and shape; and silane coupling agents, which
chemically bind the iller particles to the matrix.
he resin matrix of most North American composite resin
materials is Bis-GMA. Some composite resins utilize urethane
dimethacrylate (UDM) as the matrix and both resins are substan -
tially equivalent in terms of clinical performance. Bis-GMA was
synthesized from a type of epoxy by Bowen. It sets by means of
a polymerization reaction and its major advantage over methyl
methacrylate is that the monomeric molecule is substantially larger
than monomeric methyl methacrylate. his results clinically in
signiicantly less polymerization shrinkage.
he iller particles in composite resin are composed of quartz
or silica, and vary considerably in terms of size and shape ( Fig.
13.23 ). he incorporation of illers into the resin matrix increases
the strength of the material and further reduces th e amount of
polymerization shrinkage.
here are two rules regarding iller particles in composite resins.
he irst is the more iller, the better. Increasing th e relative amount
of iller in a material increases the strength and reduces the amount
of polymerization shrinkage. Most modern composites experience
a 2.4% to 2.8% polymerization shrinkage. A contemporary
composite resin material for restorations should contain at least
75% iller by weight. Most modern materials meet or exceed this
speciication.6. While mercury in silver amalgam poses no health risk to dental
patients, even in dental oices where excellent mercury hygiene
is practiced, dental personnel are occupationally e xposed to
higher levels of mercury vapor than the general population.
his is due to vapor that is released when amalgams are placed
and, even more importantly, when they are removed, or when
teeth with amalgam core buildups are prepared for crowns.
While the levels of mercury vapor to which dental personnel
are routinely exposed are well above those of the general popula -
tion, they are generally below the current TLV. his occupational
exposure to mercury vapor poses no risk as long as proper
procedures for mercury hygiene are utilized. All dental personnel
should be familiar with the procedures essential for the proper
practice of mercury hygiene.
Compoite Rein
Hitory
Prior to the introduction of composite resin materials, dentists
had two types of tooth colored restorative materials that could be
utilized to restore carious defects in anterior teeth: silicate cement
and poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA).
Silicate cements were supplied as a powder and liquid, with
the main constituent of the powder being ground alumino-silicate
glass and the liquid phosphoric acid. hese materials d emonstrated
decent initial esthetics but had poor physical properties and color
stability and most importantly dissolved readily in oral luids.
Silicate restorations were expected to serve 3 to 5 years, at which
time they would have to be replaced. he main advantage of this
material was that as it dissolved, it released substantial amounts
of luoride, with the result that recurrent caries almost never occurred
with silicate restorations (see Fig. 13.9 ).
he second available tooth colored direct material was PMMA
(Fig. 13.21 ). hese materials were also supplied as a powder and
liquid. he powder was essentially ground prepolymerized methyl
methacrylate and initiator, and the liquid was monomeric methyl
methacrylate. PMMA materials provided good initial esthetics but
also had poor physical properties and lacked color stability; however,
their main disadvantage was considerable polymerization shrinkage
(three times the shrinkage of modern composites) resulting in
large contraction gaps between the restoration and the cavity
margins. hese gaps permitted signiicant microleakag e that resulted
in a very high incidence of recurrent caries.
hus, while PMMA materials were chronologically developed
later than silicate materials, they were actually inferior in terms of
clinical performance.
Glass ionomer restorative materials were developed in the 1970s
and later evolved into resin-modiied glass ionomer materials.53
hese materials are currently indicated for the restoration of root
caries lesions.
Compoite Rein Material
hese materials were introduced to the profession in by Dr.
Raphael Bowen.54 It is interesting to note that the discovery of
the concept of acid-etching enamel by Dr. Michael Buonocore
occurred almost at the same time.55
he initial composite resin materials were superior to their
predecessors (silicate and PMMA) in terms of physical properties,
color stability, solubility, and clinical performance. However, these
initial materials were not suitable for use in posterior teeth and
• Fig. 13.21 Class III cavity restored with poly(methyl methacrylate)
(PMMA).
Filler particles
Silane coupling agent
Resin
• Fig. 13.22 Main components of composite resins.
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
According to Polymerization Reaction Initiation
he polymerization reaction for composite resin materials can be
initiated chemically or with visible light.
Chemical Cure. Initial composite resin materials were chemically
initiated and were called chemical-cure, auto-cure, or self-cure
composite resins. hese materials had a limited working time and
sufered from poor long-term color stability as they contained
tertiary amines that turned yellow or orange after several years of
service. Chemical cure materials are used today primarily as core
materials for the buildup of extensively damaged teeth ( Fig. 13.24 ).
Light Cure. he original light-cure materials were cured using
ultraviolet light, but contemporary composite materials all utilize
visible light, which will activate the initiator (camphorquinone).
Light-cure materials have the substantial advantage of being able
to cure on command and thus provide essentially ininite working
time so that the restoration can be sculpted and shaped into inal
form prior to polymerization. hey are also color stable due to
the elimination of the tertiary amines ( Fig. 13.25 ).
Dual Cure. Dual-cure composite resin materials, which utilize
both chemical cure and light cure technologies, are primarily used
as cements or core materials. With these materials, the setting
reaction is initiated by exposure to visible light but the reaction
will slowly continue over time in the absence of light ( Fig. 13.26 ).
According to Filler Particle Size
Early composite resin materials utilized rather large iller particles
and are called “macroilled” composite resins. As esthetic composite
bonding became popular, manufacturers developed composite resin
materials with very small fillers that are called “microfilled”
composite resins. Modern composite resin materials contain a
variety of sizes of iller and are called “hybrid” composite resins.
he evolutionary trend has been to develop hybrid composite resin
materials with smaller and smaller illers. hus, contemporary
hybrid composite resin materials may be subdivided into subgroups
of “microhybrid” and “nanohybrid” composite resin materials.
Other categories of contemporary composite resin materials include
“lowable” composite resins and “packable” composite resins.
Macroilled Composite Resin Materials. he original composite
resin materials were macroilled composite resins. hese materials
had a relatively high level of loading (approximately 75% by weight),
with particles that ranged in size between 4 and 40 microns. he second rule regarding iller particles is the smaller the average
iller particle size, the better. Materials with small iller particles
are inherently more polishable, retain their polish for longer periods,
and have improved wear resistance. One diiculty that manufacturers
have faced is that it is diicult to maintain a high iller content
with very small iller particles. his is because small iller particles
possess a high ratio of surface area to weight, and this resulted in
materials that were not usable with high iller content. Modern
technology has resulted in a constant evolution of materials, the
crux of which has been the ability to create useful materials with
a high iller content using smaller and smaller particles.
he iller particles are chemically bound to the resin matrix by
silane coupling agents. Silanes are complex, bifunctional molecules
that have two diferent end groups, one of which bonds to the
iller particle and the other bonds to the matrix. he use of silane
allows for stronger bonding of the iller to the matrix, which
improves wear resistance, and also permits the incorporation of
more iller into a given amount of resin matrix. he silanization
process is complex and involves coating the particles with silane
and then utilizing acetone washes to thin the thickness of the
silane to a monomolecular layer.
Composite resin materials also contain numerous other com -
ponents including pigments, viscosity diluents, cross-linking agents,
and initiators.
Classiication of Composite Resin Materials
Several diferent classiications for composite resin restorative
materials have been proposed over the years—for example, according
to polymerization reaction initiation or according to size of iller
particles.
B
A
• Fig. 13.23 A and B, SEM of composite resin displaying different sizes
and shapes of iller particles. (Images courtesy Dr. Jorge Perdigao.)
• Fig. 13.24 Chemical cure composite resin. (Courtesy BISCO.)
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
exposing the large, har d illers; and the more these materials were
polished, the r ougher they got. his is obviously a problem for an
“esthetic” restorative material ( Fig. 13.27 ).
Second, these large particles could be “plucked” from the surface
of a posterior restoration by opposing cusp tips and result instantly
in a quantum loss of restorative material (40 microns). hus the
materials had very poor wear resistance, a major deiciency clearly
demonstrated in early clinical trials ( Fig. 13.28 ).
Microilled Composite Resin Materials. he poor polishability
of macroilled composite resins directly led to the introduction of
microilled composite resin materials. hese materials had a relatively
low level of iller loading (45%–55% by weight), with a uniform
iller particle size of 0.04 microns. his resulted in restorations
that were very polishable and thus provided an excellent esthetic
result. he low level of iller loading resulted in a material with a
low modulus of elasticity (MOE), which made it unsuitable for
stress bearing restorations . hese materials were contraindicated
for Class IV restorations and for the restoration of posterior teeth.
his low modulus of elasticity made these materials the material
of choice for the restoration of NCCLs, which many consider to
have a lexural etiology.
he low MOE allows the material to lex along with the tooth.
Commercial examples of microilled composite resin materials
include Silux Plus (3M Oral Care, St. Paul, MN), Renamel
(Cosmedent, Chicago, IL), Durail VS (Kulzer, South Bend, IN),
and A110 (3M Oral Care, St. Paul, MN). Current evidence indicates
that microilled composite resins may not be needed because the
illed bonding agents act as stress breakers.
Hybrid Composite Resin Materials. Hybrid composite resin
materials have a combination of small and large iller particles, to
combine high iller loading with a suicient quantity of small
particles to ensure improved wear resistance and also permit adequate
polishability. hese materials have been in use since the early 1980s
and have proven to be excellent materials for both anterior and
posterior restorations. Most contemporary hybrids have a iller
content of 75% to 80% by weight, and the trend has been to
produce materials with smaller and smaller average iller particle
size. With most contemporary materials the largest iller particle
would be in the range between 1 and 2 microns. hese materials
are quite strong, polishable, and have wear resistance equivalent
to amalgam (6–15 microns/year). he esthetic potential of these
materials is excellent and many products ofer a wide range of
shades and translucencies. Typical commercial produ cts in the
hybrid category include Herculite XRV (Kerr Corporation, Orange,
CA), Z100 (3M Oral Care, St. Paul, MN), and TPH (DENTSPLY
Sirona, York, PA).
he most contemporary hybrid composite resin materials have
been described as microhybrids and nanohybrids. hese materials
contain a mixture of small and smaller particles and have excellent
handling characteristics and esthetic potential. High iller loading is
made possible with advanced technology that permits the formation
of clusters of very small particles that reduce surface area yet function
as individual nanoparticles to ensure adequate wear resistance. Commercial examples of macroilled composite resins include
Adaptic (Johnson & Johnson, New Brunswick, NJ) and Concise
(3M Oral Care, St. Paul, MN). Because of the relatively high
loading these materials were quite strong, but the rather large size
of the iller particles resulted in two signiicant disadvantages.
First, these materials were not polishable. he iller particles
were harder than the abrasives used to polish them. As these materials
were polished, the relatively soft matrix was worn away, thus
• Fig. 13.25 Light cure composite resin. (Courtesy 3M.)
• Fig. 13.26 Dual cure composite resin. (Courtesy BISCO.)
• Fig. 13.27 Schematic illustration of macroilled composite resin before and after polishing.
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
have been described as “packable” or “condensable” composite
resins. hese materials have been designed by manufacturers to
possess handling characteristics similar to amalgam.
hese materials are basically hybrid composite resins to which
large illers have been added that can be condensed or packed in
a manner similar to amalgam.
he addition of these large illers has resulted in documented
poor wear resistance of some of these materials. While some dent ists
prefer the handling characteristics of these materials, it is doubtful
that the beneits of improved handling ofset the reduction in
clinical performance that has been demonstrated by some of these
products.
Flowable Composite Resin Materials. In recent years manu -
facturers have introduced a group of materials designated as
“lowable” composite resin materials. hese materials represent a
wide range of products, with iller content ranging between 35%
and 65% by weight. hese materials are very convenient to use
because their viscosity allows them to be injected into the cavity
preparation with a syringe. However, as would be expected, the
reduction in iller content is accompanied by reduced physical
properties and increased polymerization shrinkage. he use of these
materials should be restricted to “niche” functions such as a
0.5-mm-thick liner under large posterior composite restorations.
Low Shrinkage Composite Resin Materials
Most modern hybrid composite resin materials exhibit linear
polymerization shrinkage of between 2.2% and 2.4%. his amount
of shrinkage, if not compensated for by clinical te chnique, can Commercial products in this category include Esthet-X (DENTSPLY
Sirona, York, PA), Point 4 (Kerr Corporation, Orange, CA), and
Filtek Supreme (3M Oral Care, St. Paul, MN) ( Fig. 13.29 ). he
major advantage of nanocomposites is that they polish to a very
high luster and they maintain that luster over time.
Packable (Condensable) Composite Resin Materials. Several
products have been introduced to the market in recent years that
• Fig. 13.28 Teeth numbers 12, 13, 14 restored with macroilled com -
posite resin.
B
A
D
C
• Fig. 13.29 A–D, Tooth number 15 restored with a hybrid composite resin. (Photos courtesy Dr. Phillip
Timmins.)
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
set by means of exposure to visible light using a curing light.
In general, most composite resin materials should not be cured
in thick sections, and the recommended thickness of an
increment of composite resin is about 2 mm. Curing sections
greater than 2 mm may result in insuicient curing of the
undersurface of the composite resin material. he depth of
cure is determined by a number of variables:
• he shade of the composite resin
• he thickness of the material
• he irradiance of the curing light, and the time of cure
II. Curing lights should be checked periodically with a radiometer
(most curing lights have one built in) to ensure that the light
emitted is of suicient output irradiance to eiciently cure
the material. he light should be held in close proximity to
the material (the closer the light, the greater the irradiance)
and the composite resin should be exposed to the light for a
suicient time frame. In this regard, the manufacturers’ recom -
mended curing times should be closely followed.
III. he major deiciency of composite resins is their inherent
polymerization shrinkage (2.2%–2.4%). his can result in
the formation of substantial contraction gaps between the
restorative material and the cavity margin, which can result
in postoperative sensitivity and recurrent caries. he shrinkage
of composite resin materials cannot be avoided, but the stress
created by the shrinkage can be reduced by the placement
technique. Reducing polymerization shrinkage stress can result
in intact restoration margins and the prevention of
microleakage.
There are five primary strategies that can be used to reduce
polymerization shrinkage stress:
• he irst is to create a relatively thick primed layer with the
chosen dentin bonding agent. OptiBond FL (Kerr Corpora -
tion, Orange, CA) has a relatively high amount of iller
content and, when properly used, will result in a thick primed
layer. his primed layer has a relatively low modulus of
elasticity and can thus deform slightly when the composite
resin is curing and shrinking and thus absorb some of the
stress and maintain the integrity of the tooth/restoration
bond.
• he second strategy is to use a thin liner (0.5 mm) of resinmodiied glass ionomer (Vitrebond Plus, 3M Oral Care, St.
Paul, MN) under the composite resin restoration. hese
materials bond predictably to tooth structure and also have
a low modulus of elasticity to absorb the shrinkage stress.
• he third option is to place a thin layer (0.5 mm) of lowable
composite resin as a liner. his again will theoretically
efectively absorb the shrinkage stress.
• A fourth concept that may be used to reduce shrinkage stress
is the use of “soft-start” polymerization.65 his approach
utilizes a number of procedures to prolong the gel phase of
the setting reaction of the composite resin material. he
theory is that the longer the setting composite can maintain
a gel or lowable condition, the better it can distribute the
stresses resulting from shrinking. Procedures to do this include
the use of ramped lights, pulse curing, or simply holding
the curing light some distance from the material for the
initial exposure. Several clinical and laboratory studies have
demonstrated the efectiveness of soft-start polymerization,
while other studies have demonstrated limited beneit.
• he inal approach to reduce stress is to place the composite
resin in increments, always keeping in mind the concept of result in contraction gap formation, microleakage, postoperative
sensitivity, and a potential to develop recurrent caries.
Some manufacturers have introduced products to the market
that are described as “low shrinkage” composite resin materials.
he linear shrinkage of these materials ranges between 1.4% and
1.7%. he reduction in shrinkage has been accomplished by
technology that permits higher iller loading. hese materials have
not undergone extensive clinical testing at the time of writing.
More clinical evidence of their eicacy is essential before they can
be recommended for routine use.
Recently, composite resin materials based on silorane technology
have been introduced on an experimental basis. hese materials
use a resin polymer that exhibits very low shrinkage and thus does
not depend on increased iller loading.
As with other low shrinkage materials, more clinical evidence is
required before these materials can be considered for routine use.
Bulk-Fill Composite Resin Materials
Bulk-ill resin materials were recently introduced to allow clinicians
to divert from using an incremental layering technique when placing
composite restorations, thus simplifying the procedure and reducing
chair time. his technique was developed to minimize negative
efects of polymerization-induced shrinkage stress and curing light
penetration. he undesired side efects—a time-consuming and
complex clinical procedure—contribute signiicantly to make
composite restorations technique sensitive.56
Diferent from traditional composites, which are typically
restricted to increments of 2 mm or less, these materials are designed
to be used in increments of 4 to 5 mm.57,58 Common manufacturers’
claims involve greater depth of cure and lower polymerizationinduced shrinkage stress. Although these composites are usually
referred to as if they were clearly identiiable as a class of ma terials—
bulk-ill composites—scientiic evidence contradicts the assumptions
that they would behave similarly.59,60 he variety in handling
characteristics, as well as physical and mechanical properties, is a
direct consequence of the wide range of diferent compositions
used by manufacturers, largely related to their iller content.61
he diferent types of bulk-ill composites currently available
can be categorized as lowable base bulk-ill composites and full-body
bulk-ill composites . Flowable base bulk-ill composites require a
conventional composite as the occlusal increment and therefore
are used for dentin replacement only; full-body bulk-ill composites
can replace dentin and enamel in a single increment.60 Overall,
bulk-ill composites are more translucent than other composite resin
materials. To a certain extent, this is attained by decreasing the
iller content and increasing the iller size. Increased translucency
facilitates light penetration, which is closely associated with depth of
cure and increased polymerization rates toward the deepest areas
of the restoration.62 Evidence appears to support light-curing times
of at least 20 seconds.60 Despite the large array of materials being
marketed, bulk-ill composites appear to deliver an increased depth
of cure and reduced polymerization-induced shrinkage stress.63,64
Manipulative Variables With Composite Resin
Restorative Materials
he contemporary clinician has a wide variety of quality composite
resin restorative materials from which to choose. How these chosen
materials are manipulated in the clinical setting is more important
to long-term results than which material is chosen. he following
narrative will briely discuss some of the important variabl es when
using composite resin restorative materials.
I. Most contemporary composite resin materials are cured or
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
3. High iller content (75% weight) of small iller particles (0.04–1
micron) is the key to that improvement.
4. Polymerization shrinkage (2.4%–2.8%) is the main disadvantage
of composite r esin materials. his can be accounted for with
proper technique.
5. Composite resins must be used in conjunction with contemporary
bonding systems.
6. Excellent isolation is critical to success with composite resin
materials.
Gla Ionomer Retorative Material
Glass ionomers (GI) were introduced to the profession by Wilson
and Kent in the early 1970s, and since then have evolved into a
number of unique dental materials.53 hese materials tend to be
misunderstood by many in the profession, and as a result many
clinicians underutilize glass ionomer materials, whereas other clini -
cians tend to overutilize glass ionomers and use them in situations
where they are clearly not indicated. his section describes available
glass ionomer products and also provides speciic indications and
contraindications for the clinical use of glass ion omer materials
(Fig. 13.30 ).
Glass ionomer materials are used as dental cements/luting agents,
cavity liners, pit-and-issure sealants, restorative materials (primarily
Class V), bases, and core buildup materials. Based on clinical trials
and physical properties testing, the eicacy of GI for pit-and-issure
sealants and for large core buildups is questionable.
All GI materials have a number of features in common. While
some materials have multiple setting mechanisms, the basic GI
setting reaction is an acid-base reaction with polyacrylic acid acting
on and partially dissolving alumino-silicate glass. his results in a
“burst” of luoride release at a very high level, but this burst of
luoride release is completed in 24 hours. After that, there is a
continual low-level release of luoride that is likely well below the
threshold necessary to protect against secondary carie s. Most
publications on GI materials state that GI is a luoride releasing
material, which implies protection from secondary caries. However,
GI materials must be “recharged” with luoride, which can then
be re-released in order to provide protection. his ability for GI
materials to act as “reservoirs” for luoride will be discussed later.“C-factor.”66 he C-factor relates to the coniguration of the
cavity walls, and is the relative ratio between the bonded
surface area of the composite resin to the unbonded surface
area.
A class IV composite restoration has a wealth of unbonded
surface area and a relatively small bonded area and thus has a low
C-factor. he unbonded composite resin material will shrink toward
the bond, thus reducing the shrinkage stress.
On the other hand, small Class I cavities have a high C-factor
because they have a huge bonded area and relatively small
unbonded area. When these restorations are cured, there is a high
amount of competition for the bond, and the result is that the
weakest bond (pulpal loor) gives away under the shri nkage stress
creating a luid-illed gap below the restoration and a high likeli -
hood of postoperative sensitivity. hese restorations should be
placed in anatomical increments so that the material can shrink
freely in one direction and thus eliminate or reduce the shrinkage
stress.
Summary and Conclusions About Composite
Resin Materials
Contemporary composite resin materials have improve d signiicantly
over the years. Today’s materials have good wear resistance and a
wide variety of shades and translucencies. hey are quite polishable
and provide excellent esthetics.
However, the major disadvantage of composite resin materials
is the inherent polymerization shrinkage. his resul ts in a signiicant
level of technique sensitivity. Composite resin restorations must
be placed with excellent isolation (rubber dam), in conjunction
with meticulous bonding procedures. he placement technique
itself is critical, as is meticulous inishing and polishing. Properly
placed, composite resin materials can provide a very esthetic and
durable restoration, and the results are gratifying to both patients
and clinicians.
THE BOTTOM LINE
1. here is a signiicant interest by the public in tooth colored
restorative materials.
2. Composite resin restorative materials have improved signiicantly
over the years.
• Fig. 13.30 Glass ionomer restorative material. (Courtesy GC.)
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
thus these cements have two setting reactions: the classic acid-base
reaction and a chemical-cure resin reaction.
Resin-modiied GI cements bond to tooth structure and possess
the same luoride release characteristics as conventional GI cements.
As a result of the addition of resin, they also possess superior
physical properties, have improved handling characteristics, and
are less technique sensitive.
Resin-modiied GI cements have almost totally replaced zinc
phosphate cement and are indicated for cementation of gold inlays,
onlays, partial veneer and full veneer crowns and ixed partial
dentures, metal-ceramic crowns and ixed partial dentures, and
monolithic and layered zirconia crowns and ixed partial dentures.
he manipulation of RMGI cements is relatively simple, making
them relatively free of technique sensitivity. hey are supplied with
three diferent dispensing techniques ( Fig. 13.32 ).
he original cement was supplied as a powder and liquid. It is
important with powder/liquid cements to closely follow the
manufacturer’s directions regarding the ratio of powder to liquid.
A later version of RMGI was the development of a “clicker” dis -
penser. With this product, it was simply a matter of dispensing
the correct amount of cement and mixing. his simpliied approach
was partially responsible for RMGI cements gaining the lion’s
share of the cement market. he latest innovation has been the
development of “automix” dispensers. With these devices the
operator simply dispenses the mixed cement into the restoration
and proceeds with cementation.
A short note on dispensing devices: It is clear from research
conducted at the University of Washington and at the University
of North Carolina that the same brand of cement manipulated
by diferent dispensing systems has signiicantly diferent physical
properties.67 Whether or not this has clinical signiicance remains
to be determined.
he prepared tooth should be cleaned with pumice or an intraoral
air particle abrasion device if available. he use of a desensitizer
such as Gluma Desensitizer or G5 is optional, but has been shown Glass ionomer materials form very predictable bonds to both
enamel and dentin. he bonds are weak chemical (chelation) bonds,
but are predictable, efective, and durable ( Fig. 13.31 ). In general,
GI materials have inferior physical properties compared to amalgam
and resin composite.
Type of Gla Ionomer Material
Dental Cements/Luting Agents
Conventional Gla Ionomer Cement
Conventional glass ionomer cements are supplied as powder-liquid
materials, with the primary component of the powder being ground
aluminosilicate glass, and the liquid consisting of polyacrylic acid
with small amounts of itaconic and tartaric acid. Examples include
Fuji Type I and Ketac-Cem. he setting reaction is a chemical
acid-base reaction.
hese cements bond to tooth structure and have good physical
properties compared to the “gold standard” cement, zinc phosphate.
hey release luoride although it is doubtful that this is of any
clinical signiicance.
he main disadvantage of these cements is that they have been
associated anecdotally with an increased incidence of postoperative
sensitivity. Clinical trials have demonstrated that this sensitivity
is likely related to technique (e.g., overdrying the prepared tooth)
or contamination of the setting cement by saliva. With proper
technique, the level of postcementation sensitivity should be very
low.
Conventional GI cements have decreased in popularity in recent
years because of the development of resin-modiied GI cements.
Rein-M odiied Glass Ionomer Cements
Resin-modiied glass ionomer (RMGI) cements are the most popular
cements available today. Examples include Rely-X Luting and
Rely-X Luting Plus cements, Fuji Plus and Fuji-Cem cements.
Resin monomers have been incorporated into these materials, and
• Fig. 13.31 Schematic illustration of ionic interaction between glass ionomer ions and tooth structure.
(From Albers HF: Tooth-colored restoratives: principles and techniques . , PMPH-USA.)
• Fig. 13.32 Three different dispensing methods for RMGI cements: powder liquid, clicker, and automix.
(Courtesy 3M.)
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
Reinforced Gla Ionomer
A number of reinforced glass ionomer materials have been intro -
duced over the years in an attempt to expand the indications for
GI materials. he following is a partial listing of such materials:
• Miracle Mix (Fuji II plus amalgam alloy particles)
• Ketac Silver (a glass cermet where the silver particles are chemi -
cally attached to the glass)
• Ketac Molar and Fuji IX (self-cure GI with increased aluminosilicate glass concentrations, polyacrylic acid, and polycarboxylic
acid)
• Fuji IX
• Equia and Equia Forte
• Chem-il Rock
Manufacturers claim that these materials are indicated as core
buildup materials for extensively damaged or endodontically treated
teeth. he physical properties of these materials are inferior to
silver amalgam and resin composite, and thus they should not be
used for core buildups. hey can be used as bases and blockout
materials.
Fuji IX is one of the most popular of these materials. It is
indicated as a base under large composite resin restorations, as the
intermediary material in an indirect pulp cap procedure, and as a
temporary restorative material to replace missing restorations,
broken cusps, etc. Fuji IX is mixed in an automix device. A
conditioner of 10% polyacrylic acid is placed on the tooth for 20
seconds and washed of prior to placing Fuji IX.
Cavity Liner
here are several GI materials that have been speciically formulated
to serve as liners. Among the most popular are Vitrebond and
Vitrebond Plus. Both of these materials are light cured, and the
diference between them is that Vitrebond is a powder/liquid
material and Vitrebond Plus is dispensed with a “cli cker.” Liners
are materials that are used at a thickness of no more than 0.5 mm
under either amalgam or composite restorative materials. heir
function is to seal deep dentin exposed during caries removal
with the goal of having about 2 mm of thickness of cavity liner
and remaining dentin between the restorative material and the
pulp.
Glass ionomer liners are recommended when excavation of
caries results in a remaining thickness of dentin that is likely less
than 2 mm. hey are optional any time the depth of a cavity
preparation exceeds the depth of a “minimal” preparation.
Manipulation of glass ionomer cavity liners is straightforward.
Complete the cavity preparation and clean and dry the cavity. Do
not desiccate. Mix the lining material and place into the preparation
in a thin layer (no more than 0.5 mm) using a Dycal applicator
or similar instrument. Light-cure for 20 seconds. Now regular
bonding procedures are completed when placing composite resin
restorations, or Gluma Desensitizer or G5 is applied if placing an
amalgam restoration.
A Note on Fluoride Release and Secondary Caries Preven -
tion. Dentists understand that luoride is an efective caries reducing
agent and manufacturers understand that dentists will buy any
material that contains luoride. Dentists would like ly purchase
luoride releasing tires if someone would manufacture them.
However, it is critical to understand that the efectiveness of luoride
as a caries preventive agent is dose related. Fluoride releasing
amalgam or composite resin has no chance of reducing caries
because the dose of released luoride is so low.
Glass ionomer–based materials are unique in that the set material
consists of an aqueous polygel that permits ion exchange in the to not only not interfere with bonding, but actually slightly enhances
it with RMGI cements. A small amount of cement should be
placed in the restoration and the restoration should be seated with
irm inger pressure and then completely seated with the “dynamic
seating” technique. he cement should be protected from saliva
contamination while setting and should be allowed to set completely
before removing the excess cement.
Many manufacturers of RMGI cements and some brands of
resin cements are suggesting the operator should “preset” the excess
setting cement with 5 seconds exposure to a curing light to plasticize
the excess cement. he excess cement can then be removed readily
with one or two deft moves with an explorer. his is not recom -
mended as it is likely that cement just under the margin will also
be removed along with the excess cement.
Glass Ionomer Restorative Materials
Rein-M odiied Glass Ionomers
Glass ionomer materials have been formulated for use as restorative
materials, with their primary function being restoration of noncari -
ous cervical lesions and root caries lesions. he original materials
were chemically similar to GI cements with higher glass content
and increased particle size. Examples of these materials would be
Fuji II and Ketac Cem. hese materials have essentially been replaced
with RMGI restorative materials, which are less technique sensitive,
have better physical properties, show improved esthetics, and display
vastly improved handling characteristics. Examples of RMGI
restorative materials are Fuji II LC, Fuji Filling LC, Vitremer
Restorative Material, and Ketac Nano.
he setting reactions of these materials are complex. All undergo
the classic GI acid-base reaction as well as a light-activated resin
polymerization reaction. Some also have an additional chemical-cure
reaction and can set in the absence of light.
Resin-modiied glass ionomer restorative materials are indicated
for root caries lesions due to their excellent adhesion to to oth
structure and luoride release. hey are also recommended for
repair of recurrent caries around existing indirect res torations.
(Removal of the existing restoration is generally preferred in these
situations, but is not always practical.) RMGI restorative materials
are the materials of choice for the restoration of NCCLs where
esthetics is NOT of primary importance. RMGI materials have
an excellent clinical history of retention with NCCLs, due to
excellent adhesion and low elastic modulus, but the long-term
esthetic result is compromised. Resin-modiied glass ionomer
restorative materials are contraindicated in stress bearing
situations.
When placing RMGI restorations, the following technique is
suggested. First, obtain the appropriate shade match. hen obtain
the appropriate isolation with a retraction cord/cotton roll or
preferably rubber dam. Complete the cavity preparation and then
clean the preparation with the dedicated conditioner. Conditioners
are formulations of 10% to 20% polyacrylic acid, which clean the
smeared layer of dentin without opening the dentinal tubules and
removing the smear plug. Follow the manufacturer’s directions
carefully. Some conditioners are designed to be washed of prior
to placing the restorative material, while others are not. Mix the
material. Some materials are mixed in a triturator (automixed),
some are powder/liquid, and some are dispensed with a clicker.
With Ketc-Nano, do not attempt to place the material until 30
to 40 seconds after mixing as it is initially very sticky and diicult
to handle. Place and shape the material and light-cure for the
recommended time, typically 20 to 40 seconds. Finish and polish.
Placement of a surface glaze material is optional.
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
4. Resin-modiied glass ionomer liners have an excellent track
record as lining materials used in ilms no thicker than 0.5 mm.
5. Resin-modiied glass ionomer lining cements should be used
to provide a liner/dentin thickness of 2 mm from the pulp.
6. Resin-modiied glass ionomer restorative materials provide
satisfactory service for the restoration of root caries and noncari -
ous cervical lesions.
7. Reinforced glass ionomer materials should not be used for core
buildups.
8. Glass ionomer materials do not provide protection from second -
ary caries with their inher ent luoride release.
9. Glass ionomer and RMGI materials may provide protection
from secondary caries as a result of their ability to act as luo -
ride reservoirs. In order to accomplish this, they must be
regularly exposed to topical luoride from toothpastes, gels,
mouthwashes, etc.
Adheive Dentitry
Bonding to Enamel
Of the many important scientiic advances in restorative dentistry
in the past century, perhaps none is as important as the discovery
by Buonocore in of acid etching enamel.51 Buonocore was
investigating the use of phosphoric acid to clean issures in molar
teeth and recognized the retention potential of the etched enamel
surface when he examined it microscopically ( Fig. 13.33 ).
he irst practical application of his discovery was pit-and-issure
sealants, although routine use of sealants was not to become popular
for many years. he concomitant introduction of the irst composite
resin material by Raphael Bowen in made possible current
concepts of adhesive dentistry.50 It is worth noting that the concept
of bonding composite resin materials to tooth structure did not
become popular until the mid-1970s. It is also worth noting that
at the present time the resin bond to acid-etched enamel
is the most important bond in adhesive dentistry.
he original acid etchant was the liquid from zinc-phosphate
cement, which was basically phosphoric acid. his has been replaced
by brightly colored gels ( Fig. 13.34A ), which aid in ensuring the
phosphoric acid is completely washed of the tooth. Phosphoric
acid concentrations vary from 30% to 40% with the most common
one being 37%. While extended application times may be okay oral cavity. his allows glass ionomer–based restorative materials
to absorb topically applied luoride from toothpastes, gels, etc.,
and slowly re-release that luoride over 24 hours.
An almost universal misconception is that all GI materials release
luoride and that this released luoride is efective in preventing
secondary caries. As noted in the introduction, all GI materials
do release luoride. here are two phases to this luoride release.
he irst occurs primarily in the irst 24 hours after mixing and
is described as a “burst” of luoride release resulting from dissolution
of the glass particles in the material by polyacrylic acid. After this
24-hour period, there is a sustained luoride release over time, but
this level of luoride release is likely far below the therapeutic level
essential to prevent secondary caries.
To reach a potentially therapeutic level, it is essential that GI
materials are regularly (3 ×/day) exposed to sources of luoride (e.g.,
toothpastes, gels, mouth rinses) that will allow the GI material to
uptake luoride and slowly re-release it into the surrounding
environment.68 Research has demonstrated that this does occur
on a predictable long-term basis.
Repeated exposure is essential if the GI material is to act as a
reservoir for luoride. It is unlikely that a GI-based luting cement,
in a 25-μm ilm thickness under a properly fabricated indirect
restoration, would be able to absorb and re-release luoride at a
therapeutic level. A GI base or liner under a sealed restoration
would not be exposed to luoride to be absorbed and re-released.
Similarly, under a leaking restoration, these materials would not
be exposed to suicient luoride to be efective against recurrent
caries. he reason these materials are preferred as bases and
cavity liners is because of their predictable bond and seal of
the underlying dentin, not because of their ability to prevent
secondary caries.
hus, the only GI materials that have legitimate potential for
prevention of secondary caries are GI restorative materials such as
Fuji II LC, Ketac Nano, and Fuji IX. It is importan t to understand
that these materials will only be efective if they receive regular
exposures to luoride (multiple exposures/day).
Polyacid M odiied Composites (Compomers)
Polyacid modiied composites or compomers were released in the
1990s. hey are modestly illed composite resin materials to which
has been added some prereacted glass ionomer material. he
important distinction between a glass ionomer product and a
compomer is that there is no acid-base glass ionomer reaction with
compomers. Examples of compomer products are Dyract, Com -
poglass, and F2000. Compomers are intended to be used in
non–stress-bearing situations; and they have adequate esthetics,
ease of handling, adhesion to tooth structure, but poor physical
properties. hey do release luoride, but at a very low level, less
than 10% of the release of glass ionomers. hus it is unlikely that
compomers have any meaningful efect on the incidence of second -
ary caries. here are likely no indications for use of compomers
in contemporary dentistry.
THE BOTTOM LINE
1. Glass ionomer materials are useful for several clinical applications
in restorative dentistry.
2. Glass ionomer materials provide predictable long-term bonds
to enamel and dentin.
3. Resin-modiied glass ionomer cement is the most popular cement
in restorative dentistry and is indicated for cementation of
metal castings and zirconia and porcelain-fused-to-metal based
restorations.
• Fig. 13.33 SEM image of enamel surface etched with phosphoric
acid.
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
B
A
• Fig. 13.34 A, Phosphoric acid gel. B, Etching of the enamel surface
with phosphoric acid gel.
• Fig. 13.35 Enamel surface appearance after applying the acid etchant.
Notice the chalkiness of the enamel surface.
C
B
A
• Fig. 13.36 A, Fractured tooth #9. B and C, Fragment piece was saved
and bonded back in place. on enamel, ther e is no beneit in applying the gel for more than
15 seconds ( Fig. 13.34B ). he operator should always verify that
an etch pattern has been achieved before proceeding with bonding
(Fig. 13.35 ).
he acid-etched enamel/resin bond has been studied extensively
and is a very predictable long-term bond. his bond is a purely
mechanical bond , with shear bond strength usually exceeding 20
megapascals (MPa). Properly done, it is a clinically successful bond
and should result in sealed margins with composite resin restorations.
his is important to reduce microleakage and prevent secondary
caries, which is a common cause of failure with composite resin
restorations. It’s worth repeating that the acid-etched enamel/resin
bond is the most important bond in restorative dentistry.
he acid-etched enamel/resin bond is useful for providing
retention for Class IV restorations, and for sealing the margins of
Class I, II, III, and V restorations. It is also useful for bonding
fragments of teeth fractured due to trauma ( Fig. 13.36 ).
he process of etching enamel with phosphoric acid is an example
of a “diferential acid attack,” a process that has been used in
industry for many years. A speciic acid will preferentially attack
one phase of a multiphasic substrate and leave behind a microscopi -
cally rough, retentive surface. Phosphoric acid is used to etch
enamel, nitric acid is used to etch base metal, and hydroluoric
acid is used to etch feldspathic porcelain. he surfaces created on
each of these substrates are similar in appearance and provide mechanical bonds to resin that are equal to or greater than the
bonds to etched enamel.
hese concepts have resulted in the use of a number of very
conservative resin-retained modalities for restoring teeth. One of
these procedures is the Maryland bridge ( Fig. 13.37 ), which is a
conservative method of replacing missing teeth. Clinical trials have
demonstrated that these resin-retained restorations have clinical
longevity comparable to conventional ixed partial dentures. A
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
bonding has grown through many generations, and the process
has been one of ev olution and simpliication. he following narration
will describe the evolution of dentin bonding agents in some detail
and will identify preferred adhesives at the time of writing .
he irst three generations of dentin bonding agents (DBAs)
were generally inefective, and the fourth generation DBAs intro -
duced in the 1990s were one of the most efective bonding agents
ever available until recently. However, the number of steps in the
fourth generation DBAs makes their use technique sensitive, and
many dentists reported poor results when using them. Most of
the later generations of DBAs were designed by the manufacturers
to be simpler to use, but that simpliication has generally resulted
in diminished clinical performance.
here are three main groups of DBAs: initial bonding agents
that were generally inefective, etch-and-rinse bonding agents th at
include the fourth and ifth generations, and self-etching primers.
Basically the contemporary dentist must decide on whether to use
an etch-and-rinse product or a self-etch product. Recent products
have been marketed that can be used either as a self-etch, selective
etch, or etch-and-rinse materials.
here are a number of factors that have made bonding to dentin
more diicult than bonding to enamel.
I. he compositions of enamel and dentin are diferent ( Table
13.5). he major diferences are that dentin is much less
mineralized and has much more water content than enamel.
II. Dentin is a heterogeneous substrate. One of the major factors
in this regard is the dentinal tubules. Supericial dentin, close
to the dentinoenamel junction (DEJ), has a relatively small
number of tubules and the oriices of the tubules are small.
hus there is a large amount of intertubular dentin to bond
to and successful dentin bonding is relatively predictable and
easy. With deep dentin, there are more tubules and the oriices
of the tubules are wider, so there is little intertubular dentin
to bond to ( Fig. 13.39 ). Bonding to deep dentin is diicult
and unpredictable.
III. Dentin is a dynamic substrate. It changes after bonding occurs.
It also contains enzymes called matrix-metalloproteinases
(MMPs), which can be activated by the bonding procedure. similar concept is the use of bonded metal rests to provide support
for removable partial dentures.
Perhaps the most popular of these modalities has been bonded
porcelain laminate veneers. Simonsen and Calamia are credited
with the irst study on etching porcelain with hydro luoric acid
and Harold Horn wrote the irst article describing porcelain
veneers.69,70 With conservative intraenamel preparations, these
restorations can provide many years of successful service and have
a survival rate of 95% at 15 years.71
he survival rate of all-ceramic crowns is improved if they are
etched and bonded in place. Posterior bonded ceramic restorations
in the form of inlays, onlays, and crowns are popular today and
must be bonded in place. Etched porcelain pontics can be bonded
to etched enamel of the abutment teeth to fabricate a “Carolina”
bridge. hese are primarily meant to be long-term provisionals for
patients with congenitally missing lateral incisors during their
teenage years prior to placing an implant ( Fig. 13.38 ).
In summary, the acid-etched enamel/resin bond is a strong,
reliable, mechanical bond that has proven to be useful with many
diferent clinical procedures. It is the most important bond in
adhesive restorative dentistry.
THE BOTTOM LINE
1. he acid-etched enamel/resin bond is the most important bond
in adhesive restorative dentistry.
2. Enamel etchants are 30% to 40% phosphoric acid.
3. Normal etch time is 15 seconds.
4. If the etched surface is not achieved after 15 seconds, etch again
until it is obvious.
5. Isolation is imperative. Any contamination of the etched surface
prior to bonding will negatively afect the bond.
6. he etched-enamel/resin bond is a durable mechanical bond.
It can provide adequate retention for restorations such as
porcelain laminate veneers and can also result in sealed margins
with direct composite resin restorations.
Bonding to Dentin
Bonding to acid-etched enamel is a rather straightforward procedure
that has been used efectively for many years. Bonding to dentin,
however, has proven to be a much more diicult process. Research
into dentin bonding began in the late 1970s and it continues to
be an active area of both clinical and laboratory research. Dentin
• Fig. 13.37 Maryland bridge.
B
A
• Fig. 13.38 A and B, Missing teeth 7 and 10 restored with a Carolina
bridge.
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
for cr eating the irst efective total-etch product developed in North
America. Kanca has suggested that total-etch DBAs be called
“etch-and-rinse” DBAs to clearly diferentiate them from the self-etch
products developed later on.
hese DBAs constitute the fourth and ifth generations of DBAs.
he fourth-generation DBAs were multiple bottle systems that
required three distinct procedures for bonding. hese steps are as
follows: (1) he tooth (enamel and dentin) is etched and then
rinsed. (2) A primer is placed. (3) A bonding agent is placed and
cured. he primer bonded to enamel and dentin, and sealed the
dentin. he bonding agent bonded to the primer and to the
restorative material. Inherent to this process was the necessity of
bonding to “moist” dentin, and the diiculty of precisely deining
exactly what “moist” meant led to many dentists having diiculty
using these products successfully. Commercial products of fourth
generation DBAs include All-Bond 2 (Bisco, Inc.), Scotchbond
Multi-Purpose (3M Oral Care, St. Paul, MN), OptiBond FL (Kerr
Corporation, Orange, CA), and Tenure Multi-Purpose (Den-Mat).
he technique sensitivity of the fourth-generation D BAs led
directly to the development of the ifth-generation DBAs, which
were basically single bottle systems and were easier to use. With
these systems only two steps are required: (1) he tooth is etched
and rinsed, and (2) priming and bonding are carried out as a single
Composition of Enamel and Dentin
Enamel Dentin
Mineral 80% 45%
Organic 2% 30%
Water 12% 25%
B
A
• Fig. 13.39 A, Supericial intertubular dentin. B, Deep intertubular dentin. (Photos courtesy Dr. Ed
Swift.)
• Fig. 13.40 SEM image of smear layer of dentin. hese activated MMPs gradually break down the collagen
matrix and hybrid layer. he result of this is that dentin bonds
tend to decrease signiicantly with time.
Initial Bonding Agents
For practical purposes, the irst three generations of DBAs can be
clumped together and called “initial” bonding agents. hese materials
were inefective because at the time they were formulated dental
scientists believed resin-based materials were deleterious to the
pulp. hus these materials were designed to bond to minerals in
the smeared layer of dentin, which scientists believed would protect
the pulp from the resinous bonding agents.
he smeared layer of dentin is 3 to 5 microns thick and consists
of ground dentin, fragments from the rotary instruments, denatured
protein, and both live and dead bacteria ( Fig. 13.40 ). It does have
a signiicant protective function, but most importantly for dentin
bonding, it is not irmly attached to the underlying dentin. hus
when shrinking polymers such as DBAs are bonded to it, the
smeared layer becomes detached from the underlying dentin.
hese initial DBAs formed excellent bonds to etched enamel,
and weak bonds to dentin. Most importantly, however, they had
signiicant microleakage that lead to both postoperative sensitivity
and recurrent caries.
Etch-and-Rinse Bonding Agents (Previously Called
“Total-Etch”)
he inefectiveness of the initial DBAs led to the development of
total-etch systems in the late 1980s. Credit must be given to
Fusayama and Nakabyashi from Japan for developing this concept
and to Bertolotti for recognizing the value of their work and
introducing it to North America. John Kanca also deserves credit
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
he sequencing of the bonding procedures and their rational
will be given in “he Bottom Line” at the end of this chapter.
Self-Etching Primers
Self-etching primers are basically acidic monomers that etch through
the smeared layer of dentin. he primers are simply applied and
light cured. hey are not rinsed of. Since the smeared layer is
usually not completely removed, the dentinal tubules remain sealed
and postoperative sensitivity is almost completely eliminated.
here are two types of self-etching primers. One type has two
bottles. he irst bottle is the self-etching primer that is placed on
the prepared tooth and dried. he second bottle is the bonding
agent that is placed over the primer and cured prior to placing
the restorative material. Commercial products in this category
are Clearil SE Bond (Kuraray America, Inc., New York, NY),
Simplicity (Apex Dental Materials, Inc., Lake Zurich, IL), Opti -
Bond XTR (Kerr Corporation, Orange, CA), and All-Bond SE
(Bisco, Inc.).
he second type of self-etching primer is the single bottle systems
that have the primer and bonding agent in the same bottle. Current
research has shown that the single bottle materials are not reliable
and should be avoided at this time. Commercial products in this
category include Xeno IV (DENTSPLY Sirona, York, PA) and
Adper Prompt-L-Pop (3M Oral Care, St. Paul, MN).
Self-etching primers create very predictable bonds to dentin
and eliminate postoperative sensitivity, but they have one major
problem: hey form weak bonds with uncut enamel. If the proposi -
tion that the acid-etch/resin bond to enamel is the most important
bond in adhesive restorative dentistry is accepted, this is a signiicant
deiciency. Clinical trials using self-etching primers frequently report
marginal staining after 3 or 4 years indicating microleakage at the
enamel/restoration margin. Clinicians using self-etching primers
should consider using the selective etch procedure to obtain a
better bond to enamel. hat technique will be described in the
“Bottom Line” section of this chapter.
In summary, the etch-and-rinse DBAs have two groups. One
group has three distinct steps including etching, priming, and
bonding. he other group has two steps, etching then priming
and bonding simultaneously. he self-etch materials also have two
groups. he best self-etch materials have two steps, etching and
priming simultaneously and then bonding. he other g roup etches,
primes, and bonds all at once.step, because both the primer and the bonding agent are in the
same bottle. While this procedure is a signiicant simpliication,
it still requires bonding to “moist” dentin, which remains a dilemma
for many dentists. Commercial examples of ifth-generation DBAs
include One-Step Plus (Bisco, Inc.), Adper Single Bond Plus (3M
Oral Care, St. Paul, MN), OptiBond SOLO Plus (Kerr Corporation,
Orange, CA), and Tenure Quick (Den-Mat).
Many of the initial fourth-generation products were not
particularly successful because the manufacturers were still not
convinced it was safe to use phosphoric acid on dentin. hus
they used two diferent etching agents, one for enamel and one
for dentin. For example, an early version of Scotchbond Multi
Purpose used only one acid to etch both enamel and dentin;
however, it was a weak (10% maleic) acid. Maleic acid works
well on dentin, but again does not adequately etch enamel. As
stated several times in the section on acid-etching enamel, the
most important bond in adhesive restorative dentistry is the resin
bond to acid-etched enamel.
Today’s fourth-generation DBAs all use 30% to 40% phosphoric
acid to etch both enamel and dentin, as research has shown
conclusively that it is both safe and efective. he components of
the primers include a hydrophilic monomer such as HEMA,
PENTA, BPDM, and now MDP in a volatile carrier such as acetone
or ethyl alcohol and water. One of the keys to successfully using
fourth-generation DBAs is to completely volatilize this carrier.
his can be done by air thinning or by use of high volume vacuum.
he components of bonding agents are Bis-GMA and a hydrophilic
monomer such as HEMA.
he ifth-generation DBAs are similar in composition, but
components of both the primer and bonding agent are in the same
bottle.
Almost all contemporary fourth-generation and ifth-generation
DBAs contain quartz iller particles to improve strength, reduce
shrinkage, and provide a thicker primed layer. Research has shown
that DBAs with a thicker primed layer are generally more eicacious
than those with a thin primed layer.
Etch-and-rinse DBAs basically remove the smeared layer of
dentin, and etch both enamel and dentin. Etching dentin is often
called “conditioning.” Etching dentin involves removing a small
amount of mineral from the supericial layer of dentin. his exposes
bundles of collagen, which the primer can iniltrate and form the
“hybrid” layer, composed of iniltrated collagen, mineralized dentin,
and the primer. he bond is primarily to etched intertubular dentin.
Bonding to the peritubular dentin around the dentinal tubules is
diicult and inefective. Resin tags look spectacular in SEMs but
provide no real beneit in dentin bonding ( Fig. 13.41 ).
Supericial dentin has an abundance of intertubular dentin and
allows predictable successful bonding. With deep dentin there is
relatively little intertubular dentin available due to the presence
of multiple large oriice tubules. Predictable bonding is diicult
with deep dentin, and a resin-modiied glass ionomer may be
placed over deep dentin prior to etching and bonding.
Comparing the fourth and ifth generations of etch-and-rinse
DBAs, it is clear the fourth generation has the best clinical per -
formance. he fourth-generation DBAs have three separate steps:
(1) he enamel and dentin are etched and rinsed, (2) the primer
is applied, and (3) the bonding agent is applied and cured. With
the ifth-generation DBAs, the enamel and dentin are etched and
rinsed, and the priming and bonding steps are done simultaneously.
Clinical research has shown clearly that the fourth-generation
(three-step) DBAs provide superior clinical performance when
compared to the ifth-generation (two-step) DBAs.
Composite
Hybrid Layer
Resin tagsAdhesive
• Fig. 13.41 SEM image of the hybrid layer and resin tags.
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
11. Successful dentin bonding requires the formation of a hybrid
layer resulting from resin penetration into a collagen matrix
that is partially demineralized by etching with either phosphoric
acid or acidic monomers.
12. Dentin bonds tend to deteriorate over time.
Bae and Cavity Liner in the Adheive Era
Bases and cavity liners have been used for many years in restorative
dentistry. With the development of mor e efective adhesives, the
use of materials as bases and liners has diminished. he topic of
bases and cavity liners is quite controversial today and there is a
general lack of consensus among authorities, practitioners, and
educational institutions as to indications for such materials.72 he
following is a brief description of materials used as bases, liners,
varnishes, and sealing agents available today.
Base Materials
To begin, a base is any substance placed under a restoration that
blocks out undercuts in the preparation, acts as a thermal or chemical
barrier to the pulp, and/or controls the thickness of the overlying
restoration ( Fig. 13.42 ).
Any dental cement mixed to a very thick consistency can be
used as a base. Zinc-phosphate, polycarboxylate, zinc oxide-eugenol
(IRM), and glass ionomer cements have all been historically used
as bases for direct and indirect restorations.
he primary contemporary function of a base is to block out
undercuts for indirect restorations, to seal the dentin against leakage
in deep cavities, and to act as replacement dentin with large
composite resin restorations to reduce the volume of composite
resin. he contemporary material most often utilized for these
functions is Fuji IX (GC America, Alsip, IL), which is a reinforced,
self-cure glass ionomer.
Liner Materials
A cavity liner is a luid paste applied in a thin layer as a protective
barrier between dentin and the restorative material. Liners should
not be used in layers thicker than 0.5 mm.
A number of materials have been used historically, including
calcium hydroxide, zinc oxide-eugenol, glass ionomer, and resinmodiied glass ionomer. Calcium hydroxide (e.g., Dycal, DENTSPLY New Developments
While today’s DBAs are clearly superior to early generations of
DBAs, research has demonstrated that the bonds to dentin dete -
riorate over time. his is partially due to hydrolysis of the DBAs
and also to breakdown of the collagen matrix in the hybrid layer
due to the action of MMPs activated during the bonding procedure.
Part of the problem seems to be that many DBAs are too hydrophilic
and act as semipermeable membranes allowing water-t ree formation
and osmotic blistering. Newer products are considerably less
hydrophilic than their predecessors.
he use of 2% chlorhexidine (Consepsis, Ultradent Products;
Cavity Cleanser, Bisco, Inc.) after etching seems to be somewhat
efective in inhibiting the ability of MMPs to break down the
hybrid layer, although this has not yet become a common practice.
Kerr Corporation has introduced a product called OptiBond XTR,
which is the irst self-etch material to demonstrate enamel bonding
equivalent to that of the fourth-generation DBAs. he long-term
clinical eicacy of such bonds has yet to be determined, but labora -
tory testing has been promising.
A major development in dentin bonding has been the expiration
of the patent held by Kuraray on the monomer MDP . his is the
chief ingredient in Clearil SE Bond, which has been shown in
long-term clinical trials to be as efective as the fourth-generation
etch-and-rinse materials. his is a mild two-step self-etching primer,
which has proven to be a very efective DBA and also does not
activate MMPs. Many of the major manufacturers have now
incorporated MDP into their DBAs, and it is anticipated that they
will be efective. For example, 3M Oral Care has introduced a new
product called Scotchbond Universal that purportedly can be used
in the self-etch, selective-etch, or etch-and-rinse modes. his adhesive
utilizes the monomer MDP . Laboratory tests indicate that superior
bond to enamel is achieved using the etch-and-rinse procedure. For
the diferent bonding protocols, please refer to Chapter 5 .
THE BOTTOM LINE
1. Dentin bonding agents have evolved rapidly over the past few
decades.
2. Contemporary DBAs are considerably more efective than
early generations.
3. Modern DBAs contain illers, which result in a thicker primer
layer and seemingly improved eicacy.
4. Contemporary DBAs are either etch-and-rinse materials or
self-etching primers.
5. Etch-and-rinse DBAs are either three-step (fourth-generation)
or two-step (ifth-generation) materials. Both groups are
efective, but clinical trials have clearly demonstrated the
superiority of the three-step systems.
6. Both etch-and-rinse materials involve bonding to “moist”
dentin. An efective technique for bonding to “moist” dentin
will be described later in this section.
7. Self-etching primers are supplied as either two-step or one-step
products. he one-step products are not recommended at this
time.
8. Most self-etching primers do not completely remove the smeared
layer of dentin, and postoperative sensitivity is rarely reported
with these products.
9. Enamel bonds are compromised with most self-etching primers.
his deiciency may be overcome using the “selective etch”
technique that will be described later on in this section.
10. Bonding to supericial dentin is more predictable than bonding
to deep dentin. With deep cavities a thin resin-modiied glass
ionomer liner should be used.
• Fig. 13.42 Base material used to block out undercuts in the prepara -
tion of teeth 9 and 10.
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
or a combination of tooth structure base and liner between the
restorative material and the pulp.73
Amalgam
It is no longer considered necessary to use bases to build up deep
cavity preparations to “ideal” form. With deep preparations close
to the pulp, a very small liner of calcium hydroxide may be placed,
followed by a thin liner of resin-modi ied glass ionomer (Vitrebond
Plus). As an alternative, the calcium hydroxide liner may be omitted.
Deep preparations that are not close to the pulp should receive
a thin RMGI liner. Gluma Desensitizer or G5 should be applied
to all preparations, including those in which liners have been
placed.
Composite Resin
For any preparation deeper than a minimal preparation, a thin
resin-modiied glass ionomer liner should be placed in the deepest
portion of the preparation. In this situation (deep dentin), dentin
adhesiv es tend to be less efective because there is less intertubular
dentin to interact with and form an efective hybrid layer. With
posterior composite resin preparations where the proximal box
ends close to or beyond the CEJ, a resin-modiied glass ionomer
liner should be placed to reduce postoperative sensitivity. Adhesive
bonding systems must be used with all composite resin restorations
regardless of whether a lining material has been placed.
Cast-Metal Indirect Restorations
Deep restorations should receive a RMGI liner prior to impression
making. With very deep lesions, vitality testing must be done
before administration of local anesthetic to determine the need
for endodontic therapy. Resin-modiied glass ionomer, Fuji IX, or
other base materials can be used to block out undercuts. Gluma
Desensitizer or G5 should be applied immediately after tooth
preparation prior to making the provisional restoration.
THE BOTTOM LINE
1. here is still a need for bases and liners in the adhesive era.
2. Bases are primarily used to block out undercuts.
3. Liners should be used in a thin ilm, no greater than 0.5 mm
thick.
4. Resin-modiied glass ionomers are used with deep caries prior
to bonding because bonding to deep dentin with available dentin Sirona, York, PA) and resin-modiied glass ionomer (e.g., Vitrebond,
3M Oral Care, St. Paul, MN; Fuji Lining Cement, GC America,
Alsip, IL) lining materials are the most commonly u sed. Resinmodiied glass ionomers are used most frequently, as few clinical
situations today call for the use of calcium hydroxide.
Resin-modiied glass ionomer liners (Vitrebond and Vitr ebond
Plus) are supplied as powder/liquid or paste/paste systems, respec -
tively. They are light activated and have improved handling
characteristics and physical properties compared to regular glass
ionomer lining materials. hey bond very predictably to dentin,
provide an excellent seal, and are very compatible with the pulp.
Typically they are used as a thin liner (0.5 mm) over dentin in
deep cavity preparations ( Fig. 13.43 ).
Calcium-hydroxide materials have a very high pH (9–14), are
antibacterial, and promote sclerosis, hence reducing permeability.
hey must not be used as a base because they have very poor
physical properties and should only be placed as a very thin
(0.5 mm) liner over the deepest portion of the cavity preparation.
Calcium hydroxide materials have traditionally been used when
performing a direct pulp cap, as the high pH irritates the pulp
tissues and stimulates the production of secondary dentin. Calcium
hydroxide has largely been replaced by bioactive cements such as
mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA) and biosilicate cement (Bioden -
tine, Lancaster, PA) for this function. Direct pulp capping should
only be considered with teeth with no record of spontaneous pain
and no radiographic evidence of periapical pathology.
Cavity varnish is a solution of a natural gum or synthetic resin
in an organic solvent. Copal varnish (Copalite, Temrex, Freeport,
NY) has been traditionally used under amalgam restorations to
reduce initial levels of marginal leakage. Cavity varnishes are no
longer popular and have been replaced by cavity sealers.
A cavity sealer is a liquid primerlike material that seals the
dentin surface prior to placing deinitive restorative materials.
Current products used as cavity sealers under silver amalgam restora -
tions are Gluma Desensitizer (Kulzer, South Bend, IN) and G5
desensitizer (Clinician’s Choice, New Milford, CT). hese sealers
contain both HEMA and glutaraldehyde and are very efective
sealing agents for dentin.
Clinical Recommendations
When using bases and liners, it should be remembered that the
ultimate goal is to have a minimum of 2 mm of tooth structure
B
A
• Fig. 13.43 A, Cavity preparation of tooth 30 before placing cavity liner. B, Preparation after placement
of cavity liner.
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
bonding agents is not predictable due to the lack of intertubular
dentin.
5. Cavity sealers should be used routinely under amalgam
restorations.
Indirect Retorative Material
Impreion Material
When fabricating indirect tooth-supported or implant-supported
restorations, accuracy of the impression is critical. It is clear that
impression materials have improved steadily over the past 50 years,
and the contemporary clinician has a great number of excellent
impression materials to choose from. While it is clear that con -
temporary impression materials are vastly superior to their predeces -
sors in the 1960s and 1970s, the quality of impressions sent to
commercial dental laboratories has failed to show a concomitant
improvement ( Fig. 13.44 ).74
he major deiciency seen with these impressions is failure to
record the entire prepared cervical margin in the impression. A
second deiciency is failure to follow the fundamental principles
in the manipulation of impression materials. Use of lexible plastic
stock trays ignores the need to control bulk and risk the possibility
of hydraulic distortion, especially with use of heavy body and/or
putty materials.75 Putty-wash materials are also used extensively,
often in an inappropriate manner resulting in impressions with
less than optimal accuracy.
he primary cause of these problems is a lack of appreciation
of the principles of manipulation of impression materials and poor
decisions related to margin placement and gingival displacement
techniques. Many dentists are excited about the ability to make
optical impressions, and the technology related to o ptical impressions
is impressive; however, it is clear that dentists who cannot predictably
make a traditional impression will not be able to predictably make
an optical impression.
Classiication of Impression Materials
here are two main types of impression materials: nonelastic
impression materials, which are used primarily in removable
prosthodontics, and elastic impression materials ( Fig. 13.45 ). here
are two types of elastic impression materials: water-based and
elastomeric (rubberlike) impression materials. he two types of
water-based impression materials are reversible and irreversible
hydrocolloid (alginate). here are four types of elastomeric impres -
sion materials: polysulide rubber (also known as rubber base,
thiokol rubber, and mercaptan rubber); polyether; condensation
silicone; and addition reaction silicone (also known as polyvinyl
siloxane (PVS) impression material).
his section will outline the ideal properties of impression
materials. Critical manipulative variables will be highlighted
in the subsequent section. Properties to be discussed include
accuracy, elastic recovery, dimensional stability, low, lexibility,
workability, hydrophilicity, shelf life, patient comfort, and
economics.
Accuracy
here are three main factors related to accuracy of impression
materials: ine detail reproduction, dimensional accuracy, and elastic
recovery, which will be discussed separately. According to ADA
#19, elastomeric impression materials used to fabricate precision
castings must be able to reproduce ine detail 25 microns or less.
All currently available impression materials meet this speciication.
C
B
A
• Fig. 13.44 A–C, Examples of poor intraoral impressions.
Classification of Impression Materials
1. Nonelastic Impression Materials
2. Elastic Impression Materials
A. Water-Based Impression Materials
1. Irreversible Hydrocolloid
2. Reversible Hydrocolloid
B. Elastomeric Impression Materials
1. Polysulfide Rubbe r
2. Polyether
3. Condensation Silicon e
4. Addition Reaction Silicone (PVS)
• Fig. 13.45 Classiication of impression materials.
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
the laboratory varies considerably, and if the impressions are mailed
to the lab, it will be well over 24 hours.
Dimensional stability of an impression material is determined
by the composition of the material, its susceptibility to imbibition
and syneresis, and the volatility of the by-product of the setting
reaction.80 Impressions made from water-based impression materials,
such as reversible and irreversible hydrocolloid (alginate), are
approximately 80% water, which evaporates at room t emperature.
his evaporation can result in clinically signiicant distortion of
the impression. Because of this evaporation (syneresis), water-based
impression materials should be poured within 10 minutes after
removal from the mouth. Water-based impression materials are
also subject to imbibition or the absorption of wat er. he common
practice of wrapping alginate impressions with wet paper towels
should be avoided, as the impression material will absorb water
from the towel (imbibition), which results in distortion of the
impression. hese impressions are properly stored in sealed plastic
bags prior to pouring.
he by-product of the setting reaction of condensation silicone
impression materials is ethyl-alcohol, which evaporates rapidly
at room temperature. Impressions made with condensation
silicone should be poured within 30 minutes of removal from
the mouth.
he by-product of the setting reaction of polysulide rubber
(rubber base) impression materials is water ( Fig. 13.46 ). his
evaporates more slowly than it does from water-based impression
materials, but is still signiicant. hus impressions made with
polysulide rubber should be poured within 30 minutes.
Polyether impression materials have no volatile by-product of
the setting reaction but are suiciently hydrophilic to absorb water
from the atmosphere. his absorption is dependent on relative
humidity (RH); and if the RH is over 50%, absorption of water
is suicient to cause clinically signiicant distortion.81 Polyether
impressions should be poured within 1 hour and should never be
mailed to a dental laboratory.
here is no by-product of the setting reaction for PVS impression
materials, so PVS impressions possess almost unlimited dimensional
stability. If impressions are to be mailed to the dental laboratory,
the only reasonable material to use is PVS. Indeed, the case can Polyvinyl siloxane is the best in this regard and rever sible hydrocol -
loid is the worst. It is not likely that improved ability to record
ine detail results in improved accuracy of the inal restoration,
because the limiting factor in this area is the ability of the gypsum
die materials to record ine detail. he corresponding speciication
for gypsum die materials related to ine detail is 50 microns. Some
die materials can provide better ine detail reproduction than the
50-micron speciication but fall well short of the impression materials
in this regard.
here are diferences in the ability of diferent viscosities of
elastomeric impression materials to record ine detail. Typically
the lower the viscosity, the better the ability to record ine detail.
Putty viscosities in general are very poor in this regard and are
only required to record ine detail of 75 microns.76 Some putty-wash
techniques result in putty recording some or the entire gingival
margin, which has a deleterious efect on the accuracy of the
gypsum die.
A second aspect is dimensional accuracy, which is evaluated by
measuring tooth-to-tooth distances in the same quad rant and also
cross-arch distances. here is some evidence that reversible hydrocol -
loid is slightly superior to the elastomers in this respect, but it is
likely of limited clinical signiicance.77
All of the available contemporary impression materials provide
superb accuracy if they are manipulated correctly. Although PVS
materials are likely to be slightly more accurate than other impression
materials, diferences in accuracy are not likely to be clinically
signiicant.
Elatic Recovery
Elastic recovery is the ability to low into an undercut, set in that
position, and then spring around the undercut on removal of the
impression and rebound to its original shape. No impression
material has % elastic recovery; and for all impression materials,
the greater the depth of the undercut, the greater the permanent
distortion of the impression material is.78,79 Polyvinyl siloxane
impression materials have the best elastic recovery at over 99%
with a speciic test undercut. his elastic recovery coupled with
excellent dimensional stability make it the material of choice for
clinicians who prefer to double pour impressions to obtain a
backup die.
At one time, dentists were cautioned to wait 30 minutes prior
to pouring impressions to allow maximum elastic recovery to occur.
With contemporary impression materials, this delay is no longer
necessary as elastic recovery occurs almost instantly. Keeping in
mind the greater the depth of the undercut, the greater the distor -
tion, an important procedure is to always block out undercuts in
tooth preparations prior to impression making. his often occurs
when preparing teeth with existing restorations. Many dentists fail
to do this, assuming the laboratory can block out the undercuts
on the die. While this is possible, blocking out the undercuts with
resin-modiied glass ionomer materials will reduce the overall
distortion due to improved elastic recovery.
Dimenional Stability
One of the most important properties when selecting an impressio n
material is dimensional stability. An ideal impression material would
be dimensionally stable over time, allowing the impression to be
poured at the convenience of the operator. his is extremely
important in contemporary dentistry, as most dentists have opted
to not pour up their own impressions and instead send them to
dental laboratories to be poured. he time between removal of an
impression from the mouth and the time when it is poured b y
• Fig. 13.46 Rubber base impression material.
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
impressions are some what lexible, and a rigid impression material
can compensate for this lexibility. Polyether impression materials
work well in this regard. Many PVS products have heavy body
versions that also provide the essential rigidity.
Workability
Impression materials were originally supplied as two tubes for each
viscosity. One tube was labeled as the base, the other the catalyst
(Fig. 13.47 ). he base and the catalyst were diferent colors, and
equal lengths of each were dispensed on a mixing pad. he materials
were mixed until the material became a uniform color with no
streaks. When making a clinical impression, one pad with heavy
body material was used and one with light body material. he
materials were mixed simultaneously, the light body material loaded
into an impression syringe and the heavy body material loaded
into a tray. his process required excellent coordination between
the dentist and assistant(s); thus impression making was a stressful
procedure.
Contemporary materials are supplied with “automix” handheld
devices. his is a substantial improvement and results in a standard -
ized mix with fewer inherent porosities, increased working time,
and economic savings due to less waste of material. Even better
are sophisticated electronic mixing devices such as the Pentamix
(3M Oral Care, St. Paul, MN).
Working times of impression materials vary by the manufacturer,
and most automix devices provide materials with standard-set and
quick-set capabilities. When making a single crown impression
with a quadrant or dual-arch tray, the operator may opt for a
quick-set material with a shorter working time. When making a
full-arch impression with multiple prepared teeth, it might be
prudent to choose a material with a longer working time. When
making an impression with several prepared teeth, another option
to extend working time is to refrigerate the low viscosity material,
which increases working time without sacriicing accuracy.82
Hydrophilicity
Reversible hydrocolloid impression materials are tru ly hydrophilic
and can efectively make accurate impressions in the presence of
moisture. All elastomeric impression materials require a completely
dry ield to make a successful impression .
Polyether impression materials are hydrophilic as witnessed by
their tendency to absorb water from the atmosphere. However,
polyether impression materials absolutely require a dry preparation
surface to make an accurate impression.be made that if the impression is going to be poured by a local
laboratory, it is safer to use PVS because there is no way to be
certain it will be poured at the appropriate time. his exceptional
dimensional stability, coupled with the excellent elastic recovery
of PVS impression materials, make it the best choice for clinicians
who prefer to double pour impressions to obtain a backup die.
displays discussed impression materials and recommended
pouring times.
Flow and Flexibility
Impression materials need to low readily into the minute details
of cavity preparations and accurately capture grooves, pinholes,
and cervical margin detail. Most brands of impression material
provide light body or syringe materials with low viscosity to
accomplish this. hese are used with heavy body materials in a
tray to provide more rigidity to the impression and assist in forcing
the low viscosity material into the gingival sulcus and accurately
and completely capture the prepared cervical margin.
Many early versions of low viscosity PVS impression materials
had excellent low characteristics but tended to low away from
the prepared tooth after injection of the impression material. his
created problems when attempting to make an impression of several
prepared teeth at one time. he composition of most contemporary
PVS and polyether materials has been modiied to render them
more thixotropic, and stay in place when they are syringed around
the prepared teeth, but then low readily when the heavy body
tray materials are placed over top of them.
Set impression materials vary considerably from one another
with regard to lexibility. Polyether impression materials tend to
be more rigid than other materials. his can present a problem
with long, thin preparations of mandibular incisors or periodontally
involved teeth. Fracture of the delicate gypsum dies is a common
occurrence due to the rigidity of polyether materials. Another
problem related to this rigidity is tearing of the impression material
in the gingival sulcus. While the tear strength of polyether impres -
sion materials is excellent, the amount of force required to remove
the rigid impression may exceed the tear strength of the material.
More recent formulations of polyether materials are less rigid than
early versions but are still more rigid than PVS materials.
Set PVS materials are relatively rigid but seem to fall below the
threshold where problems with fracture of dies are common.
Although rarely used today, reversible hydrocolloid impression
material is the least rigid of all impression materials and may be
the material of choice when making impressions of multiple prepared
periodontally involved teeth.
With dual-arch impressions, it is advantageous to use a relatively
rigid material. Many of the commonly used trays for dual-arch
Multiple Impression Materials and
Recommended Pouring Time
Impression Material Pour Time
Water based 10 minutes
Polysulide rubber 30 minutes
Condensation silicone 30 minutes
Polyether rubber 60 minutes
Polyvinyl siloxane At operator convenience
• Fig. 13.47 Two-tube impression material: base and catalyst.
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
Economic Factor
here can be signiicant diferences between the costs of diferent
impression materials. Reversible hydrocolloid impression material
is considerably less expensive than elastomeric impression materials.
However, there is a signiicant cost involved with using reversible
hydrocolloid, considering conditioning and tempering baths need
to be purchased along with an appropriate selection of water-cooled
stock trays. Polyether and PVS materials are comparable in costs
at about $12 per impression. Competing elastomeric materials are
less expensive and are popular in underdeveloped countries.
It is likely true, however, that the cost of impression materials
is of minimal consequence in most contemporary practices. Prac -
titioners can reduce costs by using automix devices, by using the
dual-arch technique where indicated, by using custom trays when
full-arch impressions are indicated, and by reducing the need for
remakes by making successful impressions on the irst attempt.
THE BOTTOM LINE
1. Many excellent impression materials are available to the con -
temporary clinician.
2. he quality of impressions sent to commercial dental laborator ies
needs improvement.
3. All contemporary impression materials are suiciently accurate
if manipulated properly.
4. he only impression material that should be mailed to com -
mercial laboratories is PVS.
5. Polyvinyl siloxane materials have the best ine detail reproduc tion,
elastic recovery, and dimensional stability of all impression
materials.
Principles of Impression Material Manipulation
Proper manipulation of impression materials is probably more
important in determining the accuracy of an impression than which
type of material is selected. his section will discuss the important
manipulative variables that must be considered when making
impressions for indirect restorations.
Control of Bulk
Impression materials shrink when setting. Irreversi ble hydrocolloid
and elastomers shrink due to polymerization reactions, and reversible
hydrocolloid undergoes thermoplastic shrinkage as it cools from
the warm to cool state. he efect of this shrinkage can be controlled
by paying close attention to the bulk of impression material used.
Water-based impression materials are most accurate when used
with a uniform cross-sectional thickness of 4 to 6 mm. his means
that successful impressions can be made using stock trays that will
provide approximately 4to 6-mm thickness of material.
Elastomeric impression materials are most accurate when used
with a cross-sectional thickness of 1 to 2 mm.7 Use of a stock tray
with elastomers results in excess thicknesses of impression material,
which possibly could result in an inaccurate impression. Elastomeric
full-arch impressions are best made using a custom tray that will
provide the desired cross-sectional thickness of impression material
(Fig. 13.48 ).
Numerous studies have evaluated the accuracy of elastomeric
impressions made in stock trays versus impressions made in custom
trays. Almost all conclude that impressions made in custom trays
are more accurate, yet very few North American dentists routinely
use custom trays.85
he diference in cross-sectional thickness of impression material
in a stock tray versus a custom tray is only about 2 mm, but that
diference does reduce the accuracy of the impression.86 his he manufacturers of many contemporary PVS impression
materials claim their products are “hydrophilic,” and incorrectly
imply that their materials can efectively make impression in the
presence of blood and/or saliva. he hydrophilicity of a material
is measured by the contact angle a sessile drop makes with the
material. If the contact angle is below a speciic value, the material
can be called hydrophilic. Many contemporary PVS impression
materials meet that criterion, and therefore the manufacturers are
technically correct. However, the implication that these materials
can make impressions in a wet environment is totally incorrect.83,84
hese materials require a dry environment to make successful
impression.
he advantage these “hydrophilic” PVS materials have is they
are signiicantly easier to pour. Early versions of PVS were hydro -
phobic and very diicult to pour. hey also released hydrogen for
approximately 3 hours after setting, so delaying pouring for that
period was recommended. Contemporary PVS materials have
nonionic surfactants grafted onto the polymer chains, which makes
them hydrophilic and thus easier to pour. hey also contain small
quantities of spongy palladium, which absorbs hydrogen and allows
pouring of the impression immediately upon removal from the
mouth.
Shelf Life
he exact shelf life of impression materials is not known, but it
is inadvisable to use impression materials that have passed the
expiration date established by the manufacturer. Dentists must
become familiar with manufacturers’ codes for the materials they
are using and ensure that current materials are consistently utilized.
It is arbitrarily suggested that no more than a 6-month supply of
impression material should be kept on hand at any time.
Patient Comfort
Contemporary impression materials are far more patient friendly
than the old polysulide materials, which were messy, had a bad
taste and odor, and permanently stained clothing. Reversible
hydrocolloid materials were uncomfortable for patients because
they required the use of bulky, water-cooled trays. Contemporary
impression materials are essentially odorless and tasteless.
he rigidity of polyether impression materials can be a disad -
vantage, especially if the patient has existing ixed prostheses or
multiple open gingival embrasures due to periodontal disease. In
these situations, it is advisable to use a more lexible material, and
to block out the undercuts with utility wax prior to impression
making. he use of the dual-arch impression technique, where
indicated, is also pleasant for patients in that it requires a minimum
amount of material and avoids the necessity for opposing arch
impressions.
When full-arch impressions are indicated, the use of a custom
tray is advocated. Many studies indicate that custom trays are
more accurate than stock trays and the level of patient comfort is
substantially improved. In addition, signiicantly less material is
used, which ofsets the costs of fabricating the custom trays.
he ultimate in patient comfort with impression making is the
use of optical impressions. Digital impressions are becoming more
and more popular and are very patient friendly. Imaging systems
are becoming more economical and it is anticipated that the majority
of impressions made in the next decade will be made optically. It
is important to point out that while optical impressions for single
tooth preparation are as accurate as conventional impressions, the
same factors that result in failed contemporary impressions will
result in failed optical impressions.
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
mandates that custom trays be fabricated with precision. Custom
trays should be fabricated on the diagnostic cast using one layer
of base plate wax as a spacer. T rays can be fabricated with PMMA,
photo-cure bisacryl (T riad, DENTSPLY Sirona, York, PA), or PVS.
PMMA trays should be fabricated at least 24 hours in advance to
ensure stability.
Occlusal stops are critical for proper orientation of the tray in
the patient’ s mouth. hree occlusal stops are ideal, with at least
one stop posterior to the prepared teeth. Stops should be placed
on nonfunctioning cusp tips to minimize distortion in the area
of the stops. he stops are prepared by removing the base plate
wax from the nonfunctioning cusp tips with a hand instrument
(Fig. 13.49 ). he wax spacer should be covered with tin foil before
making the tray to facilitate removal of the wax from the tray and
to prevent incorporation of a wax residue on the internal surface
of the tray. his can happen due to the inherent exotherm reaction
that occurs during the setting of the PMMA tray material. his
residue can interfere with the proper functioning of tray adhesives.
Adheion of the Impreion Material to the Tray
It is imperative that the impression material adheres to the tray.
With proper adherence, the impression material shrinks toward
the tray as it polymerizes, creating a slightly larger die. Adhesion
is achieved using speciic chemical tray adhesives. Adhesives must
be speciically matched with the impression material. hey should
be painted in a thin layer on the internal portion of the tray and
the tray borders ( Fig. 13.50 ). he tray should be painted 7 to
15 minutes prior to impression making to permit formation of
an adequate bond strength of the impression material to the
tray.87
Pouring of Impreion Material
One of the most important manipulative variables with impression
materials is the time limit after removal from the mouth to when
the impression is poured with the appropriate gypsum product.88
he factors that determine when an impression should be poured
are discussed in depth in the previous section (see ).
Vicoity Control
Impression materials are supplied in a number of viscosities ranging
from very low viscosity to very high viscosity putty materials. he
main diference between these materials with diferent viscosities
is in the amount of inert iller material in the impression material.
With low viscosity materials, there is relatively little inert iller and
thus more chemical reagent. Low viscosity materials are excellent
at recording ine detail, but also undergo more polymerization
shrinkage during the setting reaction. hus the optimum method
of impression making is to use only as much low viscosity material
as is necessary to capture the ine detail of the prepared margin,
grooves, and boxforms of the preparation; and the bulk of the
impression should be made with high viscosity material. his high
viscosity material has correspondingly more inert iller and less
reagent and displays less polymerization shrinkage on setting. he
heavy body material also assists in pushing the low viscosity, light
body material into the gingival sulcus.
Monophase PVS and polyether materials are supplied by many
manufacturers. In theory, such materials do not provide the same
level of accuracy as provided by the proper use of a combination
of low viscosity/high viscosity materials, but the actual diferences
in accuracy are likely not clinically signiicant. he convenience
of having to use only one viscosity of material makes monophasic
materials very practical.
• Fig. 13.48 Full-arch impression taken with a custom tray.
• Fig. 13.49 Custom tray showing three occlusal stops.
• Fig. 13.50 Custom tray coated with tray adhesive.
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
the PVS material with unreacted sulfur, which is pr esent in natural
latex gloves. Synthetic latex gloves, vinyl gloves, and the powder
commonly found on gloves do not cause this inhibition of polym -
erization. Sulfur-containing gingival displacement chemicals do
not cause inhibition of polymerization.94
Clinicians should avoid touching tooth preparations and adjacent
gingival areas with latex gloves. When this is not avoidable, wearing
vinyl gloves over the latex gloves is recommended. Once contamina -
tion of the preparations has occurred, cleaning with water and
other agents is not efective in removing the contamination. Routine
cleansing of tooth preparations with lour of pumice may be
indicated prior to impression making.
Contemporary PVS impression materials may not be as sensitive
to latex as the products that were used in the 1990s. It does appear
that direct contact of contemporary PVS with latex or nitrile gloves
will result in inhibited polymerization; however, t hese materials
are not susceptible to indirect contamination.95 It appears this
reduced sensitivity is a result of changes to the impression materials
rather than changes in gloves and rubber dam materials. Contem -
porary PVS materials have increased concentrations of platinum
in the chloroplatinic acid catalyst, which makes it less sensitive to
sulfur. Also nonionic surfactants have been grafted onto the polymer
chains and these surfactants may act as a separating medium and
prevent the sulfur from contacting the catalyst.Adequate Mixing
As discussed in the previous section, almost all impression materials
today come with an automix system. his provides optimum mixing
with fewer inherent voids, extends the essential working time of
the materials, and reduces waste because the materials are loaded
from the dispenser directly into the syringe or tray.
Diinfection
Microorganisms in the oral cavity can be transmitted from impres -
sions to the dental laboratory. Dentists must disinfect impressions
prior to pouring the cast or sending the impression to the laboratory.
he irst step of any disinfection technique is to rinse the
impression thoroughly in cold tap water. his step removes a
signiicant portion of the microorganisms from the impression.
Disinfection techniques involve spraying the impression with
disinfection agents or immersion of the impression materials in
chemical agents such as sodium hypochlorite. Polyvinyl siloxane
materials are stable in this regard, but special care must be taken
with water-based materials and polyethers to ensure that adequate
immersion times are used to eliminate microorganisms but that
extended immersion times are avoided to prevent excess imbibition
of the disinfecting solution and distortion of the impression.
Polyvinyl Siloxane Impreion Material and Latex
Polyvinyl siloxane impression materials have been available since
the mid-1970s and have continued to evolve and improve.89
Polyvinyl siloxane impression materials are easily the best selling
impression materials on the North American market, and they
have the best ine detail reproduction and the best elastic recovery
of all available impression materials. Polyvinyl siloxane materials
have remarkable dimensional stability and are odorless and tasteless
and pleasant for patients. hey are provided in a wide variety of
viscosities, rigidities, and working and setting times so they can
be used in a variety of clinical situations.
Polyvinyl siloxane impression materials have one major disad -
vantage: hey have a signiicant interaction with latex (rubber dam
and latex gloves). Any contact of unpolymerized PVS material
with latex results in inhibition of polymerization of the impression
material. his can occur if the dentist or assistant mixes putty
materials while wearing latex gloves or even if latex gloves were
worn prior to mixing. Direct inhibition of polymerization also
can occur if the impression material is in contact with a rubber
dam.
Indirect inhibition of polymerization also can occu r intraorally
when latex gloves contact tooth preparations and the surrounding
periodontal tissues during tooth preparation or gingival displacemen t
procedures.90-93 Such inhibition of polymerization is often subtle
and limited to small isolated areas of the surface of the impression.
It is often not detected with the initial inspection of the impression
and may be noticed only after pouring and separation of the
gypsum cast. he presenting signs of inhibited polymerization are
a ilm of unset material in isolated areas or the presence of a sticky,
slippery substance on the surface of the impression (Fig. 13.51 ). It
is similar to the feel and appearance of the oxygen-inhibited layer
that is seen with photo-cure composite resin restorative materials.
Although these isolated areas of inhibited polymerization are
subtle and not easy to detect ( Fig. 13.52 ), depending upon their
location they can render an impression unusable. Clinicians must
inspect impressions and recovered casts carefully t o ensure con -
tamination of critical areas has not occurred.
he mechanism of inhibition of polymerization is thought to
be a result of contamination of the chloroplatinic acid catalyst of
• Fig. 13.51 Unpolymerized polyvinyl siloxane material due to handling
of the material with latex gloves.
• Fig. 13.52 Impression displaying areas of inhibited polymerization of
the prepared teeth.
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
margin are captured in the putty, and putty materials are
essentially deicient in their ability to record marginal detail
(Fig. 13.54 ).
THE BOTTOM LINE
1. Water-based impression materials are most accurate with a
uniform cross-sectional thickness of 4 to 6 mm. his allows
impressions made with these materials to be made in a stock
tray.
2. Elastomeric impression materials are most accurate when made
with a uniform thickness of 1 to 2 mm. his implies the
routine use of custom trays.
3. he rational for custom trays is to make impressions with a
uniform cross-sectional thickness of 1 to 2 mm.
4. Custom trays can be made with PMMA, putty, and photo-cure
bisacryl.
5. Occlusal stops should be placed on nonfunctioning cusp tips.
6. Low viscosity materials should be used only around the prepared
teeth.
7. Speciic impression adhesives should be used and applied to
custom trays 7 to 15 minutes prior to making the
impression.
8. Impressions should be poured at appropriate times for each
type of material.
9. Impressions should be disinfected prior to pouring or sending
to the laboratory.
10. Some putty-wash techniques are superior to others.
Gypum Product
Gypsum products are widely used in a variety of applica -
tions in restorative dentistry. In many situations, obtaining
maximum accuracy and strength with the selected gypsum
product is critical to the long-term success of the restoration or
prosthesis to be fabricated. To predictably attain such success,
the clinician must first select the optimum product for the
use intended and then must manipulate the gypsum product
properly.96,97
Fortunately there are a relatively small number of gypsum
products available, and the critical manipulative variables are rather
simple. However, many dentists consistently select inappropriate
materials for the task at hand. Additionally, even though proper Putty-Wah Impreion Technique
While the recommended technique for full-arch impress ions is
use of heavy body/light body viscosities of impression material in
a custom tray, many dentists prefer to make “putty-wash” impressions.80 here are three approaches to putty-wash impressions.
One approach is appropriate and acceptable, another can provide
acceptable impressions but has some potential drawbacks, and a
third approach is unacceptable.
An excellent technique for putty-wash impressions is to use the
putty material to fabricate a custom tray. It is fabricated in the
same manner as with PMMA materials or light cure materials.
One layer of base plate wax is placed over the diagnostic cast as a
spacer, and wax is removed from nonfunctioning cusp tips to
provide occlusal stops. A putty impression is made in a stock tray,
producing a PVS putty custom tray ( Fig. 13.53 ).
A second approach is to use a relieved putty impres sion. In
this technique, a preoperative putty impression is made intraorally
prior to tooth preparation. Plastic sheets may be placed over the
teeth to prevent putty material from entering gingival embrasures.
In the area where the teeth are to be prepared, putty impression
material is removed with a bur or scalpel to provide relief, and the
impression is “washed” or relined with low viscosity PVS material.
his approach can be successful, but there are two potential
problems. It is diicult to conine the wash materials to the area
of the relieved impression, and some wash material enters the
unrelieved impression. his results in an inaccurate occlusal pattern
for the resultant cast. hus the entire impression rather than just
the relieved area should be “washed.” his creates the problem of
hydraulic distortion of the putty material as the impression is
seated in the mouth. his is impossible to detect on a clinical level
but may have a deleterious efect on the accuracy of the impression
and resulting restoration.
he third approach to putty-wash impressions is the “simul -
taneous” technique. With this technique a stock tray is loaded
with putty material, and the syringe material is injected around
the prepared tooth or teeth. he tray containing the putty material
is squashed over the syringe material, and the impression is
made with the putty and syringe material setting simultaneously.
his approach is unacceptable because it is impossible to control
the thickness of the impression material, and excess bulk is used.
It is impossible to control what material records the margin
detail of the preparation(s). Usually portions of the prepared
• Fig. 13.53 Polyvinyl siloxane putty custom tray.
• Fig. 13.54 Impression taken utilizing the “simultaneous technique.”
Notice portions of the margin captured with putty material, which may
result in lack of details.
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
mixing while the reaction is underway can result in increased
expansion because of the breakup of the gypsum crystals creating
many more nuclei of crystallization.
Classiication of Gypsum Products
Gypsum products are clas siied as Types I through V, and described
by ADA Speciication #25 ( ). Types I and II are plaster
products. Type III is commonly known as dental stone or hydrocal.
Types IV and V are high strength dental stones, also called improved
dental stone or densite. he old terms alpha and beta calcium-sulfate
dihydrate have been deemed obsolete because there is no actual
chemical diference between the two types, and all diferences are
a result of the physical characteristics of the gypsum particles.
Type I dental stones are referred to as “impression plaster,” and
are typically weak, quick setting, and possess relatively low expansion
values, as additives cause the materials to “set” before the normal
setting expansion (due to crystalline growth) can occur. he primary
use for Type I stones today is in mounting casts in an articulator.
he minimum expansion displayed by these materials coupled
with their quick setting capabilities make them ideal for this task.
Because virtually zero expansion is desirable in a mounting stone
and because expansion is bulk related, the two-stage mounting
technique is recommended. With this technique, the cast is attached
to the mounting ring with as small an increment of plaster as is
deemed practical. After this material has set, a subsequent mix
may be made and added to the initial mix for strength and cosmetic
purposes. Impression plaster is also useful in certain indexing
procedures, such as the soldering of ixed restorations, occlusal
registrations, and in implant dentistry.manipulation of gypsum is not complicated, it is frequently ignored,
thus compromising both strength and accuracy.
The Nature of Gypsum Products
Mineral gypsum exists naturally as calcium-sulfate dihydrate and is
treated by the manufacturer to remove water. It is then supplied
to the dentist as a powder, which chemically is calcium-sulfate
hemihydrate . he dentist then adds water, and a chemical reac -
tion occurs converting the gypsum back to the dihydrate form.
The chemical reaction for these processes may be written as
follows:
CaSO HO HEAT CaSO HO HO 24 22 42 2 20 51 5 •+ →• + ..
CaSO HO HO CaSO HO HEAT 24 22 24 2 05 15 2 •+ →• + ..
Diferences in the various types of gypsum exist due to the
conditions under which the water is removed during the manufactur -
ing process, the size and shape of the particles of the hemihydrate,
and the efects of various chemical additives. From a practical
standpoint, the properties of a given gypsum product can be
predicted from the water/powder ratio suggested by the manufac -
turer, and an understanding of the concept of gaging water.
A inite quantity of water is required to chemically react with
a given amount of gypsum powder supplied as calcium-sulfate
hemihydrate. his amount of water is the same, whether the material
to be mixed is Type I, Type II, Type III, Type IV, or Type V
gypsum. However, depending upon the size and shape of the
gypsum crystals, an additional amount of water is required to
produce a workable mix of material. his extra water is known as
gaging water. his gaging water does not react chemically and
remains trapped within the matrix of the setting gypsum. With
time (24 hours), most of this water evaporates, leaving air-illed
voids in the set gypsum. As a general rule, the greater the porosity
of a set gypsum material, the weaker it will be. It will also display
diminished abrasion resistance and greater expansion, although
this latter factor is somewhat variable depending upon whatever
additives are present in the formulation.
For example, the recommended water/powder ratio for a Type
II gypsum product is 45 cc/ gm. For a Type III product it is
30 cc/ gm, and for a Type IV stone it is 22 cc/ gm. With
gm of each of these gypsum products, approximately 19 cc
of water will be used up in the ensuing chemical reaction. he
rest of the water will be unreacted and will eventually result in
porosity in the set gypsum. he gaging water in the products
would be 26 cc, 11 cc, and 3 cc for Types II, III, and IV, respectively.
hus, a cast from a Type II stone would be porous, weak, and
have poor abrasion resistance. Casts from the Type IV materials
would have the least porosity and the greatest strength and abrasion
resistance. Casts from the Type III materials would be intermediate
between the Type II and IV products.
Understanding the nature of the setting reaction for gypsum
is essential to understanding the clinical behavior of the materials.
When the calcium-sulfate hemihydrate is mixed with water, insoluble
crystals of calcium-sulfate dihydrate form and begin to precipitate
from the mass. hese crystals, which can be visualized three
dimensionally as resembling sea urchins, serve as precipitation
centers or nuclei of crystallization ( Fig. 13.55 ).
As the reaction proceeds, more and more nuclei precipitate out
and all continue to grow in an outward direction. he branches
of these growing crystals intermesh and intercept one another,
creating a tendency for the crystals to be pushed apart. his results
practically in a net volumetric expansion ( Fig. 13.56 ). Continued
• Fig. 13.55 Crystal of calcium-sulfate dihydrate.
Classiication of Gypsum Products
Type I Impression plaster
Type II Model plaster
Type III Dental stone (hydrocal)
Type IV Improved dental stone
Type V Die stone high expansion
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
manipulation is essential to ensure that the maximum physical
properties of the material are attained.
he most important manipulative variable is paying attention
to the proper water to powder ratios. Gypsum is best purchased
in prepackaged envelopes. his ensures purity and prevents con -
tamination that may occur when using bulk gypsum, and also
provides a consistent volume of powder. Distilled water should be
used and measured carefully with a pipette or glass cylinder. Often
tap water contains minerals and other contaminants that can afect
the setting reaction.Type II dental stones are referred to as “model plaster” and
have little use in restorative dentistry, although they are often
utilized for the fabrication of diagnostic casts. hese materials are
weak and sufer from excessive expansion, which is desirable only
in certain situations.
Type III gypsum is commonly referred to as “dental stone.”
Dental stone is considerably stronger and more resistant to abrasion
than plaster. It also exhibits much less expansion. his product is
used extensively in restorative dentistry for the fabrication of
diagnostic casts, opposing arch casts, and in remov able prosth -
odontics where a high strength stone may actually be a disadvantage
when attempting to recover a processed prosthesis from a denture
lask.
Type IV gypsum, often referred to as densite or improved dental
stone, is commonly called “die stone.” his stone is quite strong
and abrasion resistant, and demonstrates low expansion values. It
is used primarily for the fabrication of precision casts and dies in
the lost wax process.
Type V gypsum is a high strength and high expansion stone,
and is utilized today in the fabrication of casts and dies for metalceramic restorations, particularly when the casting shrinkage of
the metal utilized is high and warrants extra expansion in the dies
(Fig. 13.57 ).
Selection and Manipulation of Gypsum Products
he selection of gypsum products is relatively simple, with the
main variables being the strength and expansion desired for any
speciic procedure. Once the appropriate product is selected, proper
• Fig. 13.56 Diagrammatic representation of the setting expansion of gypsum products. In the top row,
the crystal growth is inhibited by the surface tension of water surrounding the growing crystals. In the
middle row, the gypsum mixture (the area surrounded by the dashed circle) is immersed in water during
setting (represented by the larger solid circle); the immersion water provides more room for longer crystal
growth. The bottom row shows the expansion (e) over time (t) for hygroscopic setting expansion (H) and
normal setting expansion (N). (From Anusavice KJ, Shen C, Rawls RH: Phillips’ science of dental materi -
als, ed 12, Elsevier, St. Louis, ; adapted from Mahler DB, Ady AB: An explanation for the hygroscopic
setting expansion of dental gypsum products. J Dent Res 39: - , .)
• Fig. 13.57 Cast model showing four types of gypsum products.
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
investment expands in proportion to the increase in temperature.
hen a signiicant amount of expansion suddenly occurs when a
speciic temperature, called the inversion temperature, is reached.
his expansion occurs as a result of a change in crystalline form
of the refractory; it changes from the alpha crystalline form to the
beta crystalline form. his form change is associated with speciic
expansion, called inversion ( Fig. 13.59 ).
he second component of gypsum bonded investments is the
binder. he binder is basically gypsum, starting out as calcium
sulphate hemihydrate powder converting to calcium-sulphate
dihydrate after being mixed with water. he setting reaction of
gypsum is associated with expansion, which contributes along with
the thermal expansion to compensate the casting shrinkage of the
alloy.Controlling porosity in the set cast is critical to achieving
maximum strength. his is accomplished in several ways. Adhering
to the correct water/powder ratio helps this initially by minimizing
the amount of gaging water. Next, the powder is always added to
the water rather than the other way around. his minimizes air
inclusions that occur when the water is added to the powder.
Vacuum mixing should be utilized whenever dental stones or
improved dental stones are mixed. he mixing times recommended
by the manufacturer should be closely adhered to. Impressions
should also be poured utilizing vibration devices to prevent air
entrapment.
Separating the set cast from the impression must be done
at the appropriate time. First the gypsum must have attained
suicient strength to avoid fracture during removal. Generally
speaking, waiting 45 minutes to 1 hour will accomplish this.
Additionally, especially when using water-based impression
materials such as reversible or irreversible hydrocolloid, separa -
tion should occur within this time frame to avoid interaction
between the impression material and the surface of the set gypsum.
Such interaction would deleteriously afect the surface of the
stone cast.
In most cases, handling of the casts should be avoided for 24
hours. here is a dramatic diference between the wet strength (1
hour) and dry strength (24 hours) of gypsum products. If casts
are trimmed or margins on dies delineated before ma ximum strength
is attained, it is likely that such casts and dies could be excessively
abraded. Also gypsum casts are very susceptible to erosion by water
during trimming. his can be minimized by soaking the aged (24
hours) cast in a solution of slurry water for 1 to 2 minutes prior
to trimming. It will also prevent sludge from the trimming process
from adhering to the surface of the cast. An alternative approach
is to soften a sheet of base plate wax and adapt it to the surface
of the cast prior to trimming. his will efectively prevent water
contamination and sludge adherence.
Cating Invetment
he lost wax process was introduced to the profession in by
Taggart.98 In order to fabricate a precise gold casting, it is necessary
to balance a number of expansions and contractions related to
dental materials ( Fig. 13.58 ).
One of the major shrinkage factors in the process i s the casting
shrinkage of the metal alloys as they cool from the l iquidus
temperature to bench temperature. his shrinkage is roughly
proportional to melting temperature: he higher the melting
temperature the greater the shrinkage of the alloy. Type III gold
alloys shrink approximately 1.2% while base metal alloys have
double the casting shrinkage at 2.4%. his shrinkage must be
compensated in the entire process. he major mechanism for
accomplishing this is the use of casting investments.
here are three major types of casting investments. Gypsum
bonded investments are primarily used with gold casting alloys.
Phosphate bonded investments, also known as high-heat invest -
ments, are primarily used with porcelain bonding alloys because
they can withstand the higher temperatures required to melt
porcelain bonding alloys. Ethyl-silicate investments are primarily
used with removable partial denture castings.
With gypsum bonded investments there are three major
components. he refractory is composed of materials such as
cristobalite, tridymite, and quartz. he refractory su pplies most
of the thermal expansion of the investment through the process
of inversion. As the investment is heated in a burnout oven, the
C
B
A
• Fig. 13.58 A, Wax-up of maxillary and mandibular arches. B, Metal
casting of maxillary and mandibular arches. C, Final restoration of maxillary
and mandibular arches.
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
• Fig. 13.59 Inversion diagram.
• Fig. 13.60 Cast gold restorations after 37 years.
• Fig. 13.61 Gold foil restoration (98% gold) restoring a noncarious
cervical lesion. he third component of gypsum bonded investments is the
modiier, which may take the form of oxidizing agent or reducing
agent, depending on the commercial product.
here are three types of expansion associated with gypsum
bonded investments. he irst and most important is thermal
expansion as a result of refractory expansion, as described previ -
ously. he second is setting expansion provided by the setting
reaction of the gypsum binder. he third type is hygroscopic
expansion provided by soaking the ceramic liner of the casting
ring. At one time, asbestos was used for this function. he liner
allows the investment and casting to be easily removed from the
casting ring after casting is completed. By soaking it in water
before placing it into the ring, the liner supplies a small amount
of gaging water to the setting gypsum, which in turn allows a
small amount of extra expansion. NOTE: here is a separate type
of investment called a hygroscopic investment. hese are very
accurate investments that rely primarily on hygroscopi c expansion
and will not be described here because they are rarely used at
this time.
Phosphate bonded investments were developed to provide the
extra expansion required with metal alloys that melt at high
temperatures and also had to be formulated to withs tand those
higher melting temperatures. Phosphate bonded investments come
with a “special liquid” that is basically liquid silica. he liquid
replaces some of the water used to mix the investment, and the
basic rule is the more liquid silica, the greater t he expansion of
the investment.
Ethyl-silicate investments are used with removable partial denture
framework castings. Basically the master cast is blocked out and
duplicated with an ethyl-silicate investment. he wax-up is com -
pleted on the ethyl-silicate cast and the cast and framework are
invested in ethyl-silicate investment; the wax pattern is burnt out
and cast with chrome-cobalt alloy.
Manipulation of casting investments is relatively simple. First
the appropriate investment materials must be selected. hen the
most important variable is use of precise water to powder ratios.
In the case of phosphate bonded investments, liquid to p owder
ratios are used, with the liquid being part water and part special
liquid, depending on the amount of expansion required. Investments
are vacuum mixed and poured into diferent sized molds, depending
on the size of the casting.
After waiting a minimum of 1 hour, the casting ring is placed
into a cold oven, subjected to a controlled burnout, and the restora -
tion is cast.THE BOTTOM LINE
1. Casting investments are an integral part of the lost wax process.
2. he three types of casting investments are gypsum bonded,
phosphate bonded, and ethyl silicate investments.
3. Gypsum bonded investments are used with cast gold; phosphate
bonded investments are used with porcelain bonding alloys,
and ethyl-silicate investments with removable partial denture
frameworks.
4. Casting investments compensate for casting shrinkage of the
alloy.
5. hree types of expansion occur with casting investments: thermal,
setting, and hygroscopic. he most important expansion is
thermal.
6. Special liquid (liquid silica) is used with phosphate bonded
investments to allow for the precise amount of expansion
depending on the alloy used.
Gold Alloy
Cast gold restorations have been used in dentistry ever since Taggart
introduced the lost wax process in .98 Properly done cast gold
restorations provide the longest term survival of all types of restora -
tions. A recent study of cast gold restorations in place from
1 to 55 years demonstrated that at 30 years, the failure rate was
4.5% ( Fig. 13.60 ).52 Pure ( %) gold is too soft for use in the
oral cavity so it must be alloyed with other metals to produce the
essential physical properties.
Gold foil is 98% pure gold and direct gold foil res torations
have been placed for many years and provide long-term service
with non–stress-bearing restorations ( Fig. 13.61 ). Metals that are
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
alloyed with gold in dental casting alloys include platinum and/
or palladium for both strength and passivity, silver and copper for
strength, and zinc and indium as deoxidizers. Gold is used because
it is a noble metal and does not tarnish in the oral cavity. All noble
metals share that property . he major noble metals used in dentistry
are gold, platinum, and palladium. Nobility is determined by an
element’s position in the periodic table. Silver is a precious metal,
but is not noble as it easily tarnishes in the oral cavity.
here are four types of gold alloy, Types I, II, III, and IV ( Table
13.8). Type I gold alloy has the highest concentration of gold at
98%; it is considered a “soft” gold and is indicated in non–stressbearing situations such as Class V inlays. Type II gold contains
approximately 77% gold and is typically used with gold inlays
and restorations with inishable margins, as these alloys can be
burnished to attain maximum marginal integrity. Type III gold,
with a concentration of 72% gold, is the most commonly used
gold alloy in dentistry; it is used to fabricate crowns and ixed
partial dentures. Type IV gold has the lowest concentration of
gold (69%), and was used for the fabrication of removable partial
denture frameworks at one time but rarely for that purpose now.
It is still used for the fabrication of custom cast dowel and cores,
as it is the strongest of the gold alloys and is less expensive due to
the lower concentration of gold.
Type I gold is the softest, with the highest concentration of
gold; Type IV is the hardest, with the lowest concentration of
gold. Types I and IV gold are rarely used at this time, thus the
most used alloys in contemporary dentistry are Types II and III.
One technique that can be used to improve marginal integrity
of cast gold restorations is heat treatment. To hea t treat a gold
alloy, the alloy must have a copper content of 12%. Metal alloys
can exist in one of three states. With a eutectic mixture, distinct
phases can be identiied in the microstructure. A good example
of a eutectic would be amalgam where gamma, gamma-1, and
gamma-2 phases can easily be identiied in a micrograph. Eutectic
mixtures are hard and brittle.
he second state seen with metal alloys is as an intermetallic
compound. With intermetallic compounds there are no distinct
phases, but there is molecular ordering, and these alloys are hard
and strong. After heat hardening treatment, gold al loys exist as
intermetallic compounds. When gold alloys are heat softened, they
exist as a solid solution. With solid solutions there is a total lack
of molecular order with randomization, and solid solutions are
soft and burnishable.
he heat treatment procedure begins by heat softenin g. he
alloy is melted and cast and immediately quenched in cold water.
his transforms the alloy into a solid solution, which again is soft
and burnishable. he restoration is then taken to the mouth and
the inishable margins are burnished to achieve maximum marginal
integrity. hen the alloy is heat hardened to render it hard and
strong. To accomplish this, the restoration is heated in an oven
and then slowly cooled to bench temperature. his transforms the
alloy into an intermetallic compound, which will be hard and
strong and provide optimum clinical service.
Cast gold restorations unquestionably provide the longest service
of any restoration available in dentistry. he use of cast gold has
declined signiicantly in recent years primarily due to the profession’s
obsession with esthetics and also due to the cost of gold. Most recent
graduates of dental schools have not been taught how to fabricate
gold restorations with a high level of precision. his is an unfortunate
situation. Dentists are encouraged to contact any one of many study
clubs that teach the concepts of cast gold restorations and add this
wonderful modality to their armamentarium.Porcelain Bonding Alloy
Prior to the introduction of porcelain-fused-to-metal technology,
the clinician had only two options for the esthetic restoration of
extensively broken down anterior teeth. One was the classic
feldspathic porcelain jacket crown, which generally displayed inferior
marginal idelity and had a high incidence of fracture. he second
option was heat-processed acrylic resin bonded to metal. he acrylic
resin was mechanically bonded to the metal using beads and other
mechanical retentive features. Type III or IV gold alloys were
generally used for these restorations. he major disadvantage of
these crowns and ixed partial dentures was the poor wear resistance
of the resin veneering materials. At time intervals ranging from 3
to 5 years, the resin veneer would typically begin to age, demonstrat -
ing clinically evident wear and staining.
In late metal-ceramic restorations were patented and
introduced to the profession by Weinstein, Katz, and Weinstein.99
Original research in this area began with typical gold casting alloys,
simply because they had been used in dentistry ever since Taggert
had introduced the lost wax process to the profession in .
Four major alterations needed to be made to these alloys before
clinical success could be expected.
1. he melting temperature needed to be raised because the gold
alloys melted at temperatures well below the fusing temperatures
of porcelain. his was achieved by the addition of an appropriate
amount of platinum to the gold alloy.
2. Strength of the alloy needed to be increased. Any lexure in the
metal substructure would result in catastrophic fracture of the
porcelain veneer. Conventional gold alloys are far too lexible.
Again, the addition of platinum was a major factor in improving
the strength of the alloy.
3. he thermal coeicients of expansion and contraction of the
metal alloy and the veneering porcelain needed to be more
closely matched. he COE of the alloy was reduced to a great
extent again by the inclusion of platinum, and the COE of the
veneering ceramic was raised with the addition of sodium.
4. Predictable bonding of the porcelain to the metal needed to
be achieved. Mechanisms of porcelain to metal bonding will
be dealt with in more depth later on in this chapter. With these
early alloys, chemical bonding was achieved with th e inclusion
of trace elements such as indium, zinc, and tin. hese elements
produced a consistent oxide on the surface of the alloy that
would provide a chemical bond with the tetravalent oxides in
the opaque porcelains.
hese early porcelain bonding alloys contained a high percentage
of gold (85%) and were used extensively through the 1960s and
early 1970s. Although the physical properties of these high gold
alloys were less than ideal, the main impetus for res earch into
alternative alloys was the sudden increase in the price of gold in Types of Gold Alloys Used in Dentistry
Type Au Hardness Indication
I 98% Soft Class V
II 77% Inlays
III 72% Crowns
IV 69% Hard RPDs
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
Palladium-silver alloys are composed primarily of high concentra -
tions of palladium (60%) and silver (30%). With such high
concentrations of silver, discoloration of the porcelain is obviously
a consideration unless special precautions ar e taken during iring.
Use of the alloy W1 (Williams Gold Co., B ufalo, NY) along with
the low sodium content porcelain speciied by the same manufacturer
can eliminate this problem. Another example of a palladium-silver
alloy is Silhouette (Leach and Dillon, N. Attleboro, MA).
here are three groups of base metal alloys . he irst, nickelchromium alloy, is the most common of the three and typically
contains about 65% nickel for strength, 20% chromium for passivity,
and 2% beryllium for castability and control of oxide formation.
Commercial products representing this type of alloy include Rexil -
lium III (Jeneric Pentron) and Lite-Cast B (Williams Gold Co.,
Bufalo, NY). Nonberyllium alloys are commercially available but
should not be considered for clinical use. Note: Beryllium is critical
to help control oxide formation with base metal alloys; however,
it has been associated with the development of berylliosis, a serious
occupational pulmonary condition, and laboratory technicians are the late 1970s that approached $ /ounce. Since that time a
number of alternative alloy systems have been introduced and have
been extensively researched. he following analysis is given to assist
the clinician in alloy selection for this important clinical modality.
It is important to understand that the dentist should determine
which alloy should be used for each restoration. his important
choice should not be delegated to the laboratory technician.
Cla iication
Because the physical properties of an alloy can be predicted from
their component elements, it is useful to classify porcelain bonding
alloys according to their composition. Often alloys are casually
referred to as “precious,” “semiprecious,” or “nonprecious” metals,
usually based on the approximate gold content of the alloy. hese
terms lack precision, and several alloy groups with signiicantly
diferent physical properties could be legitimately termed “semipre -
cious” ( Fig. 13.62 ).
A more meaningful classiication is to use the nobility of an
alloy to designate the appropriate group to which a metal alloy
should be assigned. he nobility of an element is determined by
its position in the periodic table, and is a measure of its passivit y
in the oral environment. he noble metals most commonly used
in restorative dentistry are gold, platinum, and palladium. Iridium,
rhodium, ruthenium, and osmium are also designated as noble
metals. Silver, which has a tendency to tarnish in oral luids, is
generally not considered as a noble metal. Silver is a precious
metal, which signiies only that the metal has some intrinsic
value. The word “precious” has nothing to do with tarnish
potential.
Thus porcelain bonding alloys can be classified into two
major groups: noble alloys and base metal alloys. here are three
subgroups of noble alloys and three subgroups of base metal alloys
( ).
hey can be diferentiated from one another in terms of composi -
tion and in terms of certain attributes and physical properties such
as strength, it of castings, and bond potential with porcelain,
biocompatibility, and economic considerations.
compares the alloy systems in terms of these variables.
Composition
High gold alloys typically contain a high percentage of gold, usually
in the range of 80% to 85%. he alloy is strengthened with the
addition of 7% to 10% platinum, and trace elements such as
indium, zinc, and tin are added to provide an oxide layer for predict -
able porcelain bonding. hese alloys predominated until the price
of gold skyrocketed in the mid-1970s. Examples of commercial
alloys in this category are Jelenko-O (J.F . Jelenko Co., Armonk,
NY), Silhouette 850SL (Leach and Dillon, N. Attleboro, MA),
and SMG-3 (J.M. Ney Co., Bloomield, CT).
High noble alloys have a gold content typically in the range of
50% to 55% gold. Palladium is present in the range of 35% to
40%, along with the trace elements essential for bonding. hese
alloys may or may not contain silver. If more than 12% silver is
present, it may cause a tendency for the porcelain to take on a
greenish hue. Small amounts of silver may improve the wettability
of the metal coping with the opaque porcelain, although this has
not been scientiically established. Examples of this type of alloy
include Olympia (J.F . Jelenko, Armonk, NY), USC Ceramic Alloy
(Leach and Dillon, N. Attleboro, MA), and W2 and W3 (Williams
Gold Co., Bufalo, NY).
• Fig. 13.62 Porcelain-fused-to-metal ixed dental prosthesis.
Classiication of Metal-Porcelain Alloys
Noble Metal Alloys Base Metal Alloys
High gold Nickel-chrome-beryllium
Low gold Chrome-cobalt
Palladium-silver Titanium
Comparison of Multiple Alloys According
to Diferent Variables
High Au Low Au Ag-Pd Base
Composition 85% Au,
7% Pt58% Au,
38% Pd60% Pd,
38% Ag65% Ni,
20% Cr
Strength 0.5 mm 0.3 mm 0.3 mm 0.1 mm
Fit - ++ + –
Bond ++ ++ + –
Biocompatibility ++ ++ + –
Cost $ $52 $34 $6
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
However, there ar e also diferences in the ability of the various
alloy systems to predictably produce excellent margins.
Several studies have evaluated the castability of these alloy
systems. Variations were found due to the diferent speciic
gravities of the alloys and due to variations in melting temperatures.
However, current research has established that there is a “metal-mold
equilibrium” for each alloy and investment combination that will
produce an optimum casting in terms of completeness and the
quality of the surface of the casting. his equilibrium is deined
as the diference between the melting temperature of the alloy and
the temperature of the mold into which the alloy is cast. Once
this optimum temperature diferential is established, excellent
castings can be achieved with all of the systems under discussion.
his inding, plus the development of induction casting m achines,
has determined castability is no longer a concern with any of the
alloy systems.
When metal alloys are cast they solidify from the liquid to the
solid state and then subsequently cool to room temperature. Casting
shrinkage occurs during this time. his shrinkage occurs in three
stages: (1) when the liquid metal cools from the melting temperature
to the solidification temperature; (2) when it undergoes the
transformation from the liquid to the solid state; and (3) when
the solidiied metal cools to room temperature. It is likely that
this latter stage is where the most signiicant shrinkage occurs.
here are major diferences in the amount of casting shrinkage
that occurs with the various alloy systems. Casting shrinkage is a
function of the melting temperature: he higher the melting
temperature of the alloy, the greater will be the casting shrinkage.
his shrinkage of course must be compensated by equivalent
expansion of the investment. here is some question that this can
be accomplished with adequate precision with the alloys possessing
the highest melting temperatures. his is especially a problem with
large multiunit castings.
Type III gold alloys shrink approximately 1.2%. Gypsum bonded
investments can compensate very accurately for this amount of
shrinkage. High gold porcelain bonding alloys shrink slightly more
at about 1.3%. he casting shrinkage of the high noble and pal -
ladium based alloy systems is slightly higher than that of the high
gold alloys. Compensation for this shrinkage is accomplished with
high heat phosphate bonded investments, using speciic amounts
of liquid silica to control the expansion. he more silica used, the
greater is the expansion.
he nickel-chrome-beryllium alloys shrink 2.4%, which is double
the shrinkage of a Type III gold alloy. Early studies with these
alloy systems indicated that the castings were too tight and failed
to seat adequately. his was simply a result of lack of adequate
expansion provided by the investment materials utilized in the
investigation. Today it is possible to provide adequate expansion
with modern investments. However, the diiculty of producing
an accurate casting increases as the expansions and contractions
of the materials involved increase. his is particularly true when
dealing with castings with nonuniform amounts of bulk, and large
multiunit castings. It is diicult to solder base metal alloy units,
and as a result, ixed partial dentures fabricated with this alloy are
often cast in one piece. A diminution in the quality in the it of
the castings is likely to occur when this is done.
A third factor related to it of castings is distortion of the metal
coping during iring of the porcelain veneer. Clinicians have long
noted subjectively that metal copings that it very well prior to
iring the porcelain do not it nearly as well after iring. he distor -
tion that occurs is a function of both the composition of the alloy
and the margin geometry utilized. Additionally, research has shown at risk. he American Dental Association will no longer certify
beryllium-containing alloys.
Chromium-cobalt alloys are commercially available and primarily
marketed as “biocompatible” base metal alloys because they are
nickel and beryllium free. Other than the exclusion of these ele -
ments, these alloys have little to recommend them and thus should
not be used. Because they contain approximately twice as much
cobalt as they do chromium, it has been suggested that these metals
should be designated cobalt-chromium alloys. It is now possible
to very accurately mill chrome-cobalt frameworks, which removes
one of the major disadvantages (poor it) of these alloys. here is
little evidence at this time that the problems associated with excess
oxide formation with these alloys have been solved.
Titanium alloys have become available recently, and copings are
currently formed both by casting and by a combination of copymilling and spark-gap erosion. Both of these systems must be
considered experimental at this time and should be used only
under strict protocol in an institutional setting. he other issue
with titanium fused-to-metal is that veneering ceramics with very
low COEs are required, and the esthetic results achieved with
these ceramics are poor. hus only the nickel-chrome-beryllium
alloys should be considered for use by the practitioner.
Strength
Strength of a porcelain bonding alloy is of paramount importance
to the long-term longevity of the restoration. Any lexure whatsoever
in the metal substructure will result in catastrophic failure (fracture)
of the porcelain veneer. he greater the number of units in any
ixed partial denture framework, the greater is the potential for
lexure. An alloy will ideally possess strength in relatively thin
sections to allow for minimal tooth reduction and permit the
fabrication of delicate frameworks. hese substructures will then
permit the creation of embrasure forms and connector designs
that will allow for optimum cleansibility and the development of
physiologic crown contours.
One of the major disadvantages of the high gold alloys is the
relative lack of strength possessed by these metals. his lack of
strength can be compensated by bulking up the framework and
the occlusogingival dimension of the connector areas. his can
compromise embrasure form and produce overcontoured restora -
tions. A minimum cross-sectional thickness of 0.5 mm is suggested
for use with these alloys. High gold alloys should only be used
with single crown restorations on anterior teeth. In this situation,
high gold alloys have an advantage because they do not produce
a dark oxide, and intense opaque porcelains do not need to be
used to block out the color of the oxide. Because of the reduced
bite force with anterior teeth compared to posterior teeth, the
strength of the gold framework is adequate.
he high noble and palladium-based alloys are considerably
stronger than the high gold alloys, and a minimum cross-sectional
thickness of only 0.3 mm is required. his reduction of thickness
required is only 0.2 mm, but it is extremely signiicant clinically.
he nickel-chrome-beryllium alloys are very strong and can survive
with a minimal thickness of only 0.1 mm, although it is very
diicult to work within such a tight tolerance without running
the risk of perforation of the metal coping.
Fit of Castings
A most important factor in long-term success with cast restorations
is achieving excellent marginal integrity. A number of factors totally
independent of the alloy utilized are important in this regard.
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
zinc, and tin are added to the alloy to provide the oxide required
as well as r eine the grain structur e. he metal coping is run through
a degas or oxidation cycle to induce the oxide onto the surface.
At least 50% new metal is used each time a coping is cast to
prevent depletion of the trace elements from the mix. Light air
abrading with aluminum-oxide is recommended with ma ny alloys
to prevent excess oxide formation.
Chemical bonding is much less predictable with the base metal
alloys. he problem with these alloys is with the oxide layer. here
is simply too much of an oxide layer, and while the bond failure
may occur at either the interface between the metal and the oxide
or between the oxide and the opaque, it most frequently occurs
within the thick oxide layer itself.
Most porcelain bond tests are lawed in that they all allow
for a considerable amount of compression bonding. h us base
metal alloys can appear to possess good ability to bond to
porcelain as measured by these tests. However, a majority of
the reported bond will be compression bonding, which can
fail catastrophically at any time. As stated previously, the major
problem is the thickness of the oxide layer, which propagates each
time the porcelain is ired. he main function of beryllium in a
base metal alloy is to help control the oxide layer in addition to
improving the castability of the alloy. In the former function, the
beryllium is only partially successful. Nonberyllium base metal
alloys have no control of the oxide layer and hence should be
avoided.
he tendency of base metal alloys to form thick oxide layers is
also problematic when attempting to solder ixed partial dentures.
he problem here is that the alloys form the oxide layer before that not only do individual copings distort, but so do entire
frameworks for larger ixed partial dentures. Because the majority
of the distortion seems to occur during the degassing process, the
major factor in this latter type of distortion seems to be release of
stresses induced in the casting process.
As noted previously, distortion varies with the composition of
the alloy. he higher the melting temperature of an alloy, the less
distortion will likely occur. hus the high gold alloys, which have
melting temperatures closest to the sintering temperatures of the
porcelain, tend to distort the most. High noble and the palladiumbased alloys distort somewhat less, while base metal alloys tend to
distort very little. However, this latter fact should not be taken to
construe that there is no change in it of base metal castings during
porcelain application. In fact the quality of the it is diminished
considerably with base metal castings as a result of inevitable oxide
formation on the internal of the castings. his oxide layer, which
is substantial with base metal alloys, can interfere with seating of
the casting and result in marginal opening.
Of course distortion can be minimized with the intelligent use
of cervical marginal geometry. Shoulder and shoulder-bevel margins
distort relatively little, even with high gold alloys, and should be
utilized routinely in nonesthetic situations. Framework distortion
can be minimized by proper alloy selection, use of custom sager
trays, and use of the postsoldering procedure where indicated.
When all factors are taken into account, it would appear that
the high noble/palladium-silver/high palladium alloys would have
an advantage over the other systems in terms of the a bility to
achieve consistently excellent marginal integrity.
Bonding to Porcelain
Clearly the formation of a predictable bond to porcelain is an
essential property of an alloy intended for crown and bridge
prosthodontics. here are three main mechanisms of p orcelain
bonding: mechanical, chemical, and compression bonding. he
most important of these by far is chemical bonding. However, it
is prudent to take advantage of all three methods.
Mechanical bonding occurs due to the inherent microscopically
rough metal surface that exists after the degassing procedure. Van
der Waal forces play a role here, as does the improved wetting that
occurs when the surface of the alloy is air-abraded with 50-micron
aluminum-oxide particles prior to applying the opaque porcelain.
It has been estimated that such mechanical bonding should
constitute only about 10% of the total bond of the porcelain to
the metal.
Compression bonding occurs as a result of the slight thermal
coeicient of expansion mismatch that exists between the porcelain
and a compatible alloy. When a metal-ceramic restoration is taken
from the mule of a porcelain oven and allowed to cool, the metal
coping will cool irst and begin to shrink slightly. his will pull
the overlying porcelain under compression. his compression stress
contributes to the overall bond strength. We take advantage of
this by attempting to get a “wrap around” efect with our cutback
design, both buccolingually and interproximally.
Chemical bonding is the most important means of bonding
porcelain to metal. he opaque porcelains are specially formulated
with tetravalent oxides that will bond to oxides formed on the
surface of the metal. he metallic oxides either form naturally
or are induced from trace elements during the degas cycle, and
ideally will form a monomolecular layer on the surface of the al loy
(Fig. 13.63 ).
Chemical bonding with the noble metal alloys has been extensively studied and is very predictable. T race elements such as indium,
C
B
A
• Fig. 13.63 A, Noble metal alloy copings. B, Opaque porcelain applied
to noble metal alloy copings. C, Finalized porcelain-fused-to-metal crowns.
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
hat means the metal cost of laboratory work has at least doubled
over that time, which has a huge efect on laboratory costs and
subsequently raises the cost of restorative services to patients. Indeed,
a major impetus for the development of all-ceramic alternatives
to PFM is the laboratory costs.
Depending upon the philosophic orientation and sociologic
makeup of a practice, the diferences in cost of alloys may or may
not be signiicant. Far more important would seem to be the
predictability of an alloy in terms of castability, consistent it, and
lack of bond failure.
In summary, a host of metal alloys intended to be used with
porcelain are currently available commercially. hese have been
classiied according to both composition and the characteristics
and physical properties of the major groups compared.
An analysis of the material presented reveals that one group of
alloys, the high noble alloys, seems to have no deiciencies and
scores high in all of the categories discussed. High noble alloys
also happen to be cheaper than high gold alloys, although that is
a secondary consideration. hese alloys would seem to be the
metals of choice. hey are stronger and can be used in thinner
section than the high gold alloys. hey cast easily and accurately,
and show fewer tendencies to distort on iring the porcelain.
Porcelain bonding is very predictable with no discoloring of the
porcelain. Biocompatibility is not a problem.
If cost was a major consideration, use of a palladium silver alloy
with a porcelain low in sodium content would likely be a suitable
choice. As is usually the case, proper manipulation of the alloy
chosen is probably even more important than which alloy is chosen.
THE BOTTOM LINE
1. Porcelain-fused-to-metal crowns and ixed partial dentures
continue to be important restorations and provide the best
combination of reasonable esthetics with maximum longevity
of available esthetic crown options.
2. Many diferent alloy systems with diferent properties and costs
are available.
3. he dentist should choose which alloy is most appropriate for
each restoration.
4. Some of the factors that must be considered when choosing
an alloy include strength, ability to achieve excellent marginal
integrity, ability to attain a predictable bond with porcelain,
biocompatibility, and cost.
5. Base metal alloys are inexpensive but have signiicant problems
with it, porcelain bonding, and biocompatibility.
6. High gold alloys do not form dark oxides, and have the potential
to provide improved esthetics for single crowns on anterior
teeth.
7. High noble alloys are less expensive than high gold alloys and
seem to be the alloy of choice for metal-ceramic restorations.the solder can melt and join with the parent metal. his interposed
oxide layer can result in weak or nonexistent solder joints. As a
result, many ixed partial denture frameworks using base metal
are cast in one piece. While the literature on one-piece castings is
somewhat equivocal, many feel that the it of the castings is deinitely
compromised. Also, it is often essential to section, index, and
solder units because they simply do not it. his can be diicult
with base metal alloys.
Biocompatibility
While patients can be theoretically allergic to almost any element
in a casting alloy, even gold, the major elements that are of interest
in terms of biocompatibility are nickel and beryllium. It i s estimated
that approximately 22% of women are allergic to nickel. he
incidence of nickel allergy in men is less than 10%. he major
reason for the diference in incidence between the sexes is thought
to be that many women have pierced ears and wear costume jewelry.
Much of this jewelry is nickel based, and it is believed that this
will induce the allergy.
he signs and symptoms of nickel allergy can be local or systemic.
Often the presenting symptom is a rash or eczema on the arm
or legs. Patients often do not associate such peripheral symptoms
with an intraoral restoration and hence may sufer for prolonged
periods before a diagnosis of nickel allergy is made. When use of
a base metal alloy is contemplated, the patient should be specii -
cally asked if he or she has any allergy to nickel or reaction to
any metal.
Beryllium is primarily a potential problem for the laboratory
technician where grindings containing beryllium can be the etiologic
agent for a number of respiratory ailments. Proper ventilat ion and
the routine wearing of a face mask can prevent such untoward
events. Beryllium has also been shown to migrate toward the surface
of restorations, and in that location can also dissolve in oral luids.
he clinical signiicance of these indings is unknown at this time
but is a concern to some.
A similar situation may occur with the high palladium alloys . In
a number of proprietary studies palladium has been shown to dissolve
in oral luids and be cytotoxic. his most frequently occurs when
the combined concentration of gold and silver is less than 25% of
the total alloy. Again the clinical signiicance of this is unknown.
Economic Conideration
Obviously the cost of a metal alloy needs to be considered. his
can be even more important when the price of gold luctuates
extensively. Indeed the genesis of most of the research into alternative
alloys, and many of the all-ceramic alternatives to metal-ceramics,
was a gold price approaching $ /ounce.
A pilot study conducted at the University of Southern California
School of Dentistry in compared the price of a metal coping
fabricated with diferent alloys. he price of gold at the time was
close to $ /ounce. Fifty metal copings were collected at random,
weighed, and an average weight calculated. he average price/
coping/alloy could then be calculated. he results d o not take into
account the lower speciic gravity of base metal alloys, which afords
additional minor savings. Nor does it take into account the fact
that copings made with one alloy could be thinner than those
fabricated from another alloy. he data do indicate a signiicant
diferential in cost ( ).
Since , the cost of noble metals has luctuated considerably,
but the price of gold has ranged around $ to $1 an ounce. Comparison of Costs for Diferent Alloys
in and
Alloy Cost Cost
1. High gold $50 $
2. High noble $26 $52
3. Palladium-silver $17 $34
4. Base metal $3 $6
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
fact integrated into the bone. After several years of animal and
human research, Brånemark introduced his system of root form
titanium osseointegrated implants in the early 1980s. It is not
hyperbole to state that this was one of the most important advances
in the history of dentistry.
Brånemark’s original clinical research was with “hybrid” pros -
theses, which consisted of ive titanium implants placed in the
anterior mandible between the mental foramina ( Fig. 13.65 ). hese
implants were placed under a strict surgical protocol, then allowed
to heal and integrate some time before restoration. he implants
were splinted together and restored with a bar and arch-shortened
mandibular denture. hese restorations were opposed by a maxillary
denture. Clinical results were outstanding with 95% implant survival
and % prostheses survival at 5 years.
hese original implants were composed of 99% commercially
pure titanium and had machined surfaces. Many manufacturers
developed and marketed a number of diferent implants with
diferent designs, and data from current research cannot identify
a “best” implant design. Several implant systems were introduced
with “coatings” of hydroxyapatite and other formulations, but
they performed poorly compared to titanium implants, primar -
ily due to breakdown between the “coating” and the implant.
Titanium-vanadium alloy implants have been used successfully
and are stronger than commercially pure titanium implants, but
appear to have no clinical advantage because fracture of implants
is a very rare occurrence.
Manufacturers have experimented with diferent implant surfaces
trying to create more rapid osseointegration. Most contemporary
implants have microscopically “rough” surfaces, which seem to
results in more rapid integration into the bone as indicated by
“push-out tests.” It is not known whether this is clinically signiicant.
Implants today are used to replace single teeth in all areas of
the mouth, to restore multiple lost teeth with ixed partial dentures,
and to support full-mouth reconstructions ( Fig. 13.66 ). It is
important to understand that Brånemark’s original research with
95% survival at 5 years was done with ive splinted implants in
the anterior mandible. his is the best possible bone for implanta -
tion, so these results cannot be extrapolated to implants placed in
other areas of the mouth. he least desirable bone for implantation
is in the posterior maxilla.Implant Material
Dentists have tried for centuries to ind a way to implant devices
into the jaw bone to replace missing teeth. Many different
approaches were tried but no material or technique proved successful
until the 1970s. Up until that time, various forms of metal implants
primarily fabricated from chrome-cobalt alloy had been used with
some short-term success, but all failed in the long term. Blade
implants, ramus-frame implants, and other conigurations all failed
eventually because of epithelial growth between the implant and
surrounding bone and subsequent infection. he major problem
with these implants was that the surgical site that was prepared
was not suiciently precise to provide initial intimate bone-implant
proximity.
Vitreous carbon implants were introduced in the mid-1970s
and showed great promise, but sufered the same fate as the implants
described previously, as the shape of the implant was rectangular,
which made it impossible to surgically prepare the site with s uicient
precision.
he irst successful implant system was the mandibular sub -
periosteal implant designed by Dr. Roy Bodine ( Fig. 13.64 ). his
chrome-cobalt implant was used with resorbed mandibles and
demonstrated survival rates close to 20 years. With this system,
an impression was made of the exposed mandible after raising a
flap, and the implant framework was placed directly on the
periosteum over the alveolar bone rather than in the mandible.
hese implant frameworks were restored with mandibular dentures
that were secured to the metal framework with clips. While
subperiosteal implants had acceptable survival rates, the frameworks
eventually became infected and had to be removed. his removal
often resulted in considerable morbidity, because bone had grown
over the framework and had to be surgically removed before the
framework could be removed. Maxillary superiosteal implants did
not perform nearly as well as mandibular implants because of
resorption of the maxillary alveolar process.
he major breakthrough with implants came as a result of
Brånemark’s research in Sweden. Brånemark was doing capillary
research in animals using titanium cylinders to contain the speci -
mens. When trying to remove the cylinders from the bony
extremities of the animals in order to reuse them, the researchers
discovered the cylinders were very diicult to remove and had in
• Fig. 13.64 Mandibular subperiosteal implant framework.
• Fig. 13.65 Illustration showing design of hybrid dental prosthesis.
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
physical properties do not necessarily translate into improved
longevity. Keep in mind that ceramics do not fail because they
are not strong enough; they fail because it is not known how to
manufactur e law-free restorations. hose laws, called Griith
laws, tend to propagate over time and result in fatigue failure.
3. What clinical situations are recommended for the new system?
Can ixed partial dentures made with this system reasonably
be expected to survive? Should its use be limited to anterior
teeth or can it be used in molars?
his section has been written to describe the main features of
the diferent ceramic systems as they were introduced to the profes -
sion. It is not our intent to examine each system in great detail,
but to highlight the important features that led to success or failure.
It is also not intended to be all-inclusive but will focus on the
major players.
he irst esthetic crown was the porcelain jacket crown (PJC)
introduced to the profession circa by Land. To fabricate this
crown, a platinum foil was adapted to the die using a tinner’s
joint. his foil was used as a scafold to carry the porcelain into
the porcelain oven where it was ired and the foil later removed.
he PJC had good esthetics, but poor marginal integrity and a
short life span. hey were cemented in place using diferent shades
of silicophosphate cement. he major deiciency of the PJC was
the fact they frequently fractured 1 or 2 years after placement.
In , Weinstein-Katz and Weinstein iled the patent for the
irst metal-ceramic crown system.99 At the time, a porcelain-fusedto-metal (PFM) was known as a “Ceramco.” It became popular
in the late 1960s, but dentists knew little about the important
preparation details required to produce a truly esthetic restoration
(Fig. 13.67 ). Dentists did not understand the space requirements
needed for layers of metal, opaque porcelain, body, and incisal
porcelains and thus most preparations were underprepared. hey
knew nothing about cervical margin design. Laborato ry technicians
were also unaware of many of the important details of fabrication.
he dental profession and laboratory industry learned about PFMs
by trial and error. his resulted in many restorations that lacked
the expected esthetic potential and frequent fracturing of the
feldspathic porcelain veneer from the metal coping.
In the mid-1970s, individuals such as John McLean, Jack Preston,
Lloyd Miller, and Jack Nicholls began to do research that guided
the profession in producing PFMs that had improved esthetics
and great clinical longevity.
One excellent systematic review published in indicated
the failure rate with PFMs is 5% at 11 years. Several other While data from Brånemark’s original research cannot be used
to predict survival of implants placed elsewhere in the mouth, it
is clear that root form titanium implants have adequate survival
rates to recommend routine use for the replacement of missing
teeth. Restorations can be screw-retained to the implants or cementretained. Many authorities prefer screw-retained restorations as
this allows % retrieval, but this approach requi res precise implant
placement.
One issue that has come to light in recent years is the condition
called periimplantitis, deined as periimplant bone loss accompanied
by suppuration. he incidence of periimplantitis seems to be
signiicantly higher than originally reported and seems to primarily
occur in patients who originally lost their teeth to periodontitis
and who smoke. In these patients, the decision to extract teeth
and replace them with implants should be undertaken with an
abundance of caution.
THE BOTTOM LINE
1. he advent of predictable osseointegration with titanium rootform implants is one of the most important advances in
restorative dentistry.
2. Contemporary implants have acceptable survival rates and should
be considered as the primary approach for the replacement of
missing teeth.
3. No “best” implant design has been determined by clinical
research.
4. Coated implants have not survived as well as noncoated implants.
5. Periimplantitis is a serious complication of implant therapy.
6. Smokers who lost their teeth due to periodontal disease are
especially at risk for periimplantitis.
Evolution of All-Ceramic Crown
New ceramic systems continue to be introduced to the profession
at exponential rates. It is critical that clinicians understand how
these systems have evolved since the mid-1980s and that they
understand the deiciencies of many of these systems so they can
more efectively evaluate the potential of new systems as they are
introduced to the market. he three major concerns with new
systems are as follows:
1. What is the real esthetic potential of the system compared to
available tried and true systems?
2. What is a reasonable potential life span for the new system?
his can be diicult to determine because improvements in
• Fig. 13.66 Radiograph of single mandibular implant.
• Fig. 13.67 Porcelain-fused-to-metal ixed prosthesis.
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
studies have shown similar results. Such data must be considered
when assessing the utility of new ceramic systems. Numerous
ceramic systems have been introduced to the profession ( Fig. 13.68 ).
Almost all of these systems have been brought to market with
almost no clinical testing. It is also important to repeat the fact
that laboratory testing of physical and mechanical properties and
load-to-failure testing yields little useful information about expected
clinical per formance. hus it is clear that clinical dentists are carrying
out the essential clinical trials for the manufacturers.
In McLean introduced the aluminous core PJC. his
restoration used twin platinum foils for fabrication. One foil was
used as a die spacer and the other was tin plated a nd used to form
the core with aluminous core porcelain. his was veneered with
compatible low-alkali porcelain. he laboratory technique was very
demanding, which limited its commercial adaptation. In
Donovan introduced a simpliied single foil technique for fabricating
aluminous core PJCs, but this simpliied technique also failed to
catch on.
he twin-foil crown by McLean was the irst in a series of
foil-supported restorations that attempted to improve clinical
longevity by reducing the number of microscopic defects on the
internal portion of the crown. Shorer introduced the Renaissance
foil system, which used a pleated noble metal foil and a gold
colored bonding agent. Asami Tanaka had a similar system with
his Sunrise crown. hese foil-supported restorations had poor
survival data, primarily because the foil took the form of the tooth
preparation and frequently there were excesses of unsupported
porcelain. he industry standard is that there should never be
more than 2 mm of unsupported porcelain, regardless of the core
material. With foil-supported crowns this is diicult to achieve in
the majority of cases.
In , Shorer and Whiteman introduced the Captek system.
Captek is an interesting technology that forms a noble metal coping
without casting or machining. A wax sheet containing a powdered
metal alloy of 88% gold is adapted to a refractory die and heated
in an oven until the wax melts and the metal coalesces into a
porous coping. A second wax sheet containing platinum is adapted
over the coping and heated. he wax melts and the pl atinum enters
the gold coping by capillary action (hence “Captek”). he gold
color of the coping results in excellent esthetics and the platinum
provides strength to resist metal lexure. he major deiciency of
Captek is the inability to provide adequate support for the veneering
ceramic, again because the coping takes on the form of the tooth
preparation and few preparations are ideal.
In , Sozio and Riley introduced the Cerestore crown, also
called the “shrink-free” ceramic crown. his product used an
extremely accurate epoxy-resin die system, on which was injected
a high strength alumina-ceramic core. his core did not shrink on
sintering and was quite opaque, which resulted in unesthetic cervical
opacity. he core could be colored intrinsically and was overlayed
with a relatively translucent veneering ceramic. he Cerestore crown system had a relatively short time on the market, partially due to
the inherent cervical opacity, which resulted in limiting the esthetic
outcome to that attained with metal-ceramic restorations with
porcelain labial margins, and partially, due to early clinical failures
with fracture.
Experiences with Cerestore taught us one important prin -
ciple: If an all-ceramic crown system uses an opaque core
to improve fracture strength, the esthetic result achiev ed by
that system will be no better than the esthetics achieved with
metal-ceramics!
About the same time as Cerestore entered the marketplace,
Adair and Grossman from the Dow Corning Company introduced
Dicor, which was marketed as the “castable” ceramic crown.
Dicor crowns were waxed, invested, and cast using a glasslike
material that was very translucent. he restoration was then given
a speciic heat treatment called “ceraming,” which induced a change
in crystalline structure and made it slightly less translucent. hen
a thin ilm of extrinsic stain was painted on the crown to attain
the desired shade.
Dicor was the irst example of a “monolithic” crown system
where the inal esthetic result was attained by applying a thin layer
of extrinsic coloration ( Fig. 13.69 ). In general, such monolithic
restorations lack depth and have a high level of surface or specular
relection. Such restorations often experience a high incidence of
metamerism where the restoration appears one color with certain
light sources and a very diferent color in diferent light sources.
hus the major deiciency of Dicor was the inability to achieve
intrinsic coloration. Fracture rates for Dicor crowns were also
relatively high.
Originally Dicor crowns were intended to be cemented with
diferent shades of zinc-phosphate cement. However, Malament
discovered that fracture rates could be improved if Dicor crowns
were etched internally and bonded in place with resin cements.
he combination of high fracture rates and poor esthetics led to
the early demise of Dicor, however.
Experiences with Dicor taught us two important principles:
First, monolithic crowns do not allow intrinsic coloration and provide
depth of color in the same manner as layered crowns; second, the
clinical performance of ceramic crowns can be improved by etching
and bonding.
To overcome the esthetic disadvantages of Dicor, Willi Geller
introduced the Willi Glass crown in . Willi Glass used an
internal translucent core of Dicor, about 0.75 mm thick. his was
veneered with Vitadur N ceramic. Willi Glass was undoubtedly
the most esthetic restoration ever made available to the profession.
However, it had a relatively short clinical life span and s ufered
• Fig. 13.68 Major ceramic systems used in restorative dentistry.
• Fig. 13.69 Ceramic restoration by Dicor.
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
successfully for single crowns. hese systems have not captured a
major share of the market to date.
Nobel Biocare introduced Procera Allceram to the market in
the 1990s. his system used a milled alumina or zirconia core
veneered with low fusing ceramic. Crowns made with this system
had inferior marginal integrity and a high incidence of chipping
of the veneering ceramic because of lack of support of the ceramic
by the core.
he next major system to appear on the market was IPS Empress
II. It was introduced as a lithium disilicate reinforced material that
was so strong it could be predictably used to fabricate three-unit
ixed partial dentures. In this regard, IPS Empress II was a complete
disaster. One local dental laboratory (Drake Dental Lab, Charlotte,
NC) fabricated IPS Empress II ixed partial dentures using
Ivoclar’s speciication for connector height, and at 3 years, the
failure rate due to fracture was 75% (personal communication;
David Avery, Drake Dental Laboratory).
It should be noted that IPS Empress II was a lithium disilicate
material and was not really related to the original IPS Empress,
which was leucite reinforced. Part of the problem with IPS Empress
II was that the veneering ceramic was not properly matched to
the lithium disilicate core. his was corrected in a later version
called IPS Eris. IPS Eris has shown promise for single crowns but
should not be used for fabricating all-ceramic ixed partial dentures.
IPS Eris has largely been made irrelevant with the introduction
of IPS e.max, which is an optimized lithium disilicate material.
IPS e.max is a lithium disilicate material that was introduced
in ( Fig. 13.71 ). It can be pressed or machined and can be
used as a monolithic material or layered. Monolithic IPS e.max
has relatively high lexural strength of to MPa compared
to IPS Empress, which has a lexural strength of app roximately
MPa. Layered IPS e.max has approximately half the lexural
strength as the monolithic form. No long-term clinical trials have
been published at this point, but information gleaned from remake
data from three commercial laboratories and over 21, IPS
e.max monolithic and layered single crowns indicates the fracture
rate at about 4 years is only 1%. As would be expected, layered
IPS e.max crowns have better esthetic potential than monolithic
crowns, but the monolithic crowns are stronger.
It should again be noted that higher strength does not automati -
cally result in improved clinical performance, primarily because
all-ceramic crowns do not fail because they are not strong enough.
They fail because it is difficult to fabricate them without from catastrophic fracture. his was partially because the Dicor
core was not strong enough at that thickness, and partially due to
thermal incompatibilities of the Dicor core and the veneering
porcelain.
In the late 1980s, Wholwend and Scharer introduced the original
IPS Empress leucite reinforced ceramic system ( Fig. 13.70 ). his
system introduced the concept of hot pressing the ceramic, which
has the potential to reduce the number of microscopic defects in
the ceramic crown.
IPS Empress crowns can be fabricated in two diferent ways.
Monolithic IPS Empress crowns can be waxed, pressed, and stained.
hese monolithic restorations sufer from issues discussed previously
and do not provide optimum esthetics on anterior teeth. Layered
IPS Empress, with a leucite reinforced core and matched veneering
porcelain, provides the most esthetic and durable ceramic option
currently available for restoring anterior teeth. Clinical trials have
indicated 95% survival of bonded, layered IPS Empress crowns
on anterior teeth. Survival rates drop considerably with crowns
on posterior teeth.
It is critical to understand that this high survival for IPS Empress
crowns on anterior teeth is only achieved if they are internally
etched and bonded in place. here are three approaches to accom -
plishing this. he irst is the traditional approach of bonding the
restoration in place using a fourth-generation or ifth-generation
etch-and-rinse dentin bonding agent (DBA) and a dual cure resin
cement. One problem with this approach is if the DBA is cured
prior to cementation, the thickness of the cured DBA may prevent
complete seating of the crown. Alternatively, if the DBA is cured
after seating the crown at the same time as the dual cure cement,
the hydraulic pressure generated during seating will likely collapse
the collagen bundles and signiicantly compromise the hybrid layer
and dentin bonding.
A second approach is to use Paul and Magne’s immediate dentin
sealing technique. With this technique the dentin is sealed with
a fourth-generation DBA immediately after tooth preparation,
prior to making the impression. hus the ilm thickness of the
DBA is of no importance, and the tooth is sealed during the
provisional phase. he sealed preparation must be isolated with
Vaseline when making the provisional restoration to prevent bonding
of the provisional to the dentin. he oxygen-inhibited layer of the
DBA can also distort impressions, and the surface of the DBA
must be carefully cleaned prior to cementation. his immediate
dentin sealing technique results in much higher dentin bonds than
are created when bonding at the cementation stage.
he third approach to bonding etched IPS Empress restorati ons
in place is to use a self-adhesive resin cement. hese cements do
not produce a hybrid layer and strong bonds to dentin, but do
provide an excellent seal. he long-term efect on crown survival
with use of self-etching cements is not known.
Leucite-reinforced ceramic systems similar to IPS Empress (Optec
HSP , Authentic) have appeared on the market. Optec HSP was a
spectacularly unsuccessful product, which illustrates another
important principle: Every ceramic system, even if similar to another
successful system, must generate its own clinical data to support use of
the system.
In the early 1990s, Vita introduced the In-Ceram system, util izing slip-casting with iniltrated glass. hree diferent forms exist:
In-Ceram Spinell, In-Ceram Alumina, and In-Ceram Zirconia.
Spinell is the most translucent but has not performed well in
clinical trials. Zirconia is the least translucent and has the same
translucency as metal; it therefore has limited esthetic potential.
In-Ceram Alumina has decent esthetic potential and has been used
• Fig. 13.70 Leucite-reinforced glass ceramic crowns (IPS Empress).
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
Full contour zirconia restorations are also relatively inexpensive.
his is partially because they are designed and manufactured digitally.
In an era where the price of gold is over or close to $ /ounce,
this low cost beneit is a real advantage.
here is no question that the esthetic results achieved with
these restorations is compromised, but they are acceptable for
molars and perhaps mandibular incisors. Research has shown
that the best surface for full contour zirconia crowns is a polished
surface. his polished surface is relatively kind to opposing
enamel.
Recall that the preceding information is not meant to be either
all-inclusive or a detailed description of available ceramic systems.
Rather it is an overview of how these systems evolved with a brief
description of the important features of the major players. More
detailed descriptions will be given in subsequent chapters.
THE BOTTOM LINE
1. Many diferent ceramic systems have been introduced to the
dental profession over the past 30 years.
2. All have been brought to market with little or no clinical
testing.
3. Ceramic materials do not fracture because of a lack of strength.
hey fracture due to defect propagation and fatigue.
4. Because of #3, physical properties testing and load-to-failure
studies yield little useful information on potential clinical
survival rates.
5. Clinical trials or fatigue testing under water are the only
appropriate means of predicting clinical survival of ceramic
crowns.
6. Most of the ceramic systems introduced since have been
clinical failures.
7. he current cost of gold is a major factor in the cost of res toring
teeth with metal-ceramics.
8. Many all-ceramic systems, especially full contour zirconia, are
cost-efective compared to PFM.
9. Monolithic crowns have good strength but relatively poor
esthetics.
10. Layered restorations have good esthetic potential but reduced
strength.
11. Current available systems that clinicians should consider are:
a. Metal-ceramics: Reasonable esthetics, longest life span
b. IPS Empress: Esthetics, anterior teeth only
c. IPS e.max: Esthetic potential, potential longevity
d. Layered and full contour zirconia: Potential longevity, costincorporating microscopic defects called Griith laws, and it is
the propagation of these defects that results in catastrophic failure.
In the late 1990s, zirconia-based materials were introduced to
the profession. he original restorations were cored with yttriastabilized zirconia oxide and veneered with a compatible ceramic.
Zirconia is a very strong material with lexural strengths as high
as MPa. In clinical trials with these materials, core fracture
was extremely rare even with posterior ixed partial dentures.
However, the “Achilles heel” with these layered restoratio ns was
chip fracture of the veneer. he fractures did not occur at the
interface between the core and the veneer, but rather were cohesive
fractures in the body of the ceramic veneer. One clinical trial of
over crowns estimated that layered zirconia crowns fractured
at a rate ive times higher than that of metal-ceramic crowns.
here are two potential causes for this high incidence of veneer
fracture. Because the core is computer designed and manufactured
from a scan of the tooth preparation, it is highly likely that adequate
support of the veneering porcelain is not provided by the core. his
problem may have been solved by creating software that produces
a virtual full-contour wax-up and then cuts that back to provide a
core with optimal support. he second cause is the extremely poor
thermal conductivity of the core material. Basically the core cools
very slowly on removal from the porcelain oven and the veneering
ceramic cools past its glass transition temperature while the core
slowly continues to cool. his creates stress in the veneering ceramic,
which causes it to fracture under occlusal loads. his problem may
have been solved by using prolonged cooling times.
he reason core fracture is so rare with zirconia is that zirconia
possesses a property called transformation toughening. When a
defect begins to propagate, the material surrounding the defect
undergoes a transformation from the tetragonal to the monoclinic
phase, and this transformation is accompanied by a slight expansion,
which efectively pinches of the defect and prevents it from
propagating.
A relatively new zirconia restoration has been introduced in
recent years. It is called monolithic zirconia or full contour zirconia
(Fig. 13.72 ). his is basically a core of zirconia milled into a full
crown and then either glazed or polished. Based on studies of
layered zirconia, where core fracture is extremely rare, these restora -
tions may reasonably be expected to have high survival rates. One
major advantage of monolithic zirconia is that very conservative
tooth preparations can be used because of the strength of the
material. On molars, preparations similar to those used for cast
gold crowns will suice.
• Fig. 13.71 Lithium disilicate (IPS e.max) ceramic ixed dental
prosthesis.
• Fig. 13.72 Monolithic full contour zirconia restoration.
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
reasonable survival rate for the economic survival of the restorative
dentist.
It is reasonable for a clinician to adhere to Schärer’s criteria,
but the truth is that in order to publish a properly conducted
5-year clinical trial, it requires almost 10 years ( Fig. 13.74 )!
hus even though manufacturers are diligently conducting such
trials, information on investigated materials does not get into the
hands of practicing dentists until many years after the materials
are brought to market. An interesting approach to bring clinically
relevant data to the market in a timelier manner will be described
later in this section.
here are three major materials that have captured a signiicant
portion of the ceramic market in that have not had properly
conducted clinical trials published before they were widely used
clinically. hese three materials include leucite-reinforced IPS
Empress (Ivoclar), lithium disilicate–reinforced IPS e.max (Ivoclar),
and zirconia-based systems (many manufacturers). All of these
materials can be used in the monolithic state or layered. Zirconia
materials can be used layered in the partially stabilized state and
monolithic in both the partially stabilized and fully stabilized state.
Monolithic ceramic restorations have relatively poor esthetic
results but seem to provide longer clinical survival rates. With
monolithic ceramic restorations, all of the color is on the surface,
resulting in high surface relectivity and specular relection, a high
incidence of metamerism, and no depth efect. Monolithic crowns
are not suitable for maxillary anterior teeth. Layered restorations
provide signiicantly improved esthetic results but lower survival
rates.
he leucite-reinforced IPS Empress system was really the irst
successful ceramic system on the market appearing after an imposing
list of failed systems. Layered IPS Empress should only be used
on anterior teeth as clinical trials have demonstrated high failure
rates on posterior teeth. Monolithic Empress should not be
used. IPS Empress can be pressed or milled, and the usual procedure
is to press a leucite core and veneer it with the matched ceramic.
Layered IPS Empress crowns must be etched with hydroluoric
acid and bonded in place with either dual-cure resin cements/
bonding or self-adhesive resin cements. Fewer and fewer dental
laboratories are fabricating these restorations today, and even though
the esthetic results are excellent and survival on maxillary anterior
teeth is satisfactory, their use in contemporary clinical dentistry is
limited.
he material named IPS e.max is a lithium disilicate reinforced
ceramic that can be used both in the monolithic sta te and layered. Contemporary Ceramic Material
Since the early 1980s, many diferent ceramic systems have been
brought to market. None of the systems had advanced clinical
testing before coming to market and most systems failed primarily
due to premature catastrophic fracture ( Fig. 13.73 ). he driving
force behind these new systems was twofold: Many clinicians were
disappointed with the esthetic results they obtained with metalceramic restorations and hoped to obtain better esthetic results by
using metal-free restorations. With some systems, improved esthetic
results were obtained, but the price that was paid signiicantly
reduced longevity. he second driving factor was the cost of noble
metals. In , the cost of gold ranged from $ to $
an ounce. his resulted in skyrocketing laboratory costs in a market
that was not favorable to raising compensatory fees. Some of the
newer systems ofer signiicant savings in laboratory costs, partially
due to nonuse of metal but also because many of the se restorations
can be fabricated digitally thus reducing labor costs.
here are a number of reasons why dentists fail to obtain
predictable esthetics with metal-ceramic restorations and most of
them are operator related. Most dentists tend to underprepare
teeth that are to be restored with metal-ceramic crowns, and do
not provide the laboratory technician suicient room for the
metal substructure, opaque layer and body, and incisal porcelain.
Many use outdated cervical margin designs, and soft tissue
management is generally poor, resulting in a high incidence of
inadequate impressions. , Many dentists opt to send their
laboratory work overseas and accept low-quality restorations in
the name of cost reduction.
It is clear that with proper tooth preparation and soft tissue
management, coupled with working with a decent ceramist, very
esthetic restorations can be fabricated using metal-ceramics. Metalceramic restorations remain the gold standard for esthetic indirect
crown systems because they provide a combination of reasonable
esthetics with maximum longevity. Data from a number of clinical
trials indicate that 95% of metal-ceramic restorations are in service
10 to 15 years after placement.
As mentioned, early ceramic systems sufered from premature
catastrophic fracture. his led Schärer and McLean to postulate
that before a clinician uses a new ceramic system, he or she
should be provided data from independent clinical trials that
demonstrate a survival rate of no less than 95% at 5 years. his
demonstrates that they are not holding ceramic restorations to the
same survival rate as metal-ceramic restorations, but they expect a
B
A
• Fig. 13.73 A and B, Metal-ceramic restorations after 21 years.
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
the monoclinic form of zir conia. his results in a slight expansion,
which efectively “pinches of” the propagating defect.
Veneer chipping is likely caused by two issues. First, the high
strength cores were originally fabricated by scanni ng the die of
the tooth preparation and then a core of uniform thickness was
milled. his core would follow the shape of the die and does not
in any way account for the thickness of the veneering ceramic.
he industry standard for support of the veneering ceramic is that
the veneering ceramic should never exceed a thickness of 2 mm.
New software that irst produces a virtual full-contour image of
the anticipated inal restoration and then cuts back that restoration,
to provide a core with optimum support of the veneering ceramic,
should solve the support problem.
he second issue with veneer chipping is the thermal conductivity
of zirconia. It is very low, perhaps to times lower than
the conductivity of metals used to bond to porcelain ( ).
he net result of this is, as the layered ceramic unit exits the
porcelain oven, the veneering ceramic cools irst, below its glass
transition temperature while the core very slowly continues to cool
and shrink. his creates stress in the veneering ceramic, which is
expressed clinically some time later by chip fracture. Slower cooling
protocols have been introduced for iring layered zirconia restora -
tions, and it is anticipated this will signiicantly reduce the incidence
of chipping.8
One other solution to veneer chipping is being used by many
dental laboratories. here is a substantial volume of anecdotal
evidence that veneer chipping with Noritake veneering ceramic
(Kuraray America, Inc.) is almost nonexistent. Clinicians would
be wise to specify use of Noritake veneering ceramic when prescrib -
ing layered zirconia restorations.Most of what is known about the clinical performance with IPS
e.max is with monolithic restorations. Monolithic e.max has a
signiicantly higher lexural strength than IPS Empress at MPa
versus MPa ( ). he lexural strength of layered
e.max is about half of the monolithic form, which has been validated
with both fatigue studies and clinical data. , It is important to
remember that ceramic crowns fail by defect propagation, and it
is likely that the clinical success of e.max restorations is a result
of incorporating fewer inherent defects through pressing and milling
the restorations. As impressive as the gain in lexural strength of
monolithic e.max versus IPS Empress is, it pales in comparison
to the lexural strength of monolithic zirconia, which has a lexural
strength of MPa versus MPa for e.max.
Zirconia restorations were irst introduced to the profession
as partially stabilized (yttria) zirconia oxide cor es layered with a
veneering ceramic. Initial clinical data established that the cores
rarely fractured, but there was a high incidence of chip fractures
of the veneering ceramic. It was estimated that the incidence
of veneer fracture with layered zirconia was ive times that of
metal-ceramic restorations. he low incidence of core fracture
could be attributed to the property of transformation toughening
(Fig. 13.75 ).
When a defect begins to propagate in a zirconia cor e, the materials
immediately surrounding the defect change from the tetragonal to Timeline: 5-Year Clinical Trial
Product
Inception
Investigator
RecruitmentSubject
RecruitmentIRBCrown
Placement3-Yr. Recall
1-Yr. Recall 5-Yr. Recall
10 Years!!!Article Preparation
& SubmissionArticle
Publication
Article Review
& Revision
• Fig. 13.74 Timeline outlining time required for publishing properly conducted 5-year clinical trial.
Mechanical Properties of Leucite
Reinforced, Lithium Disilicate,
and Zirconia
MaterialFlexural
Strength
(MPa)Elastic
Modulus
(GPa)Hardness
(VHN) Reference
Leucite
reinforced
glass
ceramic
(Empress) 96 (Aboushelib
et al.,
2007a)
Lithium
disilicate
(IPS e.max) 95 (Ivoclar,
Vivadent)
Zirconia
(Y-TZP) – (Piconi and
Maccauro,
)Thermal Conductivity of Zirconia
Compared to Other Material
Material Thermal Conductivity W/(mK)
Silver
Gold
Gold alloy
Base metal 40
Alumina 30
Zirconia 2
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
A relatively new form of zirconia has become extremely popular
in recent years despite a complete lack of clinical data on survival.
Monolithic partially stabilized zirconia (also called full contour
zirconia) has grabbed a huge share of the world market for indirect
esthetic cro wns. he rationale for this restoration is that in clinical
trials of layered zirconia restorations core fracture is a relatively
rare occurrence. A monolithic zirconia crown is essentially a core
with a glazed or polished surface, and thus is expected to display
good survival rates.
One major advantage of partially stabilized monolithic zirconia
is that crowns can be fabricated with signiicantly m ore conservative
tooth preparations compared to those needed for metal-ceramic
and lithium disilicate crowns. he exact tooth reduction required
is unknown at this time, but a 1-mm occlusal reduction with axial
reduction of 0.75 mm and a well-deined chamfer margin seem
appropriate. A second advantage is that numerous fatigue wear
studies indicate that polished zirconia is extremely kind to opposing
tooth structure. A third and apparently compelling advantage of
these restorations is that they are very inexpensive.
One signiicant disadvantage related to partially stabilized
monolithic zirconia is that it is relatively opaque. he color can
be improved using glazes and external colorants, but the overall
esthetic result is mediocre at best ( Fig. 13.76 ).
he esthetic results are likely acceptable in the molar regions
for all but the most demanding of patients, but they are likely
contraindicated for routine use in the maxillary anterior area.
he relative opacity has resulted in the introduction of a new
zirconia-based system: fully stabilized monolithic zirconia (Bruxzir
Anterior, Glidewell Laboratory). hese materials consist of zirconia
oxide fully stabilized with yttria (8–12 wt%). hey also contain
cubic zirconia of up to 53% and are slightly less opaque than
partially stabilized zirconia. his improvement in opacity is likely
not within the realm of human perception and is accompanied
by a 50% reduction in lexural strength. Clinicians are advised to
adopt this new technology with extreme caution. here is no clinical
track record, improvements in translucency are minimal, and the
reduction in lexural strength is signiicant.
In the absence of properly conducted clinical trials on the
previously discussed ceramic systems, another approach has been
used to generate timely clinical data on the survival of these restora -
tions. Dental laboratories often warranty their crowns for 5 years
• Fig. 13.75 Schematic illustration of the transformation toughening phenomenon.
• Fig. 13.76 Monolithic zirconia ixed dental prosthesis. (Case courtesy
Dr. Vilhelm G. Ólafsson.)
and have meticulous data on remakes with these new ceramic
systems. Assuming that most patients would return to their original
dentists when experiencing premature failure with a ceramic crown
to take advantage of the warranty, and assuming the dentists will
return that restoration for remake to the same laboratory, examina -
tion of remake data provides insights of short-term to medium-term
performance of large numbers of ceramic crowns.
his “laboratory survey” approach has provided 4-year data on
over 21, lithium disilicate (e.max) restorations and 5-year data
for over 71, monolithic and layered zirconia (partially stabilized)
restorations. , he surveys found all three types of restoration
had survival rates that would easily meet and exceed the Schärer
criteria. Monolithic e.max single crowns fractured at a rate of
0.91% at 4 years, with layered e.max single crowns exhibiting
double the fracture rate at 1.81%, which is still well below Schärer’s
criteria. Monolithic zirconia single crowns had an even lower rate
of fracture (0.71%) at 5 years. Layered zirconia single crowns had
a four to ive times higher fracture rate at 3.24% at 5 years. hese
restorations were fabricated prior to initiation of the new protocols
expected to reduce the chip fracture rate of layered zirconia restora -
tions. One other result of note was the fracture rate of e.max
inlays/onlays, which was 1.01% at 4 years.
A note on bonding zirconia. Zirconia cores cannot be
efectively etched with any known acid. Zirconia restorations are
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
9. It is not practical with current protocols to “bond” zirco nia
restorations. Zirconia restorations require traditional resistance
and retention for and should be cemented with RMGI or
self-adhesive resin cement.
Reference
1. Gordon SM, D ionne RA: he integration of clinical research into
dental therapeutics: making treatment decisions. J Am Dent Assoc
(12): – , .
2. Kelly JR: Evidence-based decision making: Guide to reading the
dental materials literature. J Prosthet Dent 95(2): – , .
3. Donovan TE: he selection of contemporary restorative materials:
anecdote vs. evidence-based? J Calif Dent Assoc 34(2): – ,
.
4. Donovan TE: Evidence-based Dentistry, dentists, and dental materials.
J Calif Dent Assoc 34(2): – , .
5. Lang LA, Teich ST: A critical appraisal of evidence-based dentistry:
the best available evidence. J Prosthet Dent (6): – , .
6. Greener EH: Amalgam–yesterday, today, and tomorrow. Oper Dent
4(1):24–35, .
7. Eames WB, Sieweke JC, Wallace SW, et al: Elastomeric impression
materials: efect of bulk on accuracy. J Prosthet Dent 41(3): – ,
.
8. Tan JP , Sederstrom D, Polansky JR, et al: he use of slow heating
and slow cooling regimens to strengthen porcelain fused to zirconia.
J Prosthet Dent (3): – , .
9. Wilson AD: Speciication test for the solubility and disintegration
of dental cements: a critical evaluation of its meaning. J Dent Res
55(5): – , .
10. Heintze SD, Ruieux C, Rousson V: Clinical performance of cervical
restorations–a meta-analysis. Dent Mater 26(10): – ,
.
11. Kelly JR: Clinically relevant approach to failure testing of all-ceramic
restorations. J Prosthet Dent 81(6): – , .
12. Heintze SD: Clinical relevance of tests on bond strength, microleakage
and marginal adaptation. Dent Mater 29(1):59–84, .
13. Mahler DB, Terkla LG, Van Eysden J, et al: Marginal fracture vs
mechanical properties of amalgam. J Dent Res 49(6 Suppl): – ,
.
14. Summitt JB, Burgess JO, Berry TG, et al: he performance of
bonded vs. pin-retained complex amalgam restorations: a ive-year
clinical evaluation. J Am Dent Assoc (7): – , .
15. Leinfelder K: he enigma of dental amalgam. J Esthet Restor Dent
16(1):3–5, .
16. Innes DBK, Youdelis WV: Dispersion strengthened amalgams. J
Can Dent Assoc 29: – , .
17. Donovan TE, Handlers JP: A rational policy on the use of dental
amalgam. CDA J 12(2):10–12, .
18. Bauer JG, First HA: he toxicity of mercury in dental amalgam.
CDA J 10(6):47–61, .
19. Souder W, Sweeney AB: Is mercury poisonous in dental amalgam
restorations? Dental Cosmos 73(12): – , .
20. Hoover AW, Goldwater LJ: Absorption and excretion of mercury
in man. X. Dental amalgams as a source of urinary mercury. Arch
Environ Health 12(4): – , .
21. Frykholm KO: On mercury from dental amalgam: its toxic and
allergic efects, and some comments on occupational hygiene. Acta
Odontol Scand 15(7):56–83, .
22. Svare CW, Peterson LC, Reinhardt JW, et al: he efect of dental
amalgams on mercury levels in expired air. J Dent Res 60(9): – ,
.
23. Vimy MJ, Lorscheider FL: Intra-oral air mercury released from
dental amalgam. J Dent Res 64(8): – , .
24. Abraham JE, Svare CW, Frank CW: he efect of dental amalgam
restorations on blood mercury levels. J Dent Res 63(1):71–73,
.best used with tooth preparations with adequate resistance and
retention form, and should be cemented with resin-modiied glass
ionomer or self-adhesive resin cement. A number of diferent
protocols have been developed for “bonding” zirconia restorations.
All of these protocols involve air particle abrasion, use of a primer
with MDP monomer and silane, and use of dual-cure resin cement.
he bonds achieved with these protocols are initially weak and
get weaker with artiicial aging. here is a deinite risk in use of
air particle abrasion with zirconia restorations as some studies
have demonstrated signiicant conversion of the core to the
monoclinic form and substantial weakening after air particle
abrasion.
Zirconia seems to have a strong ainity for proteins found in
saliva and blood. It is likely the internal portion of most zirconia
crowns will be contaminated during try-in. hese proteins cannot
be removed with phosphoric acid. A routine procedure for cementing
zirconia crowns is the use of a sodium hydroxide solution (Ivoclean,
Ivoclar) for 20 seconds after try-in before cementation to efectively
remove these proteins.
Indication
Clearly metal-ceramic restorations can continue to be recommended
for indirect esthetic crown restorations. However, the promising
short-term results demonstrated with lithium disilicate and zirconia
based systems permit their rational use in specific clinical
situations.
It would seem reasonable to consider use of monolithic partially
stabilized zirconia crowns for a molar tooth, in part due to their
substantially reduced costs, and also because a more conservative
tooth preparation can be used. hese restorations can be recom -
mended for mandibular anterior teeth because they are usually
not highly visible and a more conservative tooth preparation can
be used.
Monolithic lithium disilicate crowns can be recommended for
routine use on premolar teeth due to their excellent survival rates,
adequate esthetic results, and reduced costs. Layered lithium
disilicate crowns can be recommended for maxillary anteri or teeth.
Fully stabilized zirconia crowns should not be used at this time
until clinical information is available on clinical survival.
THE BOTTOM LINE
1. Metal-ceramic restorations continue to provide an impressive
combination of reasonable esthetic results coupled with excellent
clinical longevity.
2. Most ceramic systems introduced to the market prior to
were clinical failures.
3. Ceramic systems should be documented with independent
clinical trials that demonstrate 95% survival at 5 years.
4. It takes about 10 years from product inception to publication
of a 5-year clinical trial.
5. he “laboratory survey” approach is a good one for obtaining
clinical short-term survival rates.
6. Monolithic zirconia and lithium disilicate materials have adequate
short-term survival rates.
7. Early results with layered zirconia showed unacceptable levels
of chip fractures of the veneering ceramic. hese problems may
be solved with new approaches for support of the veneer and
new iring cycles.
8. Fully stabilized zirconia crowns marketed for anterior applications
have minor improvements in translucency and signiicantly
reduced lexural strength.
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
http://www.lsro.org/presentation_files/amalgam/amalgam_
pressrelease.pdf .
47. Bellinger DC, T rachtenberg F , Barregard L, et al: Neuropsychological
and r enal efects of dental amalgam in children: a randomized
clinical trial. JAMA (15): – , .
48. DeRouen TA, Martin MD, Leroux BG, et al: Neurobehavioral
efects of dental amalgam in children: a randomized clinical trial.
JAMA (15): – , .
49. Soncini JA, Maserejian NN, T rachtenberg F , et al: he longevity of
amalgam versus compomer/composite restorations in posterior
primary and permanent teeth: indings From the New England
Children’s Amalgam T rial. J Am Dent Assoc (6): – , .
50. Maserejian NN, T rachtenberg FL, Assmann SF , et al: Dental amalgam
exposure and urinary mercury levels in children: the New England
Children’s Amalgam T rial. Environ Health Perspect (2): – ,
.
51. Bellinger DC, T rachtenberg F , Zhang A, et al: Dental amalgam and
psychosocial status: the New England Children’s Amalgam T rial. J
Dent Res 87(5): – , .
52. Donovan T, Simonsen RJ, Guertin G, et al: Retrospective clinical
evaluation of 1, cast gold restorations in service from 1 to 52
years. J Esthet Restor Dent 16(3): – , .
53. Wilson AD, Kent BE: A new translucent cement for dentistry. he
glass ionomer cement. Br Dent J (4): – , .
54. Bowen RL: Use of epoxy resins in restorative materials. J Dent Res
35(3): – , .
55. Buonocore MG: A simple method of increasing the adhesion of
acrylic illing materials to enamel surfaces. J Dent Res 34(6): – ,
.
56. Wieczkowski G, Jr, Joynt RB, Klockowski R, et al: Efects of
incremental versus bulk ill technique on resistance to cuspal fracture
of teeth restored with posterior composites. J Prosthet Dent
60(3): – , .
57. Roggendorf MJ, Kramer N, Appelt A, et al: Marginal quality of
lowable 4-mm base vs. conventionally layered resin composite. J
Dent 39(10): – , .
58. Flury S, Hayoz S, Peutzfeldt A, et al: Depth of cure of resin
composites: is the ISO method suitable for bulk ill materials?
Dent Mater 28(5): – , .
59. Han SH, Park SH: Comparison of Internal Adaptation in Class II
Bulk-ill Composite Restorations Using Micro-CT. Oper Dent .
60. Czasch P , Ilie N: In vitro comparison of mechanical properties and
degree of cure of bulk ill composites. Clin Oral Investig 17(1): –
, .
61. Alrahlah A, Silikas N, Watts DC: Post-cure depth of cure of bulk
ill dental resin-composites. Dent Mater 30(2): – , .
62. Ilie N, Bucuta S, Draenert M: Bulk-ill resin-based composites: an
in vitro assessment of their mechanical performance. Oper Dent
38(6): – , .
63. van Dijken JW, Pallesen U: A randomized controlled three year
evaluation of “bulk-illed” posterior resin restorations based on stress
decreasing resin technology. Dent Mater 30(9):e245–e251, .
64. Moorthy A, Hogg CH, Dowling AH, et al: Cuspal delection and
microleakage in premolar teeth restored with bulk-ill lowable
resin-based composite base materials. J Dent 40(6): – , .
65. Unterbrink GL: Muessner R: Inluence of light intensity on two
restorative systems. J Dent 23(3): – , .
66. Feilzer AJ, De Gee AJ, Davidson CL: Setting stress in composite
resin in relation to coniguration of the restoration. J Dent Res
66(11): – , .
67. Johnson GH, Lepe X, Zhang H, et al: Retention of metal-ceramic
crowns with contemporary dental cements. J Am Dent Assoc
(9): – , .
68. Burgess JO, Gallo JR: T reating root-surface caries. Dent Clin North
Am 46(2): – , vii-viii, .
69. Simonsen RJ, Calamia JR: Tensile bond strength of etched porcelain.
American Academy of Dental Research (AADR); Mar 1. Sage
.25. Eggleston DW, Nylander M: Correlation of dental amalgam with
mercury in brain tissue. J Prosthet Dent 58(6): – , .
26. Nylander M, Friberg L, Lind B: Mercury concentrations in the
human brain and kidneys in relation to exposure from dental
amalgam illings. Swed Dent J 11(5): – , .
27. Mackert JR, Jr: Dental amalgam and mercury. J Am Dent Assoc
(8):54–61, .
28. Vimy MJ, Lorscheider FL: Serial measurements of intra-oral air
mercury: estimation of daily dose from dental amalgam. J Dent Res
64(8): – , .
29. Mackert JR, Jr: Factors afecting estimation of dental amalgam
mercury exposure from measurements of mercury vapor levels in
intra-oral and expired air. J Dent Res 66(12): – , .
30. Berglund A: Estimation by a 24-hour study of the daily dose of
intra-oral mercury vapor inhaled after release from dental amalgam.
J Dent Res 69(10): – , .
31. Consumers Union: he mercury in your mouth. Consum Rep
56: – , .
32. Mackert JR, Jr, Berglund A: Mercury exposure from dental amalgam
illings: absorbed dose and the potential for adverse health efects.
Crit Rev Oral Biol Med 8(4): – , .
33. Molin M, Bergman B, Marklund SL, et al: Mercury, selenium, and
glutathione peroxidase before and after amalgam removal in man.
Acta Odontol Scand 48(3): – , .
34. Langan DC, Fan PL, Hoos AA: he use of mercury in dentistry:
a critical review of the recent literature. J Am Dent Assoc (6):
– , .
35. Brodsky JB, Cohen EN, Whitcher C, et al: Occupational exposure
to mercury in dentistry and pregnancy outcome. J Am Dent Assoc
(5): – , .
36. Eggleston DW: Efect of dental amalgam and nickel alloys on
T-lymphocytes: preliminary report. J Prosthet Dent 51(5): – ,
.
37. Mackert JR, Jr, Lefell MS, Wagner DA, et al: Lymphocyte levels
in subjects with and without amalgam restorations. J Am Dent Assoc
(3):49–53, .
38. Saxe SR, Snowdon DA, Wekstein MW, et al: Dental amalgam and
cognitive function in older women: indings from the Nun Study.
J Am Dent Assoc (11): – , .
39. Saxe SR, Wekstein MW, Kryscio RJ, et al: Alzheimer’s disease,
dental amalgam and mercury. J Am Dent Assoc (2): – ,
.
40. Clarkson TW, Magos L, Myers GJ: he toxicology of mercury–current
exposures and clinical manifestations. N Engl J Med (18):
– , .
41. Hujoel PP , Lydon-Rochelle M, Bollen AM, et al: Mercury exposure
from dental illing placement during pregnancy and low birth weight
risk. Am J Epidemiol (8): – , .
42. Lygre GB, Haug K, Skjaerven R, et al: Prenatal exposure to dental
amalgam and pregnancy outcome. Community Dent Oral Epidemiol
44(5): – , .
43. National Center for Toxicological Research, U.S. Food and Drug
Administration: White Paper: FDA Update/Review of Potential
Adverse Health Risks Associated with Exposure to Mercury in
Dental Amalgam, . [WWW page] . http://www.fda.gov/
MedicalDevices/ProductsandMedicalProcedures/DentalProducts/
DentalAmalgam/ucm171117.htm .
44. U.S. Public Health Service: Dental Amalgam: A Scientiic Review
and Recommended Public Health Service Strategy for Research,
Education and Regulation. Final Report of the Subcommittee on
Risk Management of the Committee to Coordinate Enviro nmental
Health and Related Programs, . [WWW page] . http://
www.health.gov/environment/amalgam1/ct.htm .
45. National Council Against Health Fraud: Position paper on amalgam
fillings, . [WWW page] . http://www.ncahf.org/pp/
amalgampp.pdf .
46. Life Sciences Research Organization, Inc.: Little evidence to link
mercury illings to human health problems, . [WWW page] .
CHAPTER 13 Dental Biomaterial
93. Kimoto K, Tanaka K, Toyoda M, et al: Indirect latex glove contamina -
tion and its inhibitor y efect on vinyl polysiloxane polymerization.
J Prosthet Dent 93(5): – , .
94. de Camargo LM, Chee WW, Donovan TE: Inhibition of polymeriza -
tion of polyvinyl siloxanes by medicaments used on gingival retraction
cords. J Prosthet Dent 70(2): – , .
95. Amaya SP , Delgado AJ, Donovan TE: Inhibition of polymerization
of contemporary polyvinyl siloxane impression materials by latex-free
products. Forum Fam Plan West Hemisph 2:12–19, .
96. Rudd KD, Morrow RM, Strunk RR: Accurate alginate impre ssions.
J Prosthet Dent 22(3): – , .
97. Rudd KD, Morrow RM, Bange AA: Accurate casts. J Prosthet Dent
21(5): – , .
98. Taggart WH: A new and accurate method of making gold inlays ,
Philadelphia, , SS White Dental Manufacturing Company.
99. Weinstein M, Katz S, Weinstein AB: Porcelain covered metalreinforced teeth. U.S. Patent No. 3, , , .
. Donovan TE, White LE: Evaluation of an improved centrifugal
casting machine. J Prosthet Dent 53(5): – , .
. Leempoel PJ, Van’t Hof MA, de Haan AF: Survival studies of dental
restorations: criteria, methods and analyses. J Oral Rehabil
16(4): – , .
. Reitemeier B, Hansel K, Kastner C, et al: A prospective 10-year
study of metal ceramic single crowns and ixed dental prosthesis
retainers in private practice settings. J Prosthet Dent (3): – ,
.
. McLean JW, Jeansonne EE, Bruggers H, et al: A new metal-ceramic
crown. J Prosthet Dent 40(3): – , .
. Donovan TE, Adishian S, Prince J: he platinum-bonded crown:
a simpliied technique. J Prosthet Dent 51(2): – , .
. Sozio RB, Riley EJ: he shrink-free ceramic crown. J Prosthet Dent
49(2): – , .
. Adair PJ, Grossman DG: he castable ceramic crown. Int J Periodontics
Restorative Dent 4(2):32–46, .
. Geller W, Kwiatkowski SJ: he Willi’s glas crown: a new solution
in the dark and shadowed zones of esthetic porcelain restorations.
Quintessence Dent T echnol 11(4): – , .
. Wohlwend A, Scharer P: he Empress technique: A new technique
for the fabrication of full ceramic crowns, inlays, and veneers.
Quintessence Int 16: – , .
. Magne P , Kim TH, Cascione D, et al: Immediate dentin sealing
improves bond strength of indirect restorations. J Prosthet Dent
94(6): – , .
. Donovan TE, Chee WW: Cervical margin design with contemporary
esthetic restorations. Dent Clin North Am 48(2):vi, - , .
. Donovan TE, Cho GC: Predictable aesthetics with metal-ceramic
and all-ceramic crowns: the critical importance of soft-tissue manage -
ment. Periodontol 27: – , .
. Scharer P: All-ceramic crown systems: clinical research versus
observation in supporting claims. Signature 1: .
. Fradeani M, Aquilano A: Clinical experience with Empress crowns.
Int J Prosthodont 10(3): – , .
. Zhao K, Pan Y, Guess PC, et al: Inluence of veneer application on
fracture behavior of lithium-disilicate-based ceramic crowns. Dent
Mater 28(6): – , .
. Zhao K, Wei YR, Pan Y, et al: Inluence of veneer and cyclic loading
on failure behavior of lithium disilicate glass-ceramic molar crowns.
Dent Mater 30(2): – , .
. Denry I, Kelly JR: State of the art of zirconia for dental a pplications.
Dent Mater 24(3): – , .
. Sulaiman TA, Delgado AJ, Donovan TE: Survival rate of lithium
disilicate restorations at 4 years: A retrospective study. J Prosthet
Dent (3): – , .
. Sulaiman TA, Abdulmajeed AA, Donovan TE, et al: Fracture rate
of monolithic zirconia restorations up to 5 years: A dental laboratory
survey. J Prosthet Dent (3): – , .70. Horn HR: Porcelain laminate veneers bonded to etched enamel.
Dent Clin N Am 27(4): – , .
71. Friedman MJ: A 15-year review of porcelain veneer failure–a clinician’s
observations. Compend Contin Educ Dent 19(6): – , ,
passim; quiz , .
72. Weiner RS, Weiner LK, Kugel G: Teaching the use of bases and
liners: a survey of North American dental schools. J Am Dent Assoc
(11): – , .
73. Hilton TJ: Cavity sealers, liners, and bases: current philosophies
and indications for use. Oper Dent 21(4): – , .
74. Samet N, Shohat M, Livny A, et al: A clinical evaluation of ixed
partial denture impressions. J Prosthet Dent 94(2): – ,
.
75. Cho GC, Chee WW: Distortion of disposable plastic stock trays
when used with putty vinyl polysiloxane impression materials. J
Prosthet Dent 92(4): – , .
76. Chee WW, Donovan TE: Fine detail reproduction of very high
viscosity poly(vinyl siloxane) impression materials. Int J Prosthodont
2(4): – , .
77. Federick DR, Caputo A: Comparing the accuracy of reversible
hydrocolloid and elastomeric impression materials. J Am Dent Assoc
(2): – , .
78. de Araujo PA, Jorgensen KD: Efect of material bulk and undercuts
on the accuracy of impression materials. J Prosthet Dent 54(6): –
, .
79. Klooster J, Logan GI, Tjan AH: Efects of strain rate on the behavior
of elastomeric impression. J Prosthet Dent 66(3): – , .
80. Donovan TE, Chee WW: A review of contemporary impression
materials and techniques. Dent Clin North Am 48(2):vi–vii, - ,
.
81. Kanehira M, Finger WJ, Endo T: Volatilization of components
from and water absorption of polyether impressions. J Dent
34(2): – , .
82. Chew CL, Chee WW, Donovan TE: he inluence of temperature
on the dimensional stability of poly (vinyl siloxane) impression
materials. Int J Prosthodont 6(6): – , .
83. Johnson GH, Lepe X, Aw TC: he efect of surface moisture on
detail reproduction of elastomeric impressions. J Prosthet Dent
90(4): – , .
84. Petrie CS, Walker MP , O’Mahony AM, et al: Dimensional accuracy
and surface detail reproduction of two hydrophilic vinyl polysiloxane
impression materials tested under dry, moist, and wet conditions.
J Prosthet Dent 90(4): – , .
85. Christensen GJ: Now is the time to change to custom impression
trays. J Am Dent Assoc (5): – , .
86. Bomberg TJ, Hatch RA, Hofman W, Jr: Impression material
thickness in stock and custom trays. J Prosthet Dent 54(2): – ,
.
87. Cho GC, Donovan TE, Chee WW, et al: Tensile bond strength of
polyvinyl siloxane impressions bonded to a custom tray as a function
of drying time: Part I. J Prosthet Dent 73(5): – , .
88. Williams PT, Jackson DG, Bergman W: An evaluation of the
time-dependent dimensional stability of eleven elastomeric impression
materials. J Prosthet Dent 52(1): – , .
89. Chee WW, Donovan TE: Polyvinyl siloxane impression materials:
a review of properties and techniques. J Prosthet Dent 68(5): – ,
.
90. Kahn RL, Donovan TE: A pilot study of polymerization inhibition
of poly (vinyl siloxane) materials by latex gloves. Int J Prosthodont
2(2): – , .
91. Kahn RL, Donovan TE, Chee WW: Interaction of gloves and rubber
dam with a poly(vinyl siloxane) impression material: a screening
test. Int J Prosthodont 2(4): – , .
92. Chee WW, Donovan TE, Kahn RL: Indirect inhibition of polymeriza -
tion of a polyvinyl siloxane impression material: a case report.
Quintessence Int 22(2): – , .
e114
Instruments and Equipment for
Tooth Preparation
TERENCE E. DONOVAN, LEE W. BOUSHELL, R. SCOTT EIDSONa
Removal and shaping of tooth structures are essential aspects
of restorative dentistry. Initially , this was a diicult process
accomplished entirely by the use of hand instr uments. he
introduction of rotary-powered cutting equipment was a major
advance in dentistry. Fr om the time of the irst hand-powered
dental drill to the present-day air-driven and electric handpiece,
tremendous strides have been made in the mechanical alteration
of tooth structure and in the ease with which teeth may be restored.
Modern high-speed equipment has eliminated the need for many
hand instruments for tooth preparation. Nevertheless, hand instru -
ments remain an essential part of the armamentarium for restorative
dentistry.
Hand Intrument for Cutting
he early hand-operated instruments—with their large, heavy
handles ( Fig. 14.1 ) and inferior (by present standards) metal alloys
in the blades—were cumbersome, awkwar d to use, and inefective
in many situations. As the commercial manufacture of hand
instruments increased and dentists began to express ideas about
tooth preparation, it became apparent that some scheme for
identifying these instruments was necessary. Among his many
contributions to modern dentistry, Black is credited with the irst
acceptable nomenclature for and classiication of hand instruments.1
His classiication system enabled dentists and manufacturers to
communicate mor e clearly and efectively about instrument design
and function.
Modern hand instruments, when properly used, produce
beneicial results for the operator and the patient. Some results
may only be satisfactorily achieved with hand instruments (i.e.,
not with rotary instruments). Preparation form dictates some
circumstances in which hand instruments are to be used, whereas
accessibility dictates others.
Terminology and C lassiication
Categories
Hand instruments used in the dental operatory may be categorized
as (1) cutting (excavators, chisels, and others) or (2) noncutting
(amalgam condensers, mirrors, explorers, probes).1 Excavators may
be subdivided further into ordinary hatchets, hoes, angle formers, and spoons. Chisels are primarily used for cutting enamel and
may be subdivided further into straight chisels, curved chisels,
bin-angle chisels, enamel hatchets, and gingival margin trimmers.
Other cutting instruments may be subdivided as knives, iles, scalers,
and carvers.
Design
Most hand instruments, regardless of use, are composed of three
parts: handle, shank, and blade. For many noncutting instruments,
the part corresponding to the blade is termed nib. he end of the
nib, or working surface, is known as face. he blade or nib is the
working end of the instrument and is connected to the handle by
the shank. Some instruments have a blade on both ends of the
handle and are known as double-ended instruments ( Fig. 14.2 ).
he blades are of many designs and sizes, depending on their
functions.
Handles are available in various sizes and shapes. Early
hand instruments had handles of quite large diameter and were
grasped in the palm of the hand. A large, heavy handle is not
always conducive to delicate manipulation. In North America,
most instrument handles are small in diameter (5.5 mm) and
light. hey are commonly eight-sided and knurled to facilitate
control. In Europe, the handles are often larger in diameter and
tapered.
Shanks, which serve to connect the handles to the w orking
ends of the instruments, are normally smooth, round, and tapered.
hey often have one or more bends to overcome the tendency of
the instrument to twist while in use when force is applied.
Enamel and dentin ar e diicult substances to cut and require
the generation of substantial forces at the tip of the instrument.
herefore, cutting hand instruments must be balanced and sharp.
Balance allows for the concentration of force onto the blade
without causing rotation of the instrument in the operator’s grasp.
Sharpness concentrates the force onto a small area of the edge,
producing high stress and resultant ability to remove/modify tooth
structure.
Balance is accomplished by designing the angles of the shank
so that the cutting edge of the blade lies within the projected
diameter of the handle and nearly coincides with the projected
long axis of the handle ( Fig. 14.3 ; see also Fig. 14.2 ). For optimal
antirotational design, the blade edge must not be positioned away
from the axis by more than 1 to 2 mm. All dental instruments
and equipment need to satisfy this principle of balance.aDr Eidson was an inactive author in this edition.
e2 CHAPTER 14 Intrument and Equipment for Tooth Preparation
Formulas
Cutting instruments have formulas describing the dimensions and
angles of the working end. hese are placed on the handle using
a code of three or four numbers separated by dashes or spaces
(e.g., 10–85–8–14) ( Fig. 14.4 ; see also Fig. 14.3 ). he irst number
indicates the width of the blade or primary cutting edge in tenths
of a millimeter (0.1 mm) (e.g., 10 = 1 mm). he second number
of a four-number code indicates the primary cutting edge angle,
measured from a line parallel to the long axis of the instrument
handle in clockwise centigrade. he centigrade angle is expressed
as a percent of degrees (e.g., 85 = 85% × degrees =
degrees). he instrument is positioned so that this number always
exceeds 50. If the edge is locally perpendicular to the blade, this
number is normally omitted, resulting in a three-nu mber code
(see Fig. 14.4 ). he third number (second number of a three-number
code) indicates the blade length in millimeters (e.g., 8 = 8 mm).
he fourth number (third number of a three-number code) indicates
the blade angle, relative to the long axis of the handle in clockwise
centigrade (e.g., 14 = 50.4 degrees). he instrument is positioned
such that this number is always 50 or less. he most commonly
used hand instruments, including those speciied in this text, are
shown in Figs. 14.5, 14.6, 14.7, 14.8, and 14.9 .
In some instances, an additional number on the handle is the
manufacturer’s identiication number (see Fig. 14.4 ). Identiication
numbers are included to assist speciic manufacturers in cataloging
and should not be confused with formula numbers.
Bevels
Most hand-cutting instruments have a single bevel on the end of
the blade that forms the primary cutting edge . T wo additional bevels Shank Angles
he functional orientation and length of the blade determine
the number of angles in the shank necessary to balance the
instrument. Black classified instruments on the basis of the
number of shank angles as mon-angle (one), bin-angle (two),
or triple-angle (three).2 Instruments with small, short blades
may be easily designed in mon-angle form while conining the
cutting edge within the limits required for balance and control.
Instruments with longer blades or more complex orientations may
require two or three angles in the shank to bring the cutting
edge close to the long axis of the handle. Such shanks are termed
contra-angled .
Names
Black classiied all of the instruments by name.2 In addition, for
hand-cutting instruments, he developed a numeric formula to
characterize the dimensions and angles of the working end (see
the next section for details of the formula). Black’s classiication
system by instrument name categorized instruments by (1)
function (e.g., scaler, excavator), (2) manner of use (e.g., hand
condenser), (3) design of the working end (e.g., spoon excava -
tor, sickle scaler), or (4) shape of the shank (e.g., mon-angle,
bin-angle, contra-angle).2 hese names were combined to form
the complete description of the instrument (e.g., bin-angle spoon
excavator).
• Fig. 14.1 Designs of some early hand instruments. These instruments
were individually handmade, variable in design, and cumbersome to use.
Because of the nature of the handles, effective sterilization was a problem.
ab cb a
• Fig. 14.2 Double-ended instrument illustrating three component parts
of hand instruments: blade (A), shank (B), and handle (C). (Modiied from
Boyd LRB: Dental instruments: a pocket guide , ed 4, St. Louis, ,
Saunders.)
34
1
2
Long axis
of instrument10-85-8-14
• Fig. 14.3 Instrument shank and blade design (with primary cutting
edge positioned close to handle axis to aid in limiting unwanted instrument
rotation). The complete instrument formula (four numbers) is expressed
as the blade width (1) in 0.1-mm increments, cutting edge angle (2) in
centigrades, blade length (3) in millimeters, and blade angle (4) in
centigrades.
CHAPTER 14 Intrument and Equipment for Tooth Preparation e3
• Fig. 14.4 Examples of instruments with three-number and four-num -
ber instrument formulas.
Secondary cutting edge
Secondary cutting edgePrimary
cutting
edge
• Fig. 14.5 Chisel blade design showing primary and secondary cutting
edges.
Inside surface
Inside surfaceA
B
C
• Fig. 14.6 Examples of hand instruments called excavators. A, Bibeveled ordinary hatchet. B, Hoe with distal bevel. C, Angle former with
distal bevel.
A
B
C
• Fig. 14.7 Examples of hand instruments called spoon excavators. A,
Bin-angle spoon. B, Triple-angle spoon. C, Spoon.
A
B
C
• Fig. 14.8 Examples of hand instruments called chisels. A, Enamel
hatchet. B, Gingival margin trimmer. C, Gingival margin trimmer.
Outside surface
Outside surfaceMesialA
B
C
• Fig. 14.9 Examples of hand instruments called chisels. A, Straight.
B, Wedelstaedt with mesial bevel. C, Bin-angle with mesial bevel.
e4 CHAPTER 14 Intrument and Equipment for Tooth Preparation
Excavators
he four subdivisions of excavators are (1) ordinary hatchets, (2)
hoes, (3) angle formers, and (4) spoons. An ordinary hatchet
excavator has the cutting edge of the blade directed in the same
plane as that of the long axis of the handle and is bi-beveled (see
Fig. 14.6A ). hese instruments are used primarily on anterior teeth
for preparing retentive areas and sharpening internal line angles,
particularly in preparation for direct gold restorations.
he hoe excavator has the primary cutting edge of the blade
perpendicular to the axis of the handle (see Fig. 14.6B ). his type
of instrument is used for planing tooth preparation walls and for
forming line angles. It is commonly used in Class III and V
preparations so as to ensure removal of any unsupported enamel
prior to restoration with amalgam and composite and is especially
useful in preparations to be restored with direct gold. Some sets
of cutting instruments contain hoes with contra-angled shanks
and long, heavy blades. hese are intended for use on the prepared
enamel walls of posterior teeth.
A special type of excavator is the angle former (see Fig. 14.6C ).
It is used primarily for sharpening line angles and creating retentive
features in dentin in preparation for gold restorations. It also may
be used when placing a bevel on enamel margins. he angle former
is mon-angled and has the primary cutting edge at an angle (other
than 90 degrees) to the blade. It may be described as a combination
of a chisel and a gingival margin trimmer and is available in pairs
(right and left).
Spoon excavators (see Fig. 14.7 ) are used for removing soft
carious tissue and carving amalgam or direct wax patterns. he
shanks may be bin-angled or triple-angled to facilitate access to
various anatomical areas.
Chisels
Chisels are intended primarily for cutting enamel and may be
grouped as (1) straight, slightly curved, or bin-angle; (2) enamel
hatchets; and (3) gingival margin trimmers. he straight chisel has
a straight shank and blade, with the bevel on only one side. Its
primary cutting edge is perpendicular to the axis of the handle. It
is similar in design to a carpenter’s wood chisel (see Fig. 14.9A ).
he shank and blade of the chisel also may be slightly curved
(Wedelstaedt design) (see Fig. 14.9B ) or may be bin-angled (see
Fig. 14.9C ). he force used with chisels is essentially a straight
thrust or a pushing motion. A right or left type is not needed
in a straight chisel because a -degree turn of the instrument
allows for its use on either side of the preparation. he bin-angle
and Wedelstaedt chisels have the primary cutting edges in a plane
perpendicular to the axis of the handle and may have either a distal
bevel or a mesial (reverse) bevel. he blade with a distal bevel is
designed to plane a wall that faces the blade’s ins ide surface (see Fig.
14.6B and C ). he blade with a mesial bevel is designed to plane
a wall that faces the blade’s outside surface (see Fig. 14.9B and C ).
he enamel hatchet is a chisel similar in design to the ordinary
hatchet except that the blade is larger, heavier, and beveled on
only one side (see Fig. 14.8A ). It has its cutting edges in a plane
that is parallel with the axis of the handle. It is used for cutting
enamel and comes as right or left types for use on opposite sides
of the preparation.
he gingival margin trimmer is designed to eliminate unsup -
ported enamel on gingival walls of proximal preparations. It is
similar in design to the enamel hatchet except the blade is curved
and the primary cutting edge is at an angle (other than perpen -
dicular) to the axis of the blade (see Fig. 14.8B and C ). It is made
as right and left types. he gingival margin trimmer may be designed form secondary cutting edges and extend from the primary edge for
the length of the blade (see Fig. 14.5 ). Bi-beveled instruments
such as ordinary hatchets have two bevels that form the cutting
edge (see Fig. 14.6A ).
Certain single-beveled instruments, such as spoon excavators
(see Fig. 14.7 ) and gingival margin trimmers (see Fig. 14.8B and
C), are used with a scraping or lateral cutting motion. Enamel
hatchets (see Fig. 14.8A ) may be used with a planing, direct cutting
motion and lateral cutting motion. Hatches have the primary
cutting edge aligned parallel with the long axis of the handle.
Single-beveled designs require that the instruments be made
in pairs, with the bevels on opposite sides of the blade. hese
instruments are designated as right beveled or left beveled and
are indicated by appending the letter R or L to the instrument
formula. To determine whether the instrument has a right or
left bevel, the primary cutting edge is held down and pointing
away, and if the bevel appears on the right side of the blade, it
is the right instrument of the pair. his instrument, when used
in a scraping motion, is moved from right to left. he opposite
holds true for the left instrument of the pair. One instrument
is suited for work on one side of the preparation and the other
is suited for the opposite side of the preparation. he primary
cutting edge of the hatchet may be useful for planing the facial
and lingual walls of proximal preparations by using a pushing
motion and the gingival wall by using a lateral motion. In addition,
the secondary cutting edge of the enamel hatchet may be useful
for planing the occlusal and gingival walls of posterior Class V
preparations.
Most instruments are available with blades and shanks o n both
ends of the handle. Such instruments are termed double ended . In
many cases, the right instrument of the pair is on one end of the
handle and the left instrument is on the other end. Occasionally
similar blades of diferent widths are placed on a single double-ended
instrument. If one observes the inside of the blade curvature (or
the inside of the angle at the junction of the blade and shank)
and the primary bevel is not visible, the instrument has a distal
bevel (see Fig. 14.6 ). Conversely, if the primary bevel is seen (from
the same viewpoint), the instrument has a mesial (or “reverse”)
bevel (see Fig. 14.9 ).
Instruments having the primary cutting edge perpendicular to
the axis of the handle are generally termed chisels (see Fig. 14.9 ).
Examples include bin-angle chisels (see Fig. 14.9C ), instruments
with a slight blade curvature (Wedelstaedt chisels) (see Fig. 14.9B ),
and hoes (see Fig. 14.6B ), which are single beveled and not des -
ignated as right or left but as having a mesial bevel or a distal
bevel. he primary cutting edge of chisels may be useful in planing
the occlusal and gingival walls of posterior Class V preparations
by using a pushing and/or pulling motion. he primary cutting
edge of the hoe is particularly useful for planing the occlusal and
gingival walls of Class III preparations. he secondary cutting edge
of the hoe is useful for planing the occlusal and gingival walls of
Class V preparations as well as walls oriented in an axial direction.
Note that hoes may also serve as excavators (see discussion later
in text).
Application
Cutting instruments are used to cut enamel/dentin and restorative
materials. Excavators are used for removal of carious tissue, r einement of the internal aspects of the preparation, and establishment
of correct anatomical restoration form. Chisels are used primarily
for cutting enamel.
CHAPTER 14 Intrument and Equipment for Tooth Preparation e5
applied through the blade to the area r equiring modiication. he
instrument should cross over the proximal phalange of the index
inger and should not cross over at the junction area of the thumb
and index inger as in the conventional pen grasp (contrast Fig.
14.11A with B). A balanced instrument design allows the application
of suitable force without the instrument tending to rotate in the
ingers (see Fig. 14.3 ).
Inverted Pen Grap
he inger positions of the inverted pen grasp are the same as for
the modiied pen grasp. he hand is rotated, however, so that the
palm faces more toward the operator ( Fig. 14.12 ). his grasp is
used mostly for tooth preparations employing the lingual approach
on anterior teeth.
he modiied pen and inverted pen grasps are the primary
grasps used in the preparation and direct restoration of teeth.
Palm-and-Thumb Grap
he palm-and-thumb grasp is similar to that used for holding a
knife while paring an apple. he handle is placed in the palm of to aford access to mesial or distal gingival walls. When the second
number in the instrument formula (found on the handle) is 90
to , the pair is used on the distal gingival preparation wall.
When the number is 75 to 85, the pair is used to remove unsup -
ported enamel on the mesial gingival wall of the pr eparation. he
90 and 85 pairs are for preparations for direct restorations and are
used to align the gingival wall so that it is perpendicular with the
external surface of the tooth structure (to ensure supported enamel).
Indirect gold restorations require the placement of a distinct bevel
associated with the gingival walls, and gingival margin trimmers
with -degree and 75-degree angle pairs ar e designed speciically
for this purpose. Among other uses for these instruments is the
beveling (“blunting” or “rounding”) of the axiopulpal line angle
of two-surface preparations so as to limit areas of stress concentration
in subsequently placed restorations.
Other Cutting Intrument
Other hand-cutting instruments such as the knife, i le, and discoidcleoid instrument are used for trimming restorative material rather
than for cutting tooth structure. Knives, known as inishing knives ,
amalgam knives , or gold knives , are designed with a thin, knifelike
blade that is made in various sizes and shapes ( Fig. 14.10A and
B). Knives are used for trimming excess restorative material on
the gingival, facial, or lingual margins of a proximal restoration
or trimming and contouring the surface of a Class V restoration.
Sharp secondary edges on the heel aspect of the blade are useful
in a scrape–pull mode.
Files (see Fig. 14.10C ) also may be used to trim excess restorative
material and are particularly useful at gingival margins. he blades
of the ile are extremely thin, and the teeth of the instrument on
the cutting surfaces are short and designed to make the ile a push/
pull instrument. Files are manufactured in various shapes and
angles to enhance access to various restoration surfaces.
he discoid-cleoid (see Fig. 14.10D and E ) instrument is used
principally for carving occlusal anatomy in unset amalgam restora -
tions. he blades are slightly curved and the cutting edges are
either circular or clawlike. he circular edge is known as a discoid ,
whereas the clawlike blade is termed cleoid . It also may be used
to trim or burnish inlay–onlay margins. he working ends of this
instrument are usually larger than the discoid end of an excavator.
Hand Intrument Technique
Four grasps are used with hand instruments: (1) modiied pen,
(2) inverted pen, (3) palm-and-thumb, and (4) modiied palmand-thumb. he conventional pen grasp is not an acceptable
instrument grasp ( Fig. 14.11A ).
Modiied Pen Grasp
he grasp that permits the greatest control of the instrument,
while simultaneously maintaining ergonomic positioning of the
wrist and elbow, is the modiied pen grasp (see Fig. 14.11B ). As
the name implies, it is similar but not identical to that used in
holding a pen. he pads of the thumb and of the index and middle
ingers contact the instrument, while the tip of the ring inger (or
tips of the ring and little ingers) is placed on a nearby tooth
surface of the same arch as a rest. he palm of the hand generally
is facing away from the operator. he pad of the middle inger is
placed near the topside of the instrument; by this inger working
with the wrist and the forearm, cutting or cleaving pressure is
E
A
C
DBSecondary
edges
Primary
edge
• Fig. 14.10 Examples of other hand instruments for cutting. A, Finish -
ing knife. B, Alter native inishing knife design emphasizing secondary
cutting edges. C, Dental ile. D, Cleoid blade. E, Discoid blade carving
amalgam.
e6 CHAPTER 14 Intrument and Equipment for Tooth Preparation
Modiied Palm-and-Thumb Grasp
he modiied palm-and-thumb grasp may be used when it is feasible
to rest the thumb on the tooth being prepared or the adjacent
tooth ( Fig. 14.14 ). he handle of the instrument is held by all
four ingers, whose pads press the handle against the distal area
of the palm and the pad and irst joint of the thumb. Grasping
the handle under the irst joints of the ring inger and little inger
provides stabilization and enables optimal control of the instrument.
he modiied palm-and-thumb grasp usually is employed in the
area of the maxillary arch and is best adopted when the dentist is
operating from a rear-chair position.
Rests
A proper instrument grasp must include a irm rest to steady the
hand during operating procedures. When the modiied pen and
inverted pen grasps are used, rests are established by placing the
ring inger (or both ring and little ingers) on a tooth (or teeth)
of the same arch and as close to the operating site as possible (see
Fig. 14.12 ). he closer the rest areas are to the operating area, the
• Fig. 14.12 Inverted pen grasp. Palm faces more toward operator. The
rest is similar to that shown for modiied pen grasp (see Fig. 14.11B ).
(Courtesy Dr. Mohammad Atieh.)
• Fig. 14.13 Palm-and-thumb grasp. This grasp has limited use, such
as preparing incisal retention in a Class III preparation on a maxillary
incisor. The rest is tip of thumb on tooth in same arch. (Courtesy Dr.
Mohammad Atieh.)
• Fig. 14.14 Modiied palm-and-thumb grasp. This modiication allows
greater ease of instrument movement and greater instrument control
during pull stroke compared with palm-and-thumb grasp. The rest is tip
of thumb on tooth being prepared or adjacent tooth. Note how the instru -
ment is braced against pad and end joint of thumb. (Courtesy Dr. Moham -
mad Atieh.)
A
B
• Fig. 14.11 Pen grasps. A, Conventional pen grasp. Side of middle
inger is on writing instrument. B, Modiied pen grasp. Correct position of
middle inger is near the “topside” of the instrument for good control and
cutting pressure. The rest is tip (or tips) of ring inger (or ring and little
ingers) on tooth (or teeth) of same arch. (Courtesy Dr. Mohammad Atieh.)
the hand and grasped by all the ingers, while the thumb is free
of the instrument, and the rest is provided by supporting the tip
of the thumb on a nearby tooth of the same arch or on a irm,
stable structure. For suitable control, this grasp requires careful
use during cutting. An example of an appropriate use is holding
a handpiece for cutting incisal retention for a Clas s III preparation
on a maxillary incisor ( Fig. 14.13 ).
CHAPTER 14 Intrument and Equipment for Tooth Preparation e7
advantage of electric handpieces is that they ofer a single motor
with multiple attachments that may be used for diferent cutting
applications. Attachments include straight type for 0. -inchdiameter instruments and contra-angle type for 0.0925and
0. -inch-diameter instruments (see subsequent section under
Shank design). he torque and concentricity of the air-driven
turbines degrade in a relatively short period, requiring replacement.
More vibration and bur chatter are associated with air-driven
handpieces. Some disadvantages of electric handpieces are the initial
setup expense and weight and balance issues for some clinicians.
Rotary Speed Ranges for D iferent Cutting Applications
he rotational speed of an instrument is reported in rotations per
minute (rpm). hree speed ranges are generally recognized: low
or slow speeds ( <12, rpm), medium or intermediate speeds
(12, – , rpm), and high or ultrahigh speeds
(> , rpm). he terms low speed , medium speed , and high
speed are used preferentially in this textbook. Most useful instruments
are rotated at either low speed or high speed. Electric handpiece
motors operate up to 40, rpm. his speed is signiicantly less
than the , rpm generated by air-driven handpieces. However,
the electric handpiece motor has attachments with multipliers t hat
increase rotation in ratios of 5 to 1 or 4 to 1, which enable rotational
speeds efectively in the same range as air-driv en handpieces. he
diference in the amount of cutting power is substantial in electric
handpieces. Air-driven handpieces produce up to 20 watts of cutt ing
power, whereas electric handpieces are able to produce up to 60
watts of cutting power . he extra cutting power in electric handpieces
allows the constant torque necessary to cut various restorative
materials and tooth structure regardless of the load. Unlike in the
air-driven handpiece, the rotary instrument in the electric handpiece
does not slow or stop (i.e., stall) as the load is increased.
A crucial factor is the surface speed of the instrument—that
is, the velocity at which the edges of the cutting instrument pass
across the surface being cut. his speed is proportional to the
rotational speed and the diameter of the instrument, with large
instruments having higher surface speeds at any given rate of
rotation. Although intact tooth structure may be removed by an
instrument rotating at low speeds, it is a traumatic experience for
the patient and the dentist. Lo w-speed cutting is inefective, is
time consuming, and requires a relatively heavy force application;
this results in heat production at the operating site and produces
vibrations of low frequency and high amplitude. Heat and vibration
are the main sources of patient discomfort.3 At low speeds, burs
have a tendency to roll out of the tooth preparation and may
damage the cavosurface margin or tooth surface. In addition, slow
speed operation of carbide burs reduces bur life as their brittle
blades are easily broken at low rpm.
Many of these disadvantages of low-speed operation do not
apply when the objective is some procedure other than cutting
tooth structur e. he low-speed range is used for cleaning teeth,
caries excav ation, and inishing and polishing procedures. At low
speeds, tactile sensation is better, and generally overheating of cut
surfaces is less likely. he availability of a low-speed option provides
a valuable adjunct for many dental procedures.
At high rpm, the sur face speed needed for eicient cutting may
be attained with smaller and more versatile cutting instruments.
his speed is used for tooth preparation and removing old restora -
tions. Other high rpm advantages include (1) diamond and carbide
cutting instruments remove tooth structure faster and with less
pressure, vibration, and heat generation; (2) the types of rotary
cutting instruments needed is reduced because smaller sizes are more reliable they are. When the palm-and-thumb grasps are used,
rests are created by placing the tip of the thumb on the tooth
being operated on, on an adjacent tooth, or on a convenient area
of the same arch (see Figs. 14.13 and 14.14 ). In some instances,
it is impossible to establish a rest on tooth structure, and soft tissue
must be used. Neither soft tissue rests nor distant hard tissue rests
aford reliable control, and they reduce the force or power that
may be used safely. Occasionally, it is impossible to establish normal
inger rests with the hand holding the instrument. Under these
circumstances, instrument control may be gained using the foreinger
of the opposite hand on the shank of the instrument or using an
indirect rest (i.e., the operating hand rests on the opposite hand,
which rests on a stable oral structure).
Guard
Guards are hand instruments or other items (e.g., cotton rolls,
dry angles, interproximal wedges) used to protect soft tissue from
contact with sharp cutting or abrasive instruments (see Fig. 14.10E ,
and Online Chapter 15 ).
Contemporary Powered Cutting Equipment
Rotary-Powered Cutting Equipment
Powered rotary cutting instruments, known as dental handpieces ,
are the most commonly used instruments in contemporary dentistry.
Dentistry, as practiced today, would not be possible without the
use of powered cutting instruments. Current dental handpieces
are no w highly eicient and sophisticated instruments that have
evolved from their beginnings in the early 1950s. Changes in
ergonomic design, weight, and balance have made handpieces more
comfortable to use for longer periods. Improved design helps to
minimize operator arm and shoulder fatigue. Incorporation of
durable iberoptics has greatly improved operator visibility. Develop -
ment of light emitting diode (LED) technology has improved the
quality, intensity, and longevity of handpiece light sources. Modern
handpieces are able to withstand the sterilization requirements of
dental practice. New bearing materials and cartridges have been
developed to enhance their service longevity and to contribute to
noise level reduction. Handpiece chuck mechanisms have evolved
such that pushbuttons, instead of chuck latches or chuck tools,
are used to release and change rotary instruments.
T wo technologies are used today for dental handpieces, and
each has unique characteristics and beneits. he air-driven handpiece
was, for many years, the mainstay for cutting teeth in dentistry.
he electric motor–driven handpiece is now becoming increasingly
popular for use in all cutting applications in dentistry. he technolo -
gies for both air-driven and electric systems continue to evolve,
and both systems remain very popular for everyday use in operative
dentistry procedures.
Air-driven and electric systems have both advantages and dis -
advantages. Air-driven systems are less costly on initial startup and
are less expensive with regard to replacing turbines compared with
electric handpieces. Air-driven handpieces weigh less than electric
handpieces, and this quality may be the most signiicant adjustment
for clinicians who make the change from air-driven handpieces to
electric handpieces. he size of the head of the air-driven handpiece
is usually smaller. he advantages of electric handpieces are that
they (1) are quieter than air-driven handpieces, (2) cut with high
torque (i.e., with ver y little stalling), and (3) ofer absolute control
over rotary instrument revolutions per minute (rpm). Another
e8 CHAPTER 14 Intrument and Equipment for Tooth Preparation
determine the cutting progress within the tooth preparation.
Additionally the abrasive dust interfered with visibility of the cutting
site and tended to mechanically etch the surface of th e dental
mirror. Prev enting the patient or oice personnel from inhaling
abrasive dust posed an additional diiculty.
Contemporary air abrasion equipment is helpful for stain
remov al, debriding pits and issures before sealing, and microme -
chanical roughening of surfaces to be bonded (enamel, cast-metal
alloys, or porcelain) ( Fig. 14.15 ).7 This approach works well
when organic material is being removed and when only a limited
amount of enamel or dentin is involved. Although promoted for
caries excavation, air abrasion is not able to produce well-deined
preparation wall and margin details that are possible with con -
ventional rotary cutting techniques. Generally, the inest stream
of abrading par ticles still generates an efective cutting width
that is far greater than the width of luted cement margins or
the errors tolerable in most caries excavations. Air abrasion does
allow the roughening of surfaces to be bonded, luted, or repaired
and this may be accomplished intraorally or extraorally. Roughen -
ing by air abrasion by itself is not a substitute for acid-etching
techniques. Roughening improves bonding. Acid etching alone or
after roughening, however, always produces a better bond than air
abrasion alone.8
Air abrasion techniques rely on the transfer of kinetic energy
from a stream of powder particles on the surface of tooth structure
or a restoration to produce a fractured surface layer, resulting
in roughness for bonding or disr uption for cutting. he energy
transfer event is afected by many things, including powder low
rate, particle size, pressure, angulation, surface composition, and
clearance angle variables ( Fig. 14.16 ). he most common error
made by operators of air abrasion units is holding the tip at the
wrong distance from the surface for the desired action. Greater
distances signiicantly reduce the energy of the stream.9 Short
distances may produce unwanted cutting actions, such as when
only surface stain removal is being attempted. he potential for
unwanted cutting is a signiicant problem when employing an
air-polishing device (e.g., Prophy Jet) to clean the surfaces of dentin
and enamel.10-13 When used properly however, units designed for
air polishing tooth sur faces may be quite efective and eicient
(Fig. 14.17 ).more universal in application; (3) the operator has better control
and greater ease of operation; (4) instruments last longer; (5) patients
are generally less apprehensive because annoying vibrations and
operating time are decreased; and (6) increased operation eiciency
results in the opportunity to treat several teeth in the same arch
at the same appointment.
Variable control of rpm makes the handpiece more versatile.
his feature allows the operator to easily obtain the optimal speed
for the size and type of rotating instrument at any stage of a speci ic
operation. Air-driven handpiece rpm may be controlled, but precise
control is mor e diicult since the operator’s pressure on the footoperated rheostat controls the speed of the handpiece. All electric
handpieces have an electronic control module that, in concert with
an adjustable rheostat, allow precise control of maximum rpm for
speciic procedural situations.
For infection control, all dental handpieces are now sterilized.
Continual sterilization will produce degradation in clinical per -
formance (longevity, power, turbine speed, iberoptic transmission,
eccentricity, noise, chuck performance, water spray pattern).4 Most
handpieces require lubrication after sterilization, and excess oil
may be present during the startup operation and increase risk of
contamination of the preparation. Sev eral companies ofer automated
equipment to precisely clean and lubricate the hand piece after
each use. It is recommended to run the handpiece for a few seconds
before initiating dental procedures in which the deposition of oil
spray onto tooth structure might interfere with processes such as
dental adhesion.
Laer Equipment
Lasers are devices that produce beams of coherent and veryhigh-intensity light. Numerous current and potential uses of
lasers in dentistry have been ident iied that involve the treatment
of soft tissues and the modiication of hard tooth structures.5,6
he word laser is an acronym for “light ampliication by stimu -
lated emission of radiation.” A crystal or gas is excited to emit
photons of a characteristic wavelength that are ampliied and
iltered to make a coherent light beam. he efects of the laser
depend on the power of the beam and the extent to which the
beam is absorbed.
Current laser units are relatively expensive compared with
air-driven and electric motor cutting instruments. hese units are
used primarily for either soft tissue applications and have few
applications for hard tissue sur face modiication. hey may be
used for tooth preparations; however, generation of a deined margin
or tooth preparation surface is not possible. Lasers ar e an ineicient
means by which to remove large amounts of enamel or dentin
and have the potential to generate unwanted amounts of heat.
hey are not able to remove existing amalgam or ceramic dental
restorations. No single laser type is suitable for all potential laser
applications. Lasers may never replace the high-speed dental
handpiece. Currently, available laser instruments have proven to
be relativ ely ineicient and impractical for tooth preparation and
have not achieved widespread popularity.
Other Equipment
Alternative methods of cutting enamel and dentin have been assessed
periodically. In the mid-1950s, air-abrasive cutting was tested, but
several clinical problems precluded general acceptance. Most
importantly, no tactile sense was associated with air-abrasive cutting
of tooth structur e. his made it diicult for the operator to
• Fig. 14.15 Example of contemporary air abrasion unit for removal of
supericial enamel defects or stains, debriding pits and issures for sealant
application, or roughening surfaces to be bonded or luted. (Courtesy
Danville Materials, Inc., San Ramon, CA.)
CHAPTER 14 Intrument and Equipment for Tooth Preparation e9
parts: (1) shank, (2) neck, and (3) head ( Fig. 14.18 ). Each has its
own function, inluencing its design and the materials used for its
constr uction. he term shank has diferent meanings as applied
to rotary instruments and to hand instruments.
Shank Design
he shank is the par t that its into the handpiece, accepts the
rotary motion from the handpiece, and provides a bearing surface
to control the alignment and concentricity of the instrument.
he shank design and dimensions vary with the handpiece for
which it is intended. he American Dental Association (ADA)
Speciication No. 23 for dental excavating burs includes ive classes
of instrument shanks.14 hree of these ( Fig. 14.19 )—the straight
handpiece shank, the right angle latch handpiece shank, and the
friction-grip handpiece shank—are commonly encountered. he
shank portion of the straight handpiece instrument is a simple
cylinder that is held in the handpiece by a metal chuck. Straight
handpiece instruments are now rarely used for preparing teeth
but are used for oral surgery extraction procedures. hey are com -
monly used however for external inishing and polishing indirect
restorations.
he more complicated shape of the right angle latch-type shank
relects the diferent mechanisms by which these instruments are
held in the handpiece. heir shorter overall length substantially
improves access to posterior regions of the mouth compared with
straight handpiece instruments. Handpieces that use right angle
latch-type burs normally have a metal bur tube within which the
instruments it as closely as possible, while still permitting easy
interchange. he posterior portion of the shank is lattened on
one side so that the end of the instrument its into a D-shaped
socket at the bottom of the bur tube. Engagement in this area is
required for bur rotation to occur. Latch-type instruments are not
retained in the handpiece by a chuck, but by a retaining latch that
slides into the groove found at the shank end of the instrument.
his type of instrument is used predominantly at low-speed and
medium-speed ranges for caries excavation and inishing procedures.
At these speeds, the small amount of potential wobble inherent
in the clearance between the rotary instrument and the handpiece
bur tube is controlled by the lateral pressure exerted during cutting
procedures. At higher speeds, the latch-type shank/bur tube design
is inadequate to provide required alignment and concentricity for Rotary Cutting Intrument
he individual instruments intended for use with dental handpieces
are manufactured in hundreds of sizes, shapes, and types. his
variation is in part a result of the need for specialized designs for
particular clinical applications or to it particular handpieces, but
much of the variation also results from individual preferences on
the part of dentists. Since the introduction of hig h-speed techniques
in clinical practice, a rapid evolution of technique and an accom -
panying proliferation of new instrument designs have occurred.
Nevertheless, the number of instruments essential for use with
any one type of handpiece is comparatively small, especially in the
case of high-speed handpieces.
Common Deign Characteritic
Despite the great variation among rotary cutting instruments, they
share certain design features. Each instrument consists of three
Connection
to devic e
• AIR PRESSURE (20-55 psi)
• WATER FLOW RATE
• POWDER FLOW RATE
• PARTICLE SIZE (25- /H9262m)
• PARTICLE TYPE and HARDNES S
• TIP DIAMETE R
• TIP GEOMETRY (e.g., round)
• ANGLE OF ATTACK (60-90 to surface )
• MOTION (e.g., 12 mm/s
scanning pattern)
• DURATION (e.g., 2-20 seconds)• SUBSTRATE /H11005 Enamel,
dentin, cementum, amalgam,
composite, casting alloy,
or ceramic• DISTANCE /H11005 3-5 mm
• Fig. 14.16 Schematic representation of range of variables associated
with any type of air abrasion equipment. The cleaning or cutting action is
a function of kinetic energy imparted to the actual surface, which is
affected by variables concerning the particle size, air pressure, angulation
with surface, type of substrate, and method of clearance. (Courtesy B.
Kunselman [Master’s thesis, ], School of Dentistry, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.)
• Fig. 14.17 Example of air abrasion equipment used for tooth cleaning
showing the Prophy tip and handle attached by a lexible cord to the
control unit with the reservoir of powder and source of water (left). (Cour -
tesy DENTSPLY International, York, PA.)
Shank Neck Head
• Fig. 14.18 Normal designation of three parts of rotary cutting
instruments.
1.
0.
0. 0. . . A
B
C
• Fig. 14.19 Characteristics and typical dimensions (in inches) of three
common instrument shank designs for straight handpiece (A), right angle
latch-type handpiece (B), and friction-grip contra-angle type handpiece
(C).
e10 CHAPTER 14 Intrument and Equipment for Tooth Preparation
Early burs were made of steel. Steel burs perform well, cutting
human dentin at low speeds, but dull rapidly at higher speeds or
when cutting enamel. When burs are dulled, the r educed efective -
ness in cutting creates increased heat and vibration.
Carbide burs, which were introduced in , have largely
replaced steel burs for tooth preparation. Steel burs now are used
mainly for inishing procedures. Carbide burs perform better than
steel burs at all speeds, and their superiority is greatest at high
speeds. All carbide burs have heads of cemented carbide in which
microscopic carbide particles, usually tungsten car bide, are held
together in a matrix of cobalt or nickel. Carbide is much harder
than steel and less prone to dull during cutting.
In most burs, the carbide head is attached to a steel neck (and
shank) by welding or brazing. he substitution of steel for carbide
in the portions of the bur where greater wear resistance is not
required has certain advantages: It permits the manufacturer more
freedom of design in attaining the characteristics desired in the
instrument and allows economy in the cost of materials of
construction.
Although most carbide burs have the joint located in the posterior
part of the head, others are sold that have the joint located within
the shank and have carbide necks and heads. Carbide is stifer and
stronger than steel, but it is also more brittle. A carbide neck
subjected to a sudden blow or shock will fracture, whereas a steel
neck will bend. A bur that is even slightly bent produces increased
vibration and overcutting as a result of increased runout (see
upcoming description of runout). Although steel necks reduce the
risk of fracture during use, they may cause severe problems if bent.
Either type may be satisfactory, and other design factors are varied
to take maximal advantage of the properties of the material used.
Bur Classiication Systems
To facilitate the description, selection, and manufacture of burs,
it is highly desirable to have some agreed-on shorthand designation,
which represents all variables of a particular head design by some
simple code. In the United States, dental burs traditionally have
been described in terms of an arbitrary numerical code for head
size and shape (e.g., 2 = 1-mm-diameter round bur; 57 = 1-mmdiameter straight issure bur; 34 = 0.8-mm-diameter inverted cone
bur).16 Despite the complexity of the system, it is still in common
use. Other countries similarly developed and used arbitrary systems.
Newer classification systems such as those developed by the
International Dental Federation ( Federation Dentaire Internationale )
and International Standards Organization (ISO) tend to use separate
designations for shape (usually a shape name) and size (usually a
number giving the head diameter in tenths of a millimeter) (e.g.,
round ; straight issure plain ; inverted cone ).17,18
Shapes
he term bur shape refers to the contour or silhouette of the head.
he basic head shapes are round, inverted cone, pear, str aight
issure, and tapered issure ( Fig. 14.20 ). A round bur is spherical.
his shape customarily has been used for initial entry into the
tooth, extension of the preparation, preparation of retention features,
and caries removal.
An inverted cone bur has a rapidly tapered cone with the apex
of the cone directed toward the bur shank. Head length is approxi -
mately the same as the head diameter. his shape is particularly
suitable for providing undercuts in tooth preparations.
A pear-shaped bur has a slightly tapered cone with the small
end of the cone directed toward the bur shank. he end of the
head either is continuously curved (see Fig. 14.20 ) or is lat with the rotary instrument head; as a result, an improved shank/clutch
design is required for these speeds.
he friction grip shank design was developed for use with
high-speed handpieces. his design is smaller in ove rall length
than the latch-type instruments, providing a further i mprovement
in access to the posterior regions of the mouth. he shank is a
simple cylinder manufactured to close dimensional tolerances. As
the name implies, friction-grip instruments originally were designed
to be held in the handpiece by friction between the shank and a
plastic or metal chuck. Newer handpiece designs have metal chucks
that close to make a positive contact with the bur shank. Careful
dimensional control of the shanks of high-speed instruments is
important because even minor variations in shank diameter can
cause substantial variation in instrument performance and problems
with insertion, retention, and removal.
Neck Design
As shown in Fig. 14.18 , the neck is the intermediate portion of an
instrument that connects the head to the shank. Except in the case
of the larger, more massive instruments, the neck normally tapers
from the shank diameter to a smaller size immediately adjacent to
the head. he main function of the neck is to transmit rotational
and translational forces to the head. At the same time, it is desir -
able for the operator to have the greatest possible visibility of the
cutting blades (or diamond particles) on the head and the greatest
manipulative freedom. For this reason, the neck dimensions represent
a compromise between the need for a large cross section to provide
strength and a small cross section to improve access and visibility.
Head Design
he head is the working part of the instrument, the cutting edges
or points that perform the desired shaping of tooth structure. he
shape of the head and the material used to construct it are closely
related to its intended application and technique of use. he heads
of instruments show greater variation in design and construction
than either of the other main components of the rotary cutting
instrument. For this reason, the characteristics of the head form
the basis on which rotary instruments are usually classiied.
Many characteristics of the heads of rotary instruments could
be used for classiication. Most important among these is the
division into bladed instruments and abrasive instruments. Material
of construction, head size, and head shape are additional charac -
teristics that are useful for further subdivision. Bladed and abrasive
instruments exhibit substantially diferent clinical performance,
even when operated under nearly identical condition s. his appears
to result from diferences in the mechanism of cutting that are
inherent to their design. he two main divisions that will be utilized
for this discussion are dental burs and diamond abrasive
instruments .
Dental Bur
he term bur is applied to all rotary cutting instruments that have
bladed cutting heads. his includes instruments intended for inish -
ing metal restorations, surgical removal of bone, and tooth
preparation.
Historical Development of Dental Burs
he earliest burs were handmade. hey were not only expensive
but also variable in dimension and performance. he shapes,
dimensions, and nomenclature of modern burs are directly related
to those of the irst machine-made burs introduced in .15
CHAPTER 14 Intrument and Equipment for Tooth Preparation e11
of this design with slightly curved tip angles are available. A tapered
issure bur has a slightly tapered cone with the small end of the
cone directed away from the bur shank. his shape is used for
tooth preparations for indirect restorations, for which freedom
from undercuts is essential for successful withdrawal of patterns
and inal seating of the restorations. Tapered issure burs may also
be designed with a lat end with the tip corners slightly rounded.
Among these basic shapes, variations are possible. Fissure and
inverted cone burs may have half-round or domed ends. Taper
and cone angles may vary. he ratio of head length to diameter
may be varied. In addition to shape, other features may be varied,
such as the number of blades, spiral versus axial patterns for blades,
and continuous versus crosscut blade edges (see Figs. 14.21 and
14.22 ).
Sizes
In the United States, the number designating bur size also tradition -
ally has served as a code for head design. his numbering system
for burs was originated by the S.S. White Dental Manufacturing
Company in for their irst machine-made burs. It was extensive rounded corners where the sides and lat end intersect ( Fig. 14.21A ;
). he No. is an elongated pear bur (length three times
the width) and is advocated for tooth preparations for amalgam.
A straight issure bur is an elongated cylinder. Some dentists
advocate this shape for amalgam tooth preparation. Modiied burs
Round In verted
conePearshapedStraight
fissureTaper ed
fissure
• Fig. 14.20 Basic bur head shapes. (From Finkbeiner BL, Johnson CS:
Mosby’s comprehensive dental assisting , St. Louis, , Mosby.)
xy z 0. mm 0. mm 0. mm1/21/4 24 /2 169L
• Fig. 14.21 Burs used in recommended procedures. Bur sizes 14, 12, 2, 4, , and 169L are
standard carbide burs available from various sources. The and burs are nonstandard carbide
burs that do not conform to the current American Dental Association (ADA) standard numbering system.
They are designed to combine rounded cor ners with lat ends and are available from several manufactur -
ers. The diamond instruments shown are wheel (x), lame (y), and tapered cylinder (z). Various twist drills
are illustrated. Particular drills often are provided as speciied by manufacturers of pin-retention systems.
e12 CHAPTER 14 Intrument and Equipment for Tooth Preparation
were added later when smaller instruments were included in the
system. All original bur designs had continuous blade edges. Later,
when crosscut burs were found to be more e fective for cutting
dentin at low speeds, crosscut versions of many bur sizes were
introduced. his modiication was indicated by adding to the
number of the equivalent noncrosscut size (e.g., a No. 57 with
crosscut was designated No. ). Similarly, a preix was used
to indicate a head design intended for end cutting only (e.g.,
except for diferences in blade design, a No. , No. , and
No. 57 bur all had the same head dimensions). hese changes
occurred gradually over time without disrupting the system. he
sizes in common use in are shown in . he system
changed rapidly thereafter, but where the numbers are still used,
the designs and dimensions remain the same.
Modiications in Bur Design
As available handpiece speeds increased after , particularly
after the high-speed turbine handpieces were introduced, a new
wave of modiication of bur sizes and shapes occurred. Numerous
other categories arose as new variations in blade number or design
were created. Some of the numbers assigned to the burs were
selected arbitrarily. With the introduction of new bur sizes and
elimination of older sizes, much of the logic in the system has no
longer been maintained, and many dentists and manufacturers no
longer recognize the original signiicance of the numbers used for
burs. he number of standard sizes that have continued in use has
been reduced. his has been most obvious in the decreased popular -
ity of large-diameter burs. he cutting efectiveness of carbide burs
is greatly increased at high speeds.19 his is particularly true of the
small-diameter sizes, which did not have suicient peripheral speed
for eicient cutting when used at lower rates of rotation. As the
efectiveness of small burs has increased, they have replaced larger
burs in many procedures. hree other major trends in bur design
are discernible: (1) reduced use of crosscuts, (2) extended heads
on issure burs, and (3) rounding of sharp tip angles.
Crosscuts are needed on issure burs to obtain adequate cutting
efectiveness at low speeds, but they are not needed at high speeds. and logical, so other domestic manufacturers found it convenient
to adopt it for their burs as well. As a result, for more than 60
years, a general uniformity existed for bur numbers in the United
States. shows the correlation of bur head sizes with
dimensions and shapes. he table includes not only many bur
sizes that are still in common use but also others that have become
obsolete.
he original numbering system grouped burs by 9 shapes and
11 sizes. he 12 and 14 designations (both very small round burs)
AByx
vw
z
• Fig. 14.22 Design features of bur heads (illustrated using No. bur
crosscut). A, Lateral view—neck diameter (v), head length (w), taper angle
(x), and spiral angle (y). B, End view—head diameter (z).
Original Bur Head Sizes ( – )
Head ShapesHEAD DIAMETERS IN INCHES ( mma)
0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0.
(0.5) (0.6) (0.8) (1.0) (1.2) (1.4) (1.6) (1.8) (2.1) (2.3) (2.5) (2.8) (3.0)
Round1412 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
Wheel — 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22
Cone — 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33
Inverted cone — 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44
Bud — 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 — — — —
Straight issure (lat end) 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 — — — —
Straight issure (pointed end) 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 — — — —
Pear 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88
Oval 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 — — — —
aMillimeter values rounded to the nearest 0.1 mm.
Courtesy H.M. Moylan, S.S. White Dental Manufacturing Company, Lakewood, NJ.
CHAPTER 14 Intrument and Equipment for Tooth Preparation e13
are illustrated in Fig. 14.21 . he selection includes standard head
designs and modi ied designs of the types just discussed. Included
in are the signiicant head dimensions of these standard
and modiied burs.
A problem related to the dimensions and designations of rotary
dental instruments worldwide arose because each country developed
its own system of classiication. Dentists in the United States often
were not aware of the problem because they predominantly used
domestic products, and all U.S. manufacturers used the same
system. he rapid rate at which new bur designs were introduced
during the transition to high-speed techniques threatened to cause
a complete breakdown in the numbering system. As various
manufacturers simultaneously developed and marketed new burs
of similar design, the risk of similar burs being given diferent
numbers or diferent burs being given the same number increased.
Combined with the growing use of foreign products in the United
States, this situation has led to more interest in the establishment
of international standards for dimensions, nomenclature, and other
characteristics.
Progress toward the development of an international numbering
system for basic bur shapes and sizes under the auspices of the
ISO has been slow. For other design features, the trend instead
seems to be toward the use of individual manufacturer’s code
numbers. hroughout the remaining text, the traditional U.S.
numbers are used, where possible. he few exceptions are shown
in Fig. 14.21 and .
Additional Features in Head Design
Numerous factors other than head size and shape are involved in
determining the clinical efectiveness of a bur design.21,22 Fig. 14.22
shows a lateral view and a cross-sectional view of a No. crosscut
tapered issure bur in which several of these factors are illustrated.
he lateral view (see Fig. 14.22A ) shows neck diameter, head
diameter, head length, taper angle, blade spiral angle, and crosscut
size and spacing as they apply to this bur size. Of these features,
head length and taper angle are primarily descriptive and may be
varied within limits consistent with the intended use of the bur.
his bur originally was designed for use at low speeds in preparing
teeth for cast restorations. he taper angle is intended to approximate Because crosscut burs used at high speeds tend to produce unduly
rough surfaces, many of the crosscut sizes originally developed for
low-speed use have been replaced by noncrosscut instruments of
the same dimension for high-speed use.20 In many instances, the
noncrosscut equivalents were available; a No. 57 bur might be
used at high speed, whereas a No. bur was preferred for
low-speed use. Noncrosscut versions of the series burs have
become popular, but their introduction precipitated a crisis in the
bur numbering system because no number traditionally had been
assigned to burs of this type.
Carbide issure burs have been introduced with head lengths
extended two to three times those of the normal tapered issure
burs of similar diameter. Such a design would never have been
practical using a brittle material such as carbide if the bur were
to be used at low speed. he applied force required to make a bur
cut at speeds of to rpm would normally be suicient
to fracture such an attenuated head. he extremely light applied
pressures needed for cutting at high speed permit many modiica -
tions of burs, however, that would have been impractical at low
speed.
he third major trend in bur design has been toward round ing
of the sharp tip corners. Early contributions to this trend were
made by Markley and Sockwell.8 Sharp angles produced in tooth
preparations by conventional burs result in areas of high stress
concentration with increased potential for tooth fracture. Bur heads
with rounded corners allow better distribution of occlusal stress
in restored teeth, help retain the strength of the tooth by preserving
vital dentin, and facilitate the adaptation of restorative materials.
Carbide burs and diamond instruments with this design last longer
because no sharp corners prone to chipping and wear are present.
Burs with rounded transitions facilitate tooth preparation with
desired features of lat preparation loors and rounded internal
line angles.
Many of these new and modiied bur designs simplify the
techniques and reduce the effort needed for optimal results.
Although the development of new bur sizes and shapes has greatly
increased the number of diferent types in current use, the number
actually required for clinical efectiveness has been reduced. Most
instruments recommended in this text for the preparation of teeth Standard Bur Head Sizes—Carbide and Steel ( –Present)
Head ShapesHEAD DIAMETERS IN INCHES ( mma)
0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0.
(0.5) (0.6) (0.8) (1.0) (1.2) (1.4) (1.6) (1.9) (2.1) (2.3) (2.5) (2.8) (3.0) (3.3)
Round1412 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 —
Wheel — 12 — 14 — 16 — — — — — — —
Inverted cone — 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 — — — — —
Plain issure — 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 — — — — —
Round crosscut — — — — — — — — —
Straight issure crosscut — — — — — —
Tapered issure crosscut — — — — — — — — — —
End cutting issure — — — — — — — — — — —
Note: Nonstandard burs are not shown in this table.
aMillimeter values rounded to the nearest 0.1 mm.
e14 CHAPTER 14 Intrument and Equipment for Tooth Preparation
and usually only one blade cuts efectively.23 Under these circum -
stances, although the high cutting rate of crosscut burs is maintained,
the ridges are not removed and a much rougher cut surface results.20
A cross-sectional view of the No. bur is shown in Fig.
14.22B . his cross section is made at the point of largest head
diameter and is drawn as seen from the shank end. he bur has
six blades uniformly spaced with depressed areas between them.
hese depressed areas are properly known as lutes . he number
of blades on a bur is always even because even numbers are easier
to produce in the manufacturing process, and instruments with
odd numbers of blades cut no better than those with even numbers.
he number of blades on an excavating (cutting) bur may vary
from 6 to 8 to 10. B urs intended mainly for inishing procedures
usually have 12 to 40 blades. he greater the number of blades,
the smoother is the cutting action at low speeds. Most burs are
made with at least six blades because they may need to be used
in this speed range. In the high-speed range, no more than one
blade seems to cut efectively at any one time, and the remaining
blades are, in efect, spares. he tendency for the bur to cut on a
single blade is often a result of factors other than the bur itself.
Nevertheless, it is important that the bur head be as symmetrical
as possible. T wo terms are in common use to measure this char -
acteristic of bur heads: concentricity and runout .
Concentricity is a direct measurement of the symmetry of the
bur head itself. It measures how closely a single circle can be
passed through the edges of all of the blades. Concentricity is
an indication of whether one blade is longer or shorter than the
others. It is a static measurement not directly related to function.
Runout is a dynamic test measuring the accuracy with which all
blade edges pass through a single point when the instrument is
rotated. It measures not only the concentricity of the head but
also the accuracy with which the center of rotation passes through
the center of the head. Even a perfectly concentric head exhibits
substantial runout if the head is not centered precisely on the the desired occlusal divergence of the lateral walls of the preparations,
and the head length must be long enough to reach the full depth
of the normal preparation. hese factors do not otherwise afect
the performance of the bur.
Neck diameter is important functionally because a neck that
is too small results in a weak instrument unable to resist lateral
forces. Too large a neck diameter may interfere with visibility and
use of the part of the bur head next to the neck and may restrict
access for coolants. As the head of a bur increases in length or
diameter, the moment arm exerted by lateral forces increases, and
the neck needs to be larger.
Compared with these factors, two other design variables, the
spiral angle and crosscutting, have considerably greater inluence
on bur performance. here is a tendency toward reduced spiral
angles on burs intended exclusively for high-speed operation in
which a large spiral angle (which would produce a smoother
preparation) is not needed. he smaller spiral angle produces more
eicient cutting.
As noted previously, crosscut bur designs have notches in the
blade edges to increase cutting efectiveness at low and medium
speeds. A minimum amount of perpendicular force is required to
make a blade grasp the surface and initiate cutting as it passes
across the surface. he harder the surface, the duller the blade;
and the greater its length, the more is the force required to initiate
cutting. By reducing the total length of bur blade that is actively
cutting at any one time, the crosscuts efectively increase the cutting
pressure resulting from rotation of the bur and the perpendicular
pressure holding the blade edge against the tooth.
As each crosscut blade cuts, it leaves small ridges of tooth
structure standing behind the notches. Because the notches in two
succeeding blades do not line up with each other, the ridges left
by one blade are removed by the following one at low or medium
speed. At the high speed attained with air-driven handpieces
however, the contact of the bur with the tooth is not continuous, Names and Key Dimensions of Recommended Burs
Manufacturer’s
Size NumberADA Size
NumberISO Size
NumberHead Diameter
(mm)Head Length
(mm)Taper Angle
(degrees) Shape
0.50 0.40 — Round
0.60 0.48 — Round
2 2 1.00 0.80 — Round
4 4 1.40 1.10 — Round
0.60 0.45 12 Inverted cone
0.90 4.30 6 Tapered issure
169La169L 0.90 5.60 4 Elongated tapered issure
0.70 0.85 8 Pear, normal length
0.80 1.00 8 Pear, normal length
245b,c330L 0.80 3.00 4 Pear, elongated
271b171 1.20 4.00 6 Tapered issure
272b172 1.60 5.00 6 Tapered issure
ADA, American Dental Association; ISO, International Standard Organization.
aSimilar to the No. bur except for greater head length.
bThese burs differ from the equivalent ADA size by being lat ended with rounded corners. The manufacturer’s number has been changed to indicate this difference.
cSimilar to the No. bur except for greater head length.
CHAPTER 14 Intrument and Equipment for Tooth Preparation e15
Carbide burs normally have blades with slight negative rake
angles and edge angles of approximately 90 degrees. heir clearance
faces either are curved or have two surfaces to provide a low clearance
angle near the edge and a greater clearance space ahead of the
following blade.
Diamond Abraive Intrument
he second major category of rotary dental cutting instruments
involves abrasive cutting rather than blade cutting. Abrasive instru -
ments are based on small, angular particles of a hard substance
held in a matrix of softer material. Cutting occurs at numerous
points where individual hard particles protrude from the matrix
rather than along a continuous blade edge. his design causes
deinite diferences in the mechanisms by which the two types of
instruments cut and in the applications for which they are best
suited.
Abrasive instruments are generally grouped as diamond or ot her
instruments. Diamond instruments have had great clinical impact
because of their long life and great efectiveness in cutting enamel
and dentin. Diamond instruments for dental use were introduced
in the United States in at a time before carbide burs were
available and when interest in increased rotational speeds was
beginning to expose the limitations of steel burs. he earliest
diamond instruments were substitutes for previously used abrasive
points of other types used for grinding and inishing.24 he vastly
superior performance in these applications led to their immediate
acceptance. he shortage of burs, as a result of wartime demands
of the 1940s, forced the use of diamond instruments. Increased
usage revealed their durability in cutting enamel and promoted
the development of operative techniques employing them.
Terminology
Diamond instruments consist of three parts: (1) a metal blank,
(2) the powdered diamond abrasive, and (3) a metallic bonding
material that holds the diamond powder onto the blank ( Fig.
14.24 ). he blank in many ways resembles a bur without blades.
It has the same essential parts: head, neck, and shank.
he shank dimensions, similar to those for bur shanks, depend
on the intended handpiece. he neck is normally a tapered section
of reduced diameter that connects the shank to the head, but for
large disk-shaped or wheel-shaped instruments, it may be the same
diameter as the shank. he head of the blank is undersized compared
with the desired inal dimensions of the instrument, but its size
and shape determine the size and shape of the inished instrument.
Dimensions of the head make allowance for a fairly uniform
thickness of diamonds and bonding material on all sides. Some
abrasive instruments are designed as a mandrel with a detachable
head, which is much more practical for abrasive disks that have
very short lifetimes.
he diamonds employed are industrial diamonds, either natural
or synthetic, that have been crushed to powder, then carefully
graded for size and quality. he shape of the individual particle
is important because of its efect on the cutting eiciency and
durability of the instrument, but the careful control of particle
size is probably of greater importance. he diamonds generally
are attached to the blank by electroplating a layer of metal on the
blank while holding the diamonds in place against it. Althou gh the
electroplating holds the diamonds in place, it also tends to cover
much of the diamond surfaces. Various proprietary techni ques
allow greater diamond exposure and resultant increased cutting
efectiveness.long axis of the bur, the bur neck is bent, the bur is not held
straight in the handpiece chuck, or the chuck is eccentric relative
to the handpiece bearings. he runout can never be less than the
concentricity, and it is usually substantially grea ter. Runout is
the more signiicant term clinically because it is the primary
cause of vibration during cutting and is the factor that determines
the minimum diameter of the hole that may be prepared by a
given bur. Burs normally cut holes measurably larger than the
head diameter because of runout defects.
Bur Blade Design
he actual cutting action of a bur (or a diamond abrasive) occurs
in a very small region at the edge of the blade (or at the point of
a diamond chip). In the high-speed range, this efective portion
of the individual blade is limited to no more than a few thousandths
of a centimeter adjacent to the blade edge. Fig. 14.23 is an enlarged
schematic view of this portion of a bur blade. Several terms used
in the discussion of blade design are illustrated.
Each blade has two sides—the rake face (toward the direction
of cutting) and the clearance face —and three important angles—the
rake angle , the edge angle , and the clearance angle . he optimal
angles depend on such factors as the mechanical properties of the
blade material, the mechanical properties of the material being
cut, the rotational speed and diameter of the bur, and the lateral
force applied by the operator through the handpiece to the bur.
he rake angle is the most important design characteristic of
a bur blade. For cutting hard, brittle materials, a negative rake
angle minimizes fractures of the cutting edge, increasing the bur
life. A rake angle is said to be negative when the rake face is ahead
of the radius (from cutting edge to axis of bur), as illustrated in
Fig. 14.23 . Increasing the edge angle reinforces the cutting edge
and reduces the likelihood for the edge of the blade to fracture.
Carbide bur blades have higher hardness and are more wear resistant,
but they are more brittle than steel blades and require greater edge
angles to minimize fractures. he three angles cannot be varied
independently of each other. An increase in the clearance angle
causes a decrease in the edge angle. he clearance angle eliminates
rubbing friction of the clearance face, provides a stop to prevent
the bur edge from digging into the tooth structure excessively, and
reduces the radius of the blade back of the cutting edge to provide
adequate lute space or clearance space for the cutting debris that
accumulates ahead of the following blade.
To axis of bur
Edge angle
Clearance
angle
Clearance faceRake
faceRake
angle
Direction of rotation
• Fig. 14.23 Bur blade design. Schematic cross section viewed from
shank end of head to show rake angle, edge angle, and clearance angle.
e16 CHAPTER 14 Intrument and Equipment for Tooth Preparation
Head Shapes and Sizes
Diamond instruments are available in a wide variety of shapes and
in sizes that correspond to all except the smallest-diameter burs.
he gr eatest diference lies in the diversity of other shapes and
sizes in which diamond instruments are produced. Even with many
subdivisions, the size range within each group is large compared
with that found among the burs. More than shapes and sizes
of diamonds are currently marketed.
Because of their design with an abrasive layer over an underlying
blank, the smallest diamond instruments cannot be as small in
diameter as the smallest burs, but a wide range of sizes is available Classiication
Diamond instruments currently are marketed in a myriad of head
shapes and sizes ( ) and in all of the standard shank
designs. Most of the diamond shapes parallel those for burs ( Fig.
14.25 ). his great diversity arose in part as a result of the relative
simplicity of the manufacturing process. Because it is possible to
make diamond instruments in almost any shape for which a blank
can be manufactured, they are produced in many high ly specialized
shapes on which it would be impractical to place cutting blades.
his has been a major factor in establishing clinical uses for these
unique shapes, which are not in direct competition with burs.
AB
C
• Fig. 14.24 Diamond instrument construction. A, Overall view. B, Detail
of abrasive layer. C, Detail of particle bonding. Standard Categories of Shapes and Sizes
for Diamond Cutting Instruments
Head Shapes Proile Variations
Round —
Football Pointed
Barrel —
Cylinder Flat-, bevel-, round-, or safe-end
Inverted cone —
Taper Flat-, round-, or safe-end
Flame —
Curettage —
Pear —
Needle “Christmas tree”
Interproximal Occlusal anatomy
Donut —
Wheel —
Round Football Barrel Flat-end
cylinderBeveled-end
cylinderInverted
coneFlat-end
taper
Round-end
taperFlame Needle Interproximal Pear Donut Wheel
• Fig. 14.25 Characteristic shapes and designs for a range of diamond cutting instruments.
CHAPTER 14 Intrument and Equipment for Tooth Preparation e17
termed points and stones . Hard and rigid molded instrument heads
use rigid polymer or ceramic materials for their matrix and com -
monly are used for grinding and shaping procedures. Other molded
instrument heads use lexible matrix materials, such as rubber, to
hold the abrasive particles. hese are used predominantly for inish -
ing and polishing procedures. Molded unmounted disks or
wheelstones are attached by a screw to a mandrel of suitable size
for a given handpiece that has a threaded hole in the end. his
design permits the instruments to be changed easily and enable
extended use of the mandrel.
he coated abrasive instruments are mostly disks that have a
thin layer of abrasive cemented to a lexible backing. his construc -
tion allows the instrument to conform to the surface contour
of a tooth or restoration. Most lexible disks are designed for
reversible attachment to a mandrel. Coated abrasive instruments
may be used in the inishing and smoothing procedures of certain
enamel walls (and margins) of tooth preparations for indirect
restorations but are most often used in inishing procedures for
restorations.
he abrasives are softer and are less wear resistant than diamond
powder; as a result, they tend to lose their sharp edges and cutting
eiciency with use and are then discarded. In contrast, molded
instruments are intended to partially regenerate through the gradual
loss of their worn outer layers but may require that the operator
reshape them to improve their concentricity or usefulness in inishing
various anatomic areas. Reshaping is accomplished by applying a
truing or shaping stone against the rotating instrument.
Materials
he matrix materials usually are phenolic resins or rubber. Some
molded points may be sintered, but most are resin bonded. A
rubber matrix is used primarily to obtain a lexible head on instru -
ments to be used for polishing. A harder, nonlexible rubber matrix
is often used for molded silicon carbide (SiC) disks. he matrix
of coated instruments is usually one of the phenolic resins.
Synthetic or natural abrasives may be used, including silicon
carbide, aluminum oxide, garnet, quartz, pumice, and cuttlebone.
he hardness of the abrasive has a major efect on the cutting
eiciency. he Mohs hardness values for important dental abrasives
are shown in . SiC usually is used in molded rounds,
tree or bud shapes, wheels, and cylinders of various sizes. hese
points are normally gray-green, available in various textures, usually
fast cutting (except on enamel), and produce a moderately smooth
surface. Molded unmounted disks are black or a dark color, have
a soft matrix, wear more rapidly than stones, and produce a
moderately rough surface texture. hese disks are termed carborundum disks or separating disks . Aluminum oxide is used for the
same instrument designs as those for silicon carbide disks. Points
are usually white, rigid, ine textured, and less porous and produce
a smoother surface than SiC.
Garnet (reddish) and quartz (white) are used for coated disks
that are available in a series of particle sizes and range from coarse
to medium-ine for use in initial inishing. hese abrasives are hard
enough to cut tooth structure and all restorative materials, with
the exception of some ceramics. Pumice is a powdered abrasive
produced by crushing foamed volcanic glass into thin glass lakes.
he lakes cut efectively, but they break down rapidly. Pumice is
used with rubber disks and wheels, usually for initial polishing
procedures. Cuttlebone is derived from the cuttleish, a relative of
squid and octopus. It is becoming scarce and gradually is being
replaced by synthetic substitutes. It is a soft white abrasive, used
only in coated disks for inal inishing and polishing. It is soft for each shape. No one manufacturer produces all sizes, but each
usually ofers an assortment of instruments that includes popular
shapes and sizes. Because of the lack of uniform nomenclature for
diamond instruments, it is often necessary to select them by
inspection to obtain the desired shape and size. It is essential to
indicate the manufacturer when attempting to describe diamond
instruments by catalog number.
Diamond Particle Factors
he clinical performance of diamond abrasive instruments depends
on the size, spacing, uniformity, exposure, and bonding of the
diamond particles. Increased pressure causes the particles to dig
into the surface more deeply, leaving deeper scratches and removing
more tooth structure.
Diamond particle size is commonly categorized as coarse
( – μm), medium (88– μm), ine (60–74 μm), and
very ine (38–44 μm) for diamond preparation instruments.24 hese
ranges correspond to standard sieve sizes for separating particles.
When using large particle sizes, the number of abrasive particles
that can be placed on a given area of the head is decreased. For
any given force that the operator applies, the pressure on each
particle tip is greater. he resulting pressure also is increased if
diamond particles are more widely spaced so that fewer are in
contact with the surface at any one time. he inal clinical per -
formance of diamond instruments is strongly afected by the
technique used to take advantage of the design factors for each
instrument.
Diamond finishing instruments use even finer diamonds
(10–38 μm) to produce relatively smooth surfaces for inal inishing
with diamond polishing pastes. Surface inishes of less than 1 μm
are considered clinically smooth (see section Composite Resins in
Chapter 13 ) and may be routinely attained by using a series of
progressively iner polishing steps.
Proper diamond instrument speed and pressure are the major
factors in determining service life.25 Properly used diamond instru -
ments last almost indeinitely. A primary cause of failure of diamond
instruments is loss of the diamonds from critical areas. his loss
results from the use of excess pressure in an attempt to increase
the cutting rate at inadequate speeds.26
Other Abraive Intrument
In addition to diamond instruments, many other types of abrasive
instruments are used in dentistry. At one time they were extensively
used for tooth preparation, but their use is now primarily restricted
to shaping, inishing, and polishing restorations in the clinic and
in the laboratory.
Classiication
In these instruments, as in the diamond instruments, the cutting
surfaces of the head are composed of abrasive particles held in a
continuous matrix of softer material. hey may be divided into
two distinct groups— molded instruments and coated instruments .
Each uses various abrasives and matrix materials.
Molded abrasive instruments have heads that are manufactured
by molding or pressing a uniform mixture of abrasive and matrix
around the roughened end of the shank or cementing a premolded
head to the shank. In contrast to diamond instruments, molded
instruments have a much softer matrix and therefore wear during
use. he abrasive is distributed throughout the matrix so that new
particles are exposed by the wear. hese instruments are made in
a full range of shapes and sizes. he mounted heads are often
e18 CHAPTER 14 Intrument and Equipment for Tooth Preparation
Bladed Cutting
he following discussion focuses on rotary bladed instrumen ts but
also is applicable to bladed hand instruments. Tooth structure,
similar to other materials, undergoes brittle and ductile fracture.
Brittle fracture is associated with crack production usually by tensile
forces. Ductile fracture involves plastic deformation of material
usually proceeding by shear forces. Extensive plastic deformation
also may produce local work hardening and encourage brittle
fracture. Low-speed cutting tends to proceed by plastic deformation
before tooth structure fracture. High-speed cutting, especially of
enamel, proceeds by brittle fracture.
he rate of str ess application (or strain rate) afects the resultant
properties of materials. In general, the faster the rate of loading,
the greater are the strength, hardness, modulus of elasticity, and
brittleness of a material. A cutting instrument with a large diameter
and high rotational speed produces a high surface speed and a
high stress (or strain) rate.
Many factors interact to determine which cutting mechanism
is active in a par ticular situation. he mechanical properties of
tooth structure, the design of the cutting edge or point, the linear
speed of the instrument’s surface, the contact force applied, and
the pow er output characteristics of the handpiece inluence the
cutting process in various ways.19,29
For the blade to initiate the cutting action, it must be sharp,
must have a higher hardness and modulus of elasticity than
the material being cut, and must be pressed against the surface
with suicient for ce. he high hardness and modulus of elas -
ticity are essential to concentrate the applied force on a small
enough area to exceed the shear strength of the material being
cut. As shown in Fig. 14.26 , sheared segments accumulate in
a distorted layer that slides up along the rake face of the blade
until it breaks or until the blade disengages from the surface
as it rotates. These chips accumulate in the clearance space
between blades until washed out or thrown out by ce ntrifugal
force.
Mechanical distortion of tooth structure ahead of the blade
produces heat. Frictional heat is produced by the rubbing action
of the cut debris against the rake face of the blade and the blade
tip against the cut surface of the tooth immediately behind the
edge. his can produce extreme temperature increases in the tooth
and the bur in the absence of adequate cooling. he transfer of
heat is not instantaneous, and the reduced temperature increase
observed in teeth cut at very high speeds may be caused, in part,
by the removal of the heated surface layer of the tooth structure
by a following blade before the heat can be conducted into
the tooth.enough that it reduces the risk of unintentional damage to tooth
structur e during the inal stages of inishing.
Cutting Mechanim
For cutting, it is necessary to apply suicient pressure to make the
cutting edge of a blade or abrasive particle dig into the surface.
Local fracture occurs more easily if the strain rate is high (high
rotary instrument surface speed) because the surface that is being
cut responds in a brittle fashion. he process by which rotary
instruments cut tooth structure is complex and not fully understood.
he following discussion addresses cutting evaluations, cutting
instrument design, proposed cutting mechanisms, and clinical
recommendations for cutting.
Evaluation of Cutting
Cutting may be measured in terms of efectiveness and eiciency.
Certain factors inluence one but not the other.27 Cutting efective -
ness is the rate of tooth structure removal (millimeters per min
[mm/min] or milligrams per second [mg/s]). Efectiveness does
not consider potential side efects such as heat or noise. Cutting
eiciency is the percentage of energy actually producing the cutting.
Cutting eiciency is reduced when energy is wasted as heat or noise.
It is possible to increase efectiveness while decreasing eiciency. A
dull bur may be made to cut faster than a sharp bur by applying
a greater pressure, but experience indicates that this results in a
great increase in heat production and reduced eiciency.28
It is generally agreed that increased rotational speed results in
increased efectiveness and eiciency. Adverse efects associated
with increased speeds are heat, vibration, and noise. Heat has been
identiied as a primary cause of pulpal injury. Air-water sprays do
not prevent the production of heat, but do serve to remove it
before it causes a damaging increase in temperature within the
tooth.Hardness Values of Restorative Materials,
Tooth Structure, and Abrasives
Knoop
HardnessBrinell
HardnessMohs
Hardness
Dentin 68 48 3–4
Enamel 5
Dental composite 41–80 60–80 5–7
Dental amalgam — 4–5
Gold alloy (type III) — —
Feldspathic porcelain — 6–7
Pumice — — 6
Cuttlebone — — 7
Garnet — — 6.5–7
Quartz 7
Aluminum oxide 9
Silicon carbide — 9.5
Diamond > > 10
Blade
motion
• Fig. 14.26 Schematic representation of bur blade (end view) cutting
a ductile material by shearing mechanism. Energy is required to deform
the material removed and produce new surface.
CHAPTER 14 Intrument and Equipment for Tooth Preparation e19
or diamond instrument. Carbide burs are better for end cutting,
produce lower heat, and have more blade edges per diameter for
cutting. hey are used efectively for punch cuts to enter tooth
structure, intracoronal tooth preparation, amalgam removal, small
preparations, and secondary retention features. Diamond instru -
ments have higher hardness, and coarse diamonds have high cutting
efectiveness. Diamonds are more efective than burs for int racoronal
and extracoronal tooth preparations, beveling enamel margins on
tooth preparations, and enameloplasty.
Hazard With Cutting Intrument
Almost everything done in a dental oice involves some risk to
the patient, the dentist, or the dental assistant. For the patient,
pulpal dangers arise from tooth preparation and restoration pro -
cedures. Soft tissue dangers are also present. Everyone is potentially
susceptible to eye, ear, and inhalation dangers. Careful adherence
to normal precautions can, however, eliminate or minimize most
risks associated with the use of cutting instruments.
Pulpal Precaution
he use of cutting instruments may harm the pulp by exposure
to mechanical vibration, heat generation, desiccation and loss of
dentinal tubule luid, or transection of odontoblastic processes. As
the thickness of remaining dentin decreases, the pu lpal insult (and
response) from heat or desiccation increases. Slight to moderate
injury produces a localized, protective pulpal response in the region
of the cut tubules. In severe injury, destruction extends beyond
the cut tubules, often resulting in pulpal abscess and death of the
pulp. hese pulpal sequelae (recovery or necrosis) take 2 weeks to
6 months or longer to become apparent, depending on the extent
and degree of the trauma. Although a young pulp is more prone
to injury, it also recovers mor e efectively compared with an older
pulp, in which the recuperative powers are slower and less efective.
Enamel and dentin are good thermal insulators and protect the
pulp if the quantity of heat is not too great and the remaining
thickness of tissue is adequate. he longer the time of cutting and
the higher the local temperature produced, the greater is the threat
of thermal trauma. he r emaining tissue is efective in protecting
the pulp in proportion to the square of its thickness. Steel burs
produce more heat than carbide burs because of ineicient cutting.
Burs and diamond instruments that are dull or plugged with debris
do not cut eiciently, resulting in heat production. When used
without coolants, diamond instruments generate more damaging
heat compared with carbide burs.
he most common instrument coolants are air and air-water
sprays. Air alone as a coolant is not efective in preventing pulpal
damage because it needlessly desiccates dentin and damages
odontoblasts. Air has a much lower heat capacity than water and
is much less eicient in absorbing unwanted heat. An air coolant
alone should be used only when visibility is a problem, such as
during the inishing procedures of tooth preparations. At such
times, air coolant combined with lower rotational speed, light,
and intermittent instrument application should be used to enhance
vision and minimize trauma. Air-water spray is universally used
to cool, moisten, and clear the operating site during normal cutting
procedures. In addition, the spray lubricates, cleans, and cools the
cutting instrument, increasing its eiciency and service life. A
well-designed and properly directed air-water spray also helps keep
the gingival crevice open for better visualization when gingival
extension is necessary. he use of a water spray and its removal Abraive Cutting
he following discussion is pertinent to all abrasive cutting situ -
ations, but diamond instruments are used as the primary example.12
he cutting action of diamond abrasive instruments is similar in
many ways to that of bladed instruments, but key diferences result
from the properties, size, and distribution of the abrasive. he
very high hardness of diamonds provides superior resistance to
wear. A diamond instrument that is not abused has little or no
tendency to dull with use. Individual diamond particles have very
sharp edges, are randomly oriented on the surface, and tend to
have large negative rake angles.
When diamond instruments are used to cut ductile materials,
some material is removed as debris, but much material lows laterally
around the cutting point and is left as a ridge of deformed material
on the surface ( Fig. 14.27 ). Repeated deformation work hardens
the distorted material until irregular portions beco me brittle, break
of, and are removed. his type of cutting is less eicient than that
by a blade; burs are generally preferred for cutting ductile materials
such as dentin.
Diamonds cut brittle materials by a diferent mechanism. Most
cutting results from tensile fractures that produce a series of
subsurface cracks ( Fig. 14.28 ). Diamonds are most eicient when
used to cut brittle materials and are superior to burs for the removal
of dental enamel. Diamond abrasives are commonly used for milling
in computer-assisted design/computer-assisted machining (CAD/
CAM) or copy-milling applications (see Chapter 12 ).
Cutting Recommendation
Overall, the requirements for efective and eicient cutting include
using a contra-angle handpiece, air-water spray for cooling, high
operating speed ( > , rpm), light pressure, and a carbide bur
AB
• Fig. 14.27 Schematic representation of an abrasive particle cutting
ductile material. A, Lateral view. B, Cross-sectional view. Material is dis -
placed laterally by passage of an abrasive particle, work hardened, and
subsequently removed by other particles.
AB
• Fig. 14.28 Schematic representation of abrasive particle cutting brittle
material. A, Lateral view. B, Cross-sectional view. Subsurface cracks
caused by the passage of abrasive particles intersect, undermining small
pieces of material, which are removed easily by following abrasive
particles.
e20 CHAPTER 14 Intrument and Equipment for Tooth Preparation
an accident does occur and soft tissue is damaged, the operator
should remain calm and control any hemorrhage with a pressure
pack. he patient should be told what has happened, and medical
assistance should be obtained, if needed.
Eye Precaution
he operator, the assistant, and the patient should wear glasses
with side shields to prevent eye damage from airborne particles
during operative procedures using rotary instrumentation. When
high speeds are used, particles of old restorations , tooth structure,
bacteria, and other debris are discharged at high speeds from the
patient’s mouth. S uiciently strong HVE applied by the dental
assistant near the operating site helps limit this problem. Protective
glasses are always indicated when rotary instrumentation is being
used. he dentist, being in the direct path of such particles, is
more likely to receive injury than the assistant or the patient. If
an eye is injured, it should be covered by a clean gauze pad until
medical attention is obtained.
In addition to routine airborne debris, airborne particles may
be produced occasionally by matrix failure of molded abrasive
cutting instruments. Hard matrix wheels may crack or shatter into
relatively large pieces. Soft abrasive wheels or points may increase
in temperature during use, causing the rubber matrix to debond
explosively from the abrasiv e into ine particles.
Precautions must be taken to prevent eye injury from unusual
light sources such as visible light–curing units and laser equipment.
Dental personnel and patients should be protected from highintensity visible light with the use of colored plastic shields (attached
to the iberoptic tip). Laser light can be inadvertently relected
from many surfaces in the dental operatory; the operatory should
be closed, and everyone should wear protective goggles (see earlier
section Laser Equipment ).
Ear Precaution
Various sounds are known to afect people in diferent ways. Soft
music or random sounds such as rainfall usually have a relaxing
or sedative efect. Loud noises are generally annoying and may
contribute to mental and physical distress. A noisy environment
decreases the ability to concentrate, increases risk of accidents, and
reduces overall eiciency. Extremely loud noises such as explosions by efective high-volume evacuation (HVE) are especially important
when old amalgam restorations are removed. HVE helps in rapid,
eicient removal of released mercury vapor and aids in increased
operator visibility.
During normal cutting procedures, a layer of debris, described
as a smear layer, is created that covers the cut surfaces of the enamel
and dentin. he smear layer on dentin is moderately protective
because it occludes the dentinal tubules and inhibits the outward
low of tubular luid and the inward penetration of microleakage
contaminants. he smear layer is still porous, however. When air
alone is applied to dentin, local desiccation may produce luid
low and afect the physiologic status of the odontoblastic processes
in the underlying dentin. Air is applied only to the extent of
removing excess moisture, leaving a glistening surface.
Soft Tiue Precaution
he lips, tongue, and cheeks of the patient are the most frequent
areas of soft tissue injury. he handpiece should never be operated
unless good access to and visualization of the cutting site are
available. A rubber dam is helpful in isolating the operating site.
When the dam is not used, the dental assistant may retract the
soft tissue on one side with a mouth mirror, cotton roll, or evacuator
tip. he dentist usually is able to manage the other side with a
mirror or cotton roll, or both. If the dentist must work alone, the
patient may help by holding a retraction-type saliva ejector evacuator
tip after it is positioned in the mouth.
he rotating instrument in a handpiece does not stop imme -
diately when the foot control is released. he operator must wait
for the instrument to stop or be extremely careful when removing
the handpiece from the mouth so as not to contact and lacerate
soft tissues. he large disk is one of the most dangerous instruments
used in the mouth. Such disks are seldom indicated intraorally.
hey should be used with light, intermittent application and with
extreme caution.
With high-speed and low-speed air-driven handpieces, sluggish
handpiece performance will alert the dental practitioner to main -
tenance issues such as a dull bur or worn or clogged gears or
bearings. A poorly maintained electric handpiece does not provide
a similar warning that maintenance is needed. Instead, if an electric
handpiece is worn out, damaged, or clogged, the electric motor
sends increased power to the handpiece head or atta chment in
order to maintain handpiece performance. his increased power
can rapidly generate heat at the head of the handpiece attachment.
Because the heat buildup is so rapid and is eiciently conducted
through the metal handpiece, a burn occurring in the patien t may
be the irst indication of handpiece problems. Patients have been
severely burned when electric handpieces have overheated during
dental procedures ( Fig. 14.29 ). Some patients have sufered thirddegree burns that required reconstructive surgery. Burns may not
be apparent to the operator or the patient until after the tissue
damage has occurred because the anesthetized patient is not able
to feel the tissue burning and the handpiece housing insulates the
operator from the heated attachment. Adhering to strict maintenance
guidelines recommended by the manufacturers is critical to prevent
overheating in electric handpieces. he clinician must be aware
that improperly maintained, damaged, or worn-out devices have
the potential to overheat without warning.
he dentist and assistant must always be aware of the patient’s
response during the cutting procedures. A sudden relex movement
caused by patient gagging, swallowing, or coughing has the potential
to result in serious injury from a rotating cutting instrument. If
• Fig. 14.29 This patient suffered a burn from the overheated bearing
of an electric handpiece. Because the patient was anesthetized, he was
unaware of the burn as it occurred from the overheated handpiece.
CHAPTER 14 Intrument and Equipment for Tooth Preparation e21
efect of excessive noise levels depends on exposure times. Normal
use of a dental handpiece is one of intermittent application that
generally is less than 30 minutes per day and represents little risk
of developing hearing loss over time. Earplugs may be used to
reduce the level of exposure, but these have several obvious
drawbacks. Room soundpr ooing helps limit sound relection and
may be accomplished with absorbing materials used on ceilings,
walls, and loors. Antinoise devices also may be used to cancel
unwanted sounds.
Inhalation Precaution
Aerosols and vapors are created by cutting tooth structure and
restorative materials and are a health hazard to all present. Aerosols
are ine dispersions in air of water, tooth debris, microorganisms,
and/or restorative materials. Cutting amalgam or composite resin
produces submicron particles and vapor. he particles that may
be inadvertently inhaled have the potential to produce alveolar
irritation and tissue reactions. Vapor from cutting amalgam is
predominantly mercury and should be captured and removed, as
much as possible, by HVE near the tooth being operated on. he
vapors generated during cutting or polishing by thermal decomposi -
tion of polymeric restorative materials (sealants, acrylic resin,
composites) are predominantly resin monomers. he resin monomers
may be captured and eiciently removed by careful HVE during
the cutting or polishing procedures.
A rubber dam protects the patient against oral inhalation of
aerosols or vapors, but nasal inhalation of vapor and iner aerosol
may still occur. Disposable masks worn by dental oice personnel
ilter out bacteria and all but the inest particulate matter. Masks
do not, however, ilter out mercury or resin monomer vapors. he
biologic efects of mercury hazards and appropriate oice hygiene
measures are discussed in Chapter 13 .or continuous exposure to high noise levels can cause permanent
damage to the hearing mechanism.
An objectionable high-pitched whine is produced by some airdriven handpieces at high speeds. Aside from the annoying aspect
of this noise, hearing loss could result from continued exposure.
Potential damage to hearing from noise depends on (1) the intensity
or loudness (decibels [db]), (2) frequency (cycles per second [cps])
of the noise, (3) duration (time) of the noise, and (4) susceptibility
of the individual. Older age, existing ear damage, disease, and
medications are other factors that can accelerate hearing loss.
Normal ears require that the intensity of sound reach a certain
minimal level before the ear can detect it. his is known as auditory
threshold and may vary with the frequency and exposure to other
sounds. When subjected to a loud noise of short duration, a protec -
tive mechanism of the ear causes it to lose some sensitivity temporar -
ily. his is described as temporary threshold shift . If suicient time
is allowed between exposures, complete recovery occurs. Extended
or continuous exposure is much more likely to result in a permanent
threshold shift with persistent hearing loss. he loss may be caused
by all frequencies, but often high-frequency sounds afect hearing
more severely. A certain amount of unnoticed noise (ambient noise
level) is present even in a quiet room (20–40 db). An ordinary
conversation averages 50 to 70 db in a frequency range of to
cps.
Air-driven handpieces with ball bearings, free running at 30-lb
air pressure, may have noise levels of 70 to 94 db at high frequencies.
Noise levels greater than 75 db in frequency ranges of to
cps may cause hearing damage. Noise levels vary among
handpieces produced by the same manufacturer. Handpiece wear
and eccentric rotating instruments may cause increased noise.
Protective measures are recommended when the noise level reaches
85 db with frequency ranges of to cps. Protection is
mandatory in areas where the level transiently reaches 95 db. he
Summary
Modern dental equipment allows eicient removal and shaping
of tooth structures and restorative materials. Hand instruments
and rotary-powered cutting burs and abrasive instruments remain
essential components of the dental armamentarium. A wide variety of strategic shapes and sizes of instruments are available for use in
patient care. Proper understanding and use of hand instruments,
handpieces, burs, and abrasives enable optimal accomplishment of
dental procedures with minimal risk to the patient and dental team.
Reference
1. Black GV: he technical procedur es in illing teeth , , Henry O.
Shepard.
2. Black GV: Operative dentistry , ed 8, Woodstock, IL, ,
Medico-Dental.
3. Peyton FA: Temperature rise in teeth developed by rotating instruments.
J Am Dent Assoc 50: – , .
4. Leonard DL, Charlton DG: Performance of high-speed dental
handpieces. J Am Dent Assoc : – , .
5. Myers TD: Lasers in dentistry. J Am Dent Assoc :46–50, .
6. Zakariasen KL, MacDonald R, Boran T: Spotlight on lasers—a look
at potential beneits. J Am Dent Assoc :58–62, .
7. Berry EA, III, Eakle WS, Summitt JB: Air abrasion: an old technology
reborn. Compend Contin Educ Dent 20: – , .
8. Sockwell CL: Dental handpieces and rotary cutting instruments.
Dent Clin North Am 15: – , .
9. Kunselman B: Efect of air-polishing shield on the abrasion of PMMA
and dentin [thesis], Chapel Hill, NC, , University of North
Carolina.10. Atkinson DR, Cobb CM, Killoy WJ: he efect of an air-powder
abrasive system on in vitro root surfaces. J Periodontol 55:13–18, .
11. Boyde A: Airpolishing efects on enamel, dentin and cement. Br
Dent J : – , .
12. Galloway SE, Pashley DH: Rate of removal of root structure by use
of the Prophy-Jet device. J Periodontol 58: – , .
13. Peterson LG, Hellden L, Jongebloed W, et al: he efect of a jet
abrasive instrument (Prophy Jet) on root surfaces. Swed Dent J 9:
– , .
14. American Dental Association: Council on Dental Research adopts
standards for shapes and dimensions of excavating burs and diamond
instruments. J Am Dent Assoc 67: , .
15. SS White Dental Manufacturing Company: A century of service to
dentistry, Philadelphia, , SS White Dental Manufacturing.
16. American National Standards Institute: American Dental Association
Speciication No. 23 for dental excavating burs. J Am Dent Assoc
: , .
17. International Standards Organization: Standard ISO : Head
and neck dimensions of designated shapes of burs, Geneva, ,
International Standards Organization.
e22 CHAPTER 14 Intrument and Equipment for Tooth Preparation
25. Eames WB, Reder BS, Smith GA: Cutting eiciency of diamond
stones: efect of technique variables. Oper Dent 2: – , .
26. Hartley JL, Hudson DC, Richardson WP , et al: Cutting characteristics
of dental burs as shown by high speed photomicrography. U S Armed
Forces Med J 8: , .
27. Koblitz FF , Tateosian LH, Roemer FD, et al: An overview of cutting
and wear related phenomena in dentistry. In Pearlman S, editor: he
cutting edge (DHEW Publication No. [NIH] 76- ), Washington,
D.C., , US Government Printing Oice.
28. Westland IN: he energy requirement of the dental cutting process.
J Oral Rehabil 7:51, .
29. Lindhe J: Orthogonal cutting of dentine. Odontol Revy (Malma)
15(Suppl 8):11– , .18. Morrant GA: Burs and rotary instruments: Introduction of a new
standard numbering system. Br Dent J :97–98, .
19. Eames WB, N ale JL: A comparison of cutting eiciency of air-driven
issure burs. J Am Dent Assoc 86: – , .
20. Cantwell KR, Rotella M, Funkenbusch PD, et al: Surface characteristics
of tooth structure after cutting with rotary instruments. Dent Progr
1:42–46, .
21. Henry EE, Peyton FA: he relationship between design and cutting
eiciency of dental burs. J Dent Res 33: – , .
22. Henry EE: Inluences of design factors on performance of the inverted
cone bur. J Dent Res 35: – , .
23. Hartley JL, Hudson DC: Modern rotating instruments: burs and
diamond points. Dent Clin North Am – , .
24. Grajower R, Zeitchick A, Rajstein J: he grinding eiciency of
diamond burs. J Prosthet Dent 42: – , .
e2315
Preliminary Considerations for
Operative Dentistry
LEE W. BOUSHELL, RICARDO WALTER, ALDRIDGE D. WILDER, JR.
This chapter addresses routine chairside preoperative proce -
dures (before actual tooth pr eparation). hese procedures
primarily include patient and operator positions as well as
isolation of the operating ield.
Preoperative Patient and Dental Team
Conideration
In preparation for a clinical procedure, it is important to ensure
that patient and operator positions are properly selected, instrument
exchange between the dentist and the assistant is eicient, proper
illumination is present, and magniication is used, as needed.
Patient and Operator Poition
Eicient patient and operator positions are beneicial for th e welfare
of both individuals. A patient who is in a comfortable position is
more relaxed, has less muscle tension, and is more capable of
cooperating with the dentist.
he practice of dentistry is physically demanding and psychologi -
cally stressful. Physical problems may arise if appropriate operating
positions are neglected.1 Most restorative dental procedures may
be accomplished with the dentist seated. Positions that create
unnecessary curvature of the spine or slumping of the shoulders
should be avoided. Proper balance and weight distribution on
both feet is essential when operating from a standing position.
Generally any uncomfortable or unnatural position that places
undue strain on the body should only rarely be used.
Chair and Patient Positions
Chair and patient positions are important considerations. Dental
chairs are designed to provide total body support in any chair
position. An available chair accessory is an adjustable headrest
cushion or an articulating headrest attached to the chair back. A
contoured or lounge-type chair provides adequate patient support
and comfort. Most chairs also are equipped with programmable
operating positions.
he most common patient positions for operative dentistry are
almost supine or reclined 45 degrees ( Fig. 15.1 ). he choice of
patient position varies with the operator, the type of procedure, and the area of the mouth involved in the operation. In the almost
supine position, the patient’s head, knees, and feet are approximately
the same level. he patient’s head should not be lower than the
feet; the head should be positioned lower than the feet only in an
emergency, as when the patient is in syncope.
Operating Positions
Operating positions may be described by the location of the
operator or by the location of the operator’s arms in relation to
patient position. A right-handed operator uses essentially three
positions—right front, right, and right rear. hese are sometimes
referred to as the 7-o’clock , 9-o’clock , and 11-o’clock positions (Fig.
15.2A ). For a left-handed operator, the three positions are the
left front , left, and left rear positions , or the 5-o’clock , 3-o’clock ,
and 1-o’clock positions. A fourth position, direct rear position , or
12-o’clock position , has application for certain areas of the mouth.
As a rule, the teeth being treated should be at the same level as
the operator’s elbow. he operating positions described here are
for the right-handed operator; the left-handed operator should
substitute left for right.
Right Front Poition
he right front position facilitates examination and treatment of
mandibular anterior teeth (see Fig. 15.2B ), mandibular posterior
teeth (especially on the right side), and maxillary anterior teeth.
It is often advantageous to have the patient’s head rotated slightly
toward the operator.
Right Poition
In the right position, the operator is directly to the right of the
patient (see Fig. 15.2C ). his position is convenient for operating
on the facial surfaces of maxillary and mandibular right posterior
teeth and the occlusal surfaces of mandibular right posterior teeth.
Right Rear Poition
he right rear position is the position of choice for most operations.
The operator is behind and slightly to the right of the
patient. he left arm is positioned around the patient’s head (see
Fig. 15.2D ). When operating from this position, the lingual and
incisal (occlusal) surfaces of maxillary teeth are viewed in the mouth
mirror. Direct vision may be used on mandibular teeth, particularly
e24 CHAPTER 15 Preliminary Conideration for Operative Dentitry
Operating Stools
A variety of operating stools are available for the dentist and the
dental assistant. he seat should be well padded with smooth
cushion edges and should be adjustable for optimal leg position
and back support. Advantages of the seated work position are
compromised if the operator uses the stool improperly. he operator
should sit back on the cushion, using the entire seat and not just
the front edge. he upper body should be positioned so that the
spinal column is straight or bent slightly forward and supported
by the backrest of the stool. he thighs should be parallel to the
loor, and the lower legs should be perpendicular to the loor. If
the seat is too high, its front edge compromises circulation to the
user’s legs. Feet should be lat on the loor.
he seated work position for the assistant is essentially the same
as for the operator except that the stool is 4 to 6 inches higher for
maximal visual access. It is important that the assistant’s stool have
an adequate footrest so that a parallel thigh position is maintained
with good foot support. When properly seated, the operator and
the assistant are capable of providing dental service throughout
the day without an unnecessar y decline in eiciency and productivity
because of muscle tension and fatigue ( Fig. 15.3 ).
Intrument Exchange
All instrument exchanges between the operator and the assistant
should occur in the exchange zone below the patient’s chin and a
few inches above the patient’s chest. Instruments should not be
exchanged over the patient’s face. During the procedure the operator
should anticipate the next instrument required and inform the
assistant accordingly; this allows the instrument to be brought
into the exchange zone for a timely exchange.
During proper instrument exchange, the operator should not
need to look away from the operating ield. he operator should
rotate the instrument handle forward to cue the assistant to exchange
instruments. he assistant should take the instrument from the
operator, rather than the operator dropping it into the assistant’s
hand, and vice versa. Each person should be sure that the other
has a irm grasp on the instrument before it is released.
Mag niication and Headlamp Illumination
Another key to the success of clinical operative dentistry is visual
acuity. he operator must be able to see clearly to attend to the on the left side, but the use of a mouth mirror is advocated for
visibility, light r election, and retraction.
Direct Rear Position
he direct rear position is used primarily for operating on the
lingual surfaces of mandibular anterior teeth. he operator is located
directly behind the patient and looks down over the patient’s head
(see Fig. 15.2E ).
General Considerations
Several general considerations regarding chair and patient positions
are important. he operator should not hesitate to rotate the patient’s
head backward or forward or from side to side to accommodate
the demands of access and visibility of the operating ield. Minor
rotation of the patient’s head is not uncomfortable to the patient
and allows the operator to maintain his or her basic body position.
As a rule, when operating in the maxillary arch, the maxillary
occlusal surfaces (i.e., the maxillary occlusal plane) should be
oriented approximately perpendicular to the loor. When operating
in the mandibular arch, the mandibular occlusal surfaces (i.e., the
mandibular occlusal plane) should be oriented approximately 45
degrees to the loor.
he operator’s face should not come too close to the patient’s
face. he ideal distance is similar to that for reading a book while
sitting in an upright position. he vertical position of the patient
should be adjusted to allow the operator to maintain optimal
ergonomic back and neck posture. Another important aspect of
proper operating position is to minimize body contact with the
patient. It is not appropriate for an operator to rest forearms on
the patient’s shoulders or hands on the patient’s face or forehead.
he patient’s chest should not be used as an instrument tray. From
most positions, the left hand should be free to hold the mouth
mirror to relect light onto the operating ield, to view the tooth
preparation indirectly, or to retract the cheek or tongue. In certain
instances, it is more appropriate to retract the cheek with one or
two ingers of the left hand than to use a mouth mirror. It is often
possible, however, to retract the cheek and relect light with the
mouth mirror at the same time.
When operating for an extended period, the operator may obtain
a certain amount of rest and muscle relaxation by changing operating
positions. Operating from a single position through the day,
especially if standing, produces unnecessary fatigue. Changing
positions, if only for a short time, reduces muscle strain and lessens
fatigue.1
B
A
• Fig. 15.1 Common patient positions. Both positions are recommended for sit-down dentistry. Use
depends on the arch being treated. A, Supine. B, Reclined 45 degrees.
CHAPTER 15 Preliminary Conideration for Operative Dentitry e25
to the clinician’s vision, eliminating shado ws at the operating ield.
Current headlamps use light-emitting diode (LED) technology and
produce whiter light than conventional tungsten halogen light sources.
Iolation of the Operating Field
he goals of operating ield isolation are moisture control, ret raction,
and patient safety.details of each procedure. he use of magniication facilitates attention
to detail and does not adversely a fect vision. Magnifying lenses
have a ixed focal length that often requires the operator to maintain
a proper working distance, which helps to ensure go od posture.
Several types of magniication devices are available, including bifocal
eyeglasses, loupes, and surgical telescopes ( Fig. 15.4 ). To further
improve visual acuity, headlamps are recommended in operative
dentistry. heir greatest advantage is the light source being parallel
B
C
E
DOperator’s
stool
Patient’s
chair7:00
Right front11:00
Right rear
6: :00
Direct rear
9:00
Right
A
• Fig. 15.2 Operating positions indicated by arm approach to the patient. A, Diagrammatic operator
positions. B, Right front. C, Right. D, Right rear. E, Direct rear. (B, C, D, E, Courtesy Dr. Mohammad
Atieh.)
e26 CHAPTER 15 Preliminary Conideration for Operative Dentitry
gingiv al tissue, tongue, lips, and cheek. he rubber dam, highvolume evacuator, absorbents, retraction cord, mouth prop, and
other isolation devices such as the Isolite (Isolite Systems, Santa
Barbara, CA) are used for retraction and access.
Patient Safety
An important consideration of isolating the operating ield is the
use of means to provide safety (i.e., prevent harm) to the patient
during the operation.4,5 Excessive saliva and handpiece spray may
alarm the patient. Small instruments and restorative debris may
be aspirated or swallowed. Soft tissue may be iatrogenically damaged.
Various isolation techniques and devices limit the potential for
adverse outcomes. Harm prevention is achieved as much by the
manner in which the devices are used as by the devices
themselves.
Local Anesthesia
Local anesthetics play a role in eliminating the discomfort of dental
treatment and controlling moisture by reducing salivary low. Local
anesthetics incorporating a vasoconstrictor also reduce blood low,
which helps control hemorrhage at the operating site.
Rubber Dam Iolation
In S.C. Barnum, a New York City dentist, introduced the
rubber dam into dentistry. Use of the rubber dam ensures appropri -
ate dryness of the teeth and improves the quality of clinical
restorative dentistry.6,7 he rubber dam is used to deine the
operating ield by isolating one or more teeth from the oral environ -
ment. he dam eliminates saliva from the operating site and retracts
the soft tissue.
Advantages
he advantages of rubber dam isolation of the operating ield include
(1) a dry, clean operating ield; (2) improved access and visibility;
(3) optimization of dental material properties; (4) protection of the
patient and the operator; and (5) operating eiciency.
Dry, Clean Operating Field
For most procedures, rubber dam isolation is the preferred method
of obtaining a dry, clean ield. he operator is best able to perform
procedures such as proper tooth preparation, caries removal, and
insertion of restorative materials in a dry ield. he time saved by
operating in a clean ield with good visibility may more than
compensate for the time spent applying the rubber dam.8 When
excavating a deep caries lesion and risking pulpal exposure, use of
the rubber dam is strongly recommended to prevent pulpal
contamination fr om bacteria in oral luids.
Acce and Viibility
he rubber dam provides maximal access and visibility. It controls
moisture and retracts soft tissue. Gingival tissue is mildly retracted
so as to enhance access to and visibility of the gingival aspects of
the tooth preparation. he dam also retracts the lips, cheeks, and
tongue. A dark-colored rubber dam provides a nonreflective
background, which is in contrast to the operating site. he dam
allows uninterrupted access and visibility througho ut the operative
procedure.
Optimization of Dental Material Propertie
he rubber dam prevents moisture contamination and compromise
of restorative materials used during the procedure. Amalgam Goal of Iolation
Moisture Control
It is not possible to properly accomplish operative dentistry without
control of mouth moisture. Moisture control refers to the exclusion
of saliva, gingival sulcular luid, and gingival bleeding from the
operating ield. It also involves preventing or limiting the spray
from the handpiece and restorative debris from being swallowed
or aspirated by the patient. he rubber dam, suction devices, and
absorbents are variously e fective in controlling moisture.2,3 Generally
this textbook recommends use of the rubber dam as an optimum
means of gaining moisture control.
Retraction and Access
he details of a restorative procedure cannot be managed without
proper retraction and access. Retraction and access provide maximal
exposure of the operating site and usually involve having the patient
maintain an open mouth and displacement or retraction of the
• Fig. 15.3 Recommended seating positions for operator and chairside
assistant, with the height of the operating ield approximately at elbow
level of the operator. (From Robinson DS, Bird DL: Essentials of dental
assisting, ed 4, St. Louis, , Saunders.)
• Fig. 15.4 Use of magniication with surgical telescopes.
CHAPTER 15 Preliminary Conideration for Operative Dentitry e27
strength. he dam material is available in 12.5 × 12.5 cm or 15
× 15 cm sheets. he thicknesses or weights available are thin
(0.15 mm), medium (0.2 mm), heavy (0.25 mm), and extra heavy
(0.30 mm). Light and dark dam materials are available, and darker
colors are generally preferred for contrast. he rubber dam material
has a shiny side and a dull side. Because the dull side is less light
relective, it is generally placed facing the occlusal side of the
isolated teeth. A thicker dam is more efective in retracting tissue
and more resistant to tearing; it is especially recommended for
isolating Class V lesions in conjunction with a cervical retainer.
he thinner material has the advantage of passing through the
contacts easier, which is particularly helpful when proximal contacts
are broad and tooth mobility is limited.
Frame
he rubber dam holder (frame) suspends the borders of the rubber
dam. he Young holder is a U-shaped metal frame ( Fig. 15.6 )
with small metal projections for securing the borders of the rubber
dam.
Retainer
he rubber dam retainer consists of four prongs and two jaws
connected by a bow ( Fig. 15.7 ). he retainer is used to anchor
the dam to the most posterior tooth to be isolated. Retainers also
are used to retract gingival tissue. Many diferent sizes and shapes
are available, with speciic retainers designed for certain teeth restorative material does not achieve its optimum physical properties
if used in a wet ield.6 Bonding to enamel and dentin is severely
compromised or nonexistent if the tooth substrate is contaminated
with saliv a, blood, or other oral luids.9,10 Some studies have con -
cluded that no diference exists between the use of the rubber dam
and cotton roll isolation as long as control of sources of contamina -
tion is maintained during the restorative procedures.2,11-13 However,
the efectiveness of rubber dam isolation allows freedom to focus
on the details of the restorative procedure, which is especially
advantageous for those procedures that are technique sensitive.
Protection of the Patient and the Operator
he rubber dam protects the patient and the operator. It protects
the patient from aspirating or swallowing small instruments or
debris associated with operative procedures.14 A properly applied
rubber dam protects soft tissue and the tongue from irritating or
distasteful medicaments (e.g., etching and astringent agents). he
dam also ofers some soft tissue protection from rotating burs and
stones. Authors disagree on whether the rubber dam protects the
patient from mercury exposure during amalgam removal.15,16
However, it is generally agreed that the rubber dam is an efective
infection contr ol barrier for the dental oice.17-19
Operating Eiciency
Use of the rubber dam allows for operating eiciency and increased
productivity. Conversation with the patient is limited. he rubber
dam retainer (discussed later) helps provide a moderate amount
of mouth opening during the procedure. (For additional mouthopening aids, see Mouth Props .) Quadrant restorative procedures
are facilitated. Many state dental practice acts permit the assistant
to place the rubber dam, thus saving time for the dentist. Chris -
tensen reported that use of a rubber dam increases the quality and
quantity of restorative services.8
Disadvantages
Rubber dam use is low among private practitioners.20-22 Time
consumption and patient objection are the most frequently quoted
disadvantages of the rubber dam. However, the rubber dam may
usually be placed in less than 5 minutes. he advantages previously
mentioned certainly justify any time utilized in accomplishing
proper placement.
Certain situations may preclude the use of the rubber dam,
including (1) teeth that have not erupted suiciently to support
a retainer, (2) some third molars, and (3) extremely malpositioned
teeth. In addition, patients may not tolerate the rubber dam if
breathing through the nose is diicult. In rare instances, the patient
cannot tolerate a rubber dam because of psychologic reasons or
latex allergy.12,23 Latex-free rubber dam material is, however, currently
available ( Fig. 15.5 ). hese situations are the exception and it has
been reported that use of the rubber dam was well accepted by
most patients and operators.24
Materials and Instruments
he materials and instruments necessary for the use of the rubber
dam are available from most dental supply companies. It is necessary
to have wax ed dental tape or loss available so as to lubricate the
contact areas of the teeth to be isolated prior to rubber dam
placement.
Material
Rubber dam material (latex and nonlatex), as with all types of
elastic material, will deteriorate over time, resulting in low tear
• Fig. 15.5 Rubber dam material as supplied in sheets. (From Boyd
LRB: Dental instruments: a pocket guide, ed 4, St. Louis, ,
Saunders.)
• Fig. 15.6 Young rubber dam frame (holder). (From Hargreaves KM,
Cohen S: Cohen’s pathways of the pulp, ed 10, St. Louis, , Mosby.)
e28 CHAPTER 15 Preliminary Conideration for Operative Dentitry
(Fig. 15.8 ). lists suggested retainer applications. When
positioned on a tooth, a properly selected retainer should contact
the tooth on its four line angles (see Fig. 15.7 ). his four-point
contact prevents rocking or tilting of the retainer. Movement of
the retainer on the anchor tooth may injure the gingiva and the
tooth, resulting in postoperative soreness or sensitivity.25 he prongs
of some retainers are gingivally directed (inverted) and are helpful
when the anchor tooth is only partially erupted or when additional
soft tissue retraction is indicated ( Fig. 15.9 ). he jaws of the retainer
should not extend beyond the mesial and distal line angles of the
tooth because (1) they may interfere with matrix and wedge place -
ment, (2) gingival trauma is more likely to occur, and (3) a complete
seal around the anchor tooth is mor e diicult to achieve.
Wingless and winged retainers are available (see Fig. 15.8 ). he
winged retainer has anterior and lateral wings ( Fig. 15.10 ). he
Bow
Hole
ProngJaw
• Fig. 15.7 Rubber dam retainer. Note four-point prong contact (arrows)
with tooth. (Modiied from Daniel SJ, Harfst SA, Wilder RS: Mosby’s dental
hygiene: concepts, cases, and competencies, ed 2, St. Louis, ,
Mosby.)
ANTERIORColor Coded Matte Finish Winged and Wingless Clamps
Small lower
Large bicuspids Bicuspids
Small LargeLower Lower
Upper
Lower left molars/
Upper right molarsLower right molars/
Upper left molarsSmall upper Upper and lowerPREMOLAR
SERRATED JAWSMOLAR - SPECIAL USE
Serrations for improved retentionFor irregularly shaped, structurally
compromised or partially erupted molarsMOLAR
• Fig. 15.8 Selection of rubber dam retainers. Note retainers with wings. ( Pictured : Color Coded Matte
Finish Winged and Wingless Clamps.) (Courtesy Coltène/Whaledent Inc., Cuyahoga Falls, OH.)Suggested Retainers for Various Anchor
Tooth Applications
Retainer Application
W56 Most molar anchor teeth
W7 Mandibular molar anchor teeth
W8 Maxillary molar anchor teeth
W4 Most premolar anchor teeth
W2 Small premolar anchor teeth
W27 Terminal mandibular molar anchor teeth requiring
preparations involving the distal surface
• Fig. 15.9 Retainers with prongs directed gingivally are helpful when
the anchor tooth is only partially erupted.
CHAPTER 15 Preliminary Conideration for Operative Dentitry e29
wings are designed to provide extra retraction of the rubber dam
from the operating ield and to allow attachment of the dam to
the retainer before conveying the retainer (with dam attached) to
the anchor tooth, after which the dam is removed from the lateral
wings. As seen in Fig. 15.10 , the anterior wings may be removed
if they are not desired.
he bow of the retainer (except the No. , which is applied
after the rubber dam is in place) should be tied with dental loss
(Fig. 15.11 ) approximately 30 cm in length before the retainer is
placed in the mouth. For maximal protection, the tie may be
threaded through both holes in the jaws of the retainer because
the bow of the retainer may fatigue and fracture after multiple
uses. he loss allows retrieval of the retainer or its broken parts
if they are accidentally swallowed or aspirated. It is sometimes
necessary to recontour the jaws of the retainer to the shape of the
tooth by grinding with a mounted stone or other cutting instrument
(Fig. 15.12 ). A retainer usually is not required when the dam is
applied for treatment of anterior teeth except for the cervical retainer
for Class V restorations.
Punch
he rubber dam punch is a precision instrument having a rotating
metal table disc (cutting table) with holes of varying sizes and a
tapered, sharp-pointed plunger ( Fig. 15.13 ). Care should be exercised
when changing from one hole to another. he plunger should be
centered in the cutting hole so that the edges of the holes are not
b
a
• Fig. 15.10 Removing anterior wings (a) on molar retainer. Lateral
wings (b) are for attachment of the rubber dam material during
placement.
• Fig. 15.11 Methods of tying retainers with dental loss.
• Fig. 15.12 Recontouring jaws of retainer with mounted stone. at risk of being chipped by the plunger tip when the plunger is
closed. If the holes in the disk are damaged, the cutting quality
of the punch is compromised, as evidenced by incompletely cut
holes. hese holes tear easily when stretched during application
over the retainer or tooth.
Retainer Forcep
he rubber dam retainer forceps is used for placement and removal
of the retainer from the tooth ( Fig. 15.14 ).
Napkin
he rubber dam napkin, placed between the rubber dam and the
patient’s skin, has the following beneits ( Fig. 15.15 ):
1. Improvement of patient comfort by reducing direct contact of
the rubber material with the skin.
2. Absorption of saliva seeping at the corners of the mouth.
3. Serves as a cushion for the rubber material.
4. Provides a convenient method of wiping the patient’s lips upon
removal of the dam.
Lubricant
A water-soluble lubricant applied in the area of the punched holes
facilitates the passing of the dam septa through the proximal contact
areas of the teeth to be isolated. Rubber dam lubricants are com -
mercially available; however, other lubricants such as shaving cream
also are satisfactory. Additionally, the use of waxed loss enables
e30 CHAPTER 15 Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry
• Fig. 15.13 Rubber dam punches. (From Boyd LRB: Dental instru­
ments: a pocket guide, ed 4, St. Louis, , Saunders.)
• Fig. 15.14 Rubber dam forceps (A) engaging retainer (B). (A, From
Boyd LRB: Dental instruments: a pocket guide, ed 4, St. Louis, ,
Saunders. B, From Baum L, Phillips RW, Lund MR: Textbook of operative
dentistry, ed 3, Philadelphia, , Saunders.)
• Fig. 15.15 Disposable rubber dam napkin. (Courtesy Coltene/vvhale­
dent Inc., Cuyahoga Falls, OH.) • Fig. 15.16 A, Anchor formed from rubber dam material. B, Anchor
formed from dental tape.
initial lubrication of contact areas of the teeth to be isolated. Cocoa
butter or petroleum jelly may be applied at the corners of the
patient's mouth to prevent irritation. These two materials are not
satisfactory rubber dam lubricants, however, because both are
oil-based and not easily rinsed from the dam and adjacent tooth
structure when the dam is placed.
Anchors (Other Than Retainers)
Other anchors, in addition to conventional rubber dam retainers,
may also be used. The intensity of the proximal contact itself may
be sufficient to anchor the dam on the tooth farthest from the
posterior retainer (in the isolated field), eliminating the need for
a second retainer (see step 13 of Procedure 15.1 later in the chapter).
To secure the dam further anteriorly or to anchor the dam on any
tooth where a retainer is contraindicated, a small piece of rubber
dam material (cut from a sheet of dam) or waxed dental tape (or
floss) or a rubber Wedjet (Hygenic, Akron, OH) may be passed
through the proximal contact. The cut piece of dam material is
first stretched, passed through the contact, and then released (Fig.
15.16A).When waxed dental tape or floss is used, it should be
passed through the contact, looped, and passed through a second
time (see Fig. 15.16B). When the anchor is in place, the dam
material, the tape (floss), or Wedjet should be trimmed to prevent
interference with the operating site.
Hole Size and Position
Successful isolation of teeth and maintenance of a dry, clean
operating field largely depend on hole size and position in the
rubber dam.26 Holes should be punched by following the arch
form, making adjustments for malpositioned or missing teeth.
Most rubber dam punches have either five or six holes in the
cutting table. The smaller holes are used for the incisors, canines,
and premolars and the larger holes for the molars. The largest hole
generally is reserved for the posterior anchor tooth to allow the
rubber dam material to stretch over the retainer without tearing
Text continued on p. e35
CHAPTER 15 Preliminary Conideration for Operative Dentitry e31
PROCEDURE 15.1
Application of Rubber Dam Iolation
The application procedure is described for right-handed operators.
Left-handed users should change right to left. Each step number has a
corresponding illustration.
Step 1: Testing and Lubricating the Proximal Contacts
The opera tor receives the dental loss from the assistant to test the
interproximal contacts and remove debris from the teeth to be isolated.
Passing (or attempting to pass) the loss through the contacts identiies any
sharp edges of restorations or enamel that must be smoothed or removed to
prevent tearing the dam. Using waxed dental loss (or tape) may lubricate tight
contacts to facilitate dam placement. Tight contacts that are dificult to loss
but do not cut or fray the loss may be wedged apart slightly to permit
placement of the rubber dam. A blunt hand instrument may be used for
separation. For some clinical situations, the occlusal embrasure above the
proximal portion of the tooth to be restored may need to be partially prepared
(opened) to eliminate a sharp or dificult contact before the dam is placed.
1
Step 1: Testing and lubricating the proximal contacts.
Step 2: Punching Holes
It is recommended that the assistant punch the holes after assessing the
arch form and tooth alignment. Some operators, however, prefer to have the
assistant prepunch the dam using holes marked by a template or a rubber
dam stamp.
2
Step 2: Punching the holes.
Step 3: Lubricating the Dam
The assistant lubricates both sides of the rubber dam in the area of the
punched holes using a cotton roll or gloved ingertip to apply the watersoluble lubricant. This facilitates passing the rubber dam through the
contacts. The lips and especially the corners of the mouth may be lubricated
with water-insoluble petroleum jelly or cocoa butter to prevent irritation.
3
Step 3: Lubricating the dam.
Step 4: Selecting the Retainer
The operator receives (from the assistant) the rubber dam retainer forceps
with the selected retainer and loss tie in position ( A). The free end of the tie
should exit from the cheek side of the retainer. The retainer is placed on the
tooth to verify retainer stability. If the retainer its poorly, it is removed either
for adjustment or for selection of a different size.24 (Retainer adjustment, if
needed to provide stability, is discussed in the previous section on rubber
dam retainers.) Whenever the forceps is holding the retainer, care should be
taken not to open the retainer more than necessary to secure it in the
forceps. Stretching the retainer open for extended periods causes it to lose
its elastic recovery. Retainers that have been deformed (“sprung”) in this
way, such as the one shown in B, should be discarded.
4A
4B
Step 4: Selecting the retainer. (From Peterson JE, Nation WA, Matsson
L: Effect of a rubber dam clamp (retainer) on cementum and junctional
epithelium, Oper Dent 11 :42–45, .)
Continued
e32 CHAPTER 15 Preliminary Conideration for Operative Dentitry
Step 5: Testing the Retainer’s Stability and Retention
If during trial placement the retainer seems acceptable, remove the forceps.
Test the retainer’s stability and retention by lifting gently in an occlusal
direction with a ingertip under the bow of the retainer or by gently tugging
on the loss tie. An improperly itting retainer rocks or is easily dislodged.
5
Step 5: Testing the retainer’s stability and retention.
Step 6: Positioning the Dam Over the Retainer
Before applying the dam, the loss tie may be threaded through the anchor
hole or it may be left on the underside of the dam. With the foreingers,
stretch the anchor hole of the dam over the retainer (bow irst) and then
under the retainer jaws. The lip of the hole must pass completely under the
retainer jaws. The foreingers may thin out, to a single thickness, the septal
dam for the mesial contact of the retainer tooth and attempt to pass it
through the contact, lip of the hole irst. The septal dam always must pass
through its respective contact in single thickness. If it does not pass through
readily, it should be passed through with waxed dental loss later in the
procedure.
6
Step 6: Positioning the dam over the retainer.
Step 7: Applying the Napkin
The operator now gathers the rubber dam in the left hand, while the
assistant inserts the ingers and thumb of the right (or left) hand through the
napkin’s opening and grasps the bunched dam held by the operator.
7
Step 7: Applying the napkin.
Step 8: Positioning the Napkin
The assistant pulls the bunched dam through the napkin and positions it on
the patient’s face. The operator helps by positioning the napkin on the
patient’s right side. The napkin reduces skin contact with the dam.
8
Step 8: Positioning the napkin.
Step 9: Attaching the Frame
The operator unfolds the dam. (If an identiication hole was punched, it is
used to identify the upper left corner.) The assistant aids in unfolding the
dam and, while holding the frame in place, attaches the dam to the metal
projections on the left side of the frame. The rubber dam material should
irst be attached to the area of frame that is located on the same arch that
the retainer/anchor tooth are located. This limits the likelihood of retainer
dislodgement during rubber dam suspension. This is then followed by
suspending the rest of the rubber dam on the frame. The frame is positioned
on the outside the dam. The curvature of the frame should be concentric
with the patient’s face. The dam lies between the frame and napkin. Either
the operator or the assistant attaches the dam along the inferior border of
the frame. Attaching the dam to the frame at this time controls the dam to
provide access and visibility. The free ends of the loss tie are secured to the
frame.
9
Step 9: Attaching the frame. PROCEDURE 15.1
Application of Rubber Dam Iolation—cont’d
CHAPTER 15 Preliminary Conideration for Operative Dentitry e33
Step 10 (Optional): Attaching the Neck Strap
The assistant attaches the neck strap to the left side of the frame and
passes it behind the patient’s neck. The operator attaches it to the
right side of the frame. Neck strap tension is adjusted to stabilize the
frame and hold the frame (and periphery of the dam) gently against the face
and away from the opera ting ield. If desired, using soft tissue paper
between the neck and strap may prevent contact of the patient’s neck
against the strap.
10
Step 10 (optional): Attaching the neck strap.
Step 11: Passing the Dam Through the Posterior Contact
If a tooth is present distal to the retainer, the distal edge of the posterior
anchor hole should be passed through the contact (single thickness, with no
folds) to ensure a seal around the anchor tooth. If necessary, use waxed
dental loss to assist in this procedure (see step 15 for the use of dental
loss). If the retainer comes off unintentionally as this is done or during
subsequent procedures, passage of the dam through the distal contact
anchors the dam suficiently to allow easier reapplication of the retainer or
placement of an adjusted or different retainer.
11
Step 11: Passing the dam through the posterior contact.
Step 12 (Optional): Applying a Rigid Supporting Material
If the stability of the retainer is questionable, a rigid supporting material such
as a quick-set PVS bite registration material or a low-fusing modeling
compound may be applied.
12
Step 12 (optional): Applying the rigid material.
Step 13: Applying the Anterior Anchor (if Needed)
The operator passes the dam over the anterior anchor tooth, anchoring the
anterior portion of the rubber dam. Usually the dam passes easily through
the mesial and distal contacts of the anchor tooth if it is passed in single
thickness starting with the lip of the hole. Stretching the lip of the hole and
sliding it back and forth aids in positioning the septum. When the contact
farthest from the retainer is minimal (“light”), an anchor may be required in
the form of a double thickness of dental loss or a narrow strip of dam
material or Wedjet that is stretched, inserted, and released. If the contact is
open, a rolled piece of dam material may be used.
13
Step 13: Applying the anterior anchor (if needed).
Step 14: Passing the Septa Through the Contacts Without Dental
Floss
The operator passes the septa through as many contacts as possible without
the use of dental loss by stretching the septal dam faciogingivally and
linguogingivally with the foreingers. Each septum must not be allowed to
bunch or fold. Rather its passage through the contact should be started with
a single edge and continued with a single thickness. Passing the dam
through as many contacts as possible without using dental loss is urged
because the use of dental loss always increases the risk of tearing holes in
the septa. Slight separation (wedging) of the teeth is sometimes an aid when
the contacts are extremely tight. Pressure from a blunt hand instrument
(e.g., beaver-tail burnisher) applied in the facial embrasure gingival to the
contact usually is suficient to obtain enough separation to permit the
septum to pass through the contact.PROCEDURE 15.1
Application of Rubber Dam Iolation—cont’d
Continued
e34 CHAPTER 15 Preliminary Conideration for Operative Dentitry
14
Step 14: Passing the septa through the contacts without dental loss.
Step 15: Passing the Septa Through the Contacts With Floss
Use waxed dental loss to pass the dam through the remaining contacts.
Dental tape may be preferred over loss because its wider dimension more
effectively carries the rubber septa through the contacts and may be less
likely to cut the septa. The waxed variety makes passage easier and
decreases the chances for cutting holes in the septa or tearing the edges of
the holes. The leading edge of the septum should be over the contact, ready
to be drawn into and through the contact with dental loss. As before, the
septal rubber should be kept in single thickness with no folds. Dental loss
should be placed at the contact on a slight angle. With a good inger rest on
the tooth, dental loss should be controlled so that it slides (not snaps)
through the proximal contact, preventing damage to the interdental tissues.
When the leading edge of the septum has passed the contact, the remaining
interseptal dam can be carried through more easily.
15
Step 15: Passing the septa through the contacts with waxed dental loss
(or tape).
Step 16 (Optional): Technique for Using Dental Floss
Often, several passes with dental loss are required to carry a reluctant
septum through a tight contact. When this happens, previously passed loss
should be left in the gingival embrasure until the entire septum has been
placed successfully with subsequent passage of dental loss. This prevents a
partially passed septum from being removed or torn. The double strand of
the loss is removed from the facial embrasure.
16
Step 16 (optional): Technique for using dental loss.
Step 17: Inverting the Dam Interproximally
Invert the dam into the gingival sulcus to complete the seal around the tooth
and prevent leakage. Often the dam inverts itself as the septa are passed
through the contacts as a result of the dam being stretched gingivally. The
operator should verify that the dam is inverted interproximally. Inversion in
this region is best accomplished with dental tape (or loss).
17
Step 17: Inverting the dam interproximally.
Step 18: Inverting the Dam Faciolingually
With the edges of the dam inverted interproximally, complete the inversion
facially and lingually using an explorer or a beaver-tail burnisher while the
assistant directs a stream of air onto the tooth. Move the explorer around the
neck of the tooth facially and lingually with the tip perpendicular to the tooth
surface or directed slightly gingivally. A dry surface prevents the dam from
sliding out of the crevice. Alternatively, the dam may be inverted facially and
lingually by drying the tooth while stretching the dam gingivally and
releasing it slowly.
18
Step 18: Inverting the dam faciolingually. PROCEDURE 15.1
Application of Rubber Dam Iolation—cont’d
CHAPTER 15 Preliminary Conideration for Operative Dentitry e35
Step 19 (Optional): Using a Saliva Ejector
The use of a saliva ejector is optional because most patients are able and
usually prefer to swallow excess saliva. Salivation is greatly reduced when
profound anesthesia is obtained. If salivation is a problem, the operator or
assistant uses cotton pliers to pick up the dam lingual to mandibular incisors
and cuts a small hole through which the saliva ejector is inserted. The hole
should be positioned so that the rubber dam helps support the weight
of the ejector, preventing pressure on the delica te tissues in the loor of the
mouth.
19
Step 19 (optional): Creating a hole for the use of a saliva ejector.
Step 20: Conirming Proper Application of the Rubber Dam
The properly applied rubber dam is securely positioned and comfortable to
the patient. The patient should be assured that the rubber dam does not
prevent swallowing or mouth closing (about halfway) during a pause in the
procedure.
20
Step 20: Conirming proper application of the rubber dam.
Step 21: Checking for Access and Visibility
Check to see that the completed rubber dam provides maximal access and
visibility for the operative procedure.
21
Step 21: Checking for access and visibility.
Step 22: Inserting the Wedges
For proximal surface preparations (Classes II, III, and IV), many operators
consider the insertion of interproximal wedges as the inal step in rubber
dam application. Wedges are generally round toothpick ends about 12 mm in
length that are snugly inserted into the gingival embrasures from the facial
or lingual embrasure, whichever is greater, using No. pliers.
To facilitate wedge insertion, irst stretch the dam slightly by ingertip
pressure in the direction opposite wedge insertion ( A), then insert the wedge
while slowly releasing the dam. This results in a passive dam under the
wedge (i.e., the dam elastic dam does cause the wedge to rebound) and
prevents bunching or tearing of the septal dam during wedge insertion.
Lubricating the wedge with water may facilitate wedge placement without
rebound. The inserted wedges appear in B.
22A
22B
Step 22: Inserting the wedges. PROCEDURE 15.1
Application of Rubber Dam Iolation—cont’d
(Fig. 15.17 ). he following guidelines and suggestions may be
helpful when positioning the holes:
• (Optional) Punch an identiication hole in the upper left (i.e.,
the patient’s left) corner of the rubber dam for ease of location
of that corner when applying the dam to the holder.
• When operating on the incisors and mesial surfaces of canines,
isolate from irst premolar to irst premolar. Metal retainers
usually are not required for this isolation ( Fig. 15.18A ). If
additional access is necessary after isolating teeth, as described,
a retainer may be positioned over the dam to engage the adjacent nonisolated tooth, but care must be exercised not to pinch the
gingiva beneath the dam (see Fig. 15.18B and C ).
• When operating on a canine, it is preferable to isolate from
the irst molar to the opposite lateral incisor. To treat a Class
V lesion on a canine, isolate posteriorly to include the irst
molar to provide access for placement of the cervical retainer
on the canine.
• When operating on posterior teeth, isolate anteriorly to include
the lateral incisor on the opposite side of the arch from the
operating site. In this case, the hole for the lateral incisor is the
e36 CHAPTER 15 Preliminary Conideration for Operative Dentitry
most remote from the hole for the posterior anchor tooth.
Anterior teeth included in the isolation pro vide inger rests on
dry teeth and better access and visibility for the operator and
the assistant.
• When operating on premolars, punch holes to include one to
two teeth distally, and extend anteriorly to include the opposite
lateral incisor.
• When operating on molars, punch holes as far distally as possible,
and extend anteriorly to include the opposite lateral incisor.
• Isolation of a minimum of three teeth is recommended except
when endodontic therapy is indicated, and in that case only
the tooth to be tr eated is isolated. he number of teeth and
the tooth surfaces to be treated influence the pattern of
isolation.
• he distance between holes is equal to the distance from the
center of one tooth to the center of the adjacent tooth, measured
at the level of the gingival tissue. When the distance between
holes is excessive, the dam material is excessive and wrinkles
between teeth, which impedes visibility of the proximal surfaces.
Conversely, too little distance between holes causes the dam
to stretch, resulting in an open space between the rubber
material and the isolated tooth and subsequent leakage. When
the distance is correct, the dam intimately adapts and isolates
the teeth as well as covers and slightly retracts the interdental
tissue.
• When the rubber dam is applied to maxillary teeth, the irst
holes punched (after the optional identiication hole) are for
the central incisors. hese holes are positioned approximately
25 mm from the superior border of the dam ( Figs. 15.19A and
15.20 ), pro viding suicient material to cover the patient’s upper
lip. For a patient with a large upper lip or mustache, position
the holes more than 25 mm from the edge. Conversely, for a
child or an adult with a small upper lip, the holes should be
positioned less than 25 mm from the edge. he holes for the
incisors are punched irst, followed by the remaining holes as
indicated for the anticipated procedure.
• When the rubber dam is applied to mandibular teeth, the irst
hole punched (after the optional identiication hole) is for the
posterior anchor tooth that is to receive the retainer. To determine
proper location, mentally divide the rubber dam into three
vertical sections: left, middle, and right. If the anchor tooth is
the mandibular irst molar, punch the hole for this tooth at a
point halfway from the superior edge to the inferior edge and
at the junction of the right (or left) and middle thirds (see Fig.
15.19B ). If the anchor tooth is the second or third molar, the
position for the hole moves toward the inferior border and
slightly toward the center of the rubber dam compared with
the irst molar hole just described (see Fig. 15.19C and D ). If
the anchor tooth is the irst premolar, the hole is placed toward
the superior border compared with the hole for the irst molar
and toward the center of the dam (see Fig. 15.19E ). he farther
posterior the mandibular anchor tooth, the more dam material
is required to come from behind the retainer over the upper
lip. Fig. 15.20 illustrates the diference in the amount of dam
required, comparing the irst premolar and the second molar
as anchor teeth. he distances also may be compared by noting
the length of dam between the superior edge of the dam and
the position of the hole for the posterior anchor t ooth (see Fig.
15.19B–F ).
• When a thinner rubber dam is used, smaller holes must be
punched to achieve an adequate seal around the teeth because
the thin dam has greater elasticity.
A
B
C
• Fig. 15.18 A, Isolation for operating on incisors and mesial surface of
canines. B and C, Increasing access by application of metal retainer over
dam and adjacent nonisolated tooth. 6
1
2
• Fig. 15.17 Cutting table on rubber dam punch, illustrating use of hole
size. (Modiied from Daniel SJ, Harfst SA, Wilder RS: Mosby’s dental
hygiene: concepts, cases, and competencies, ed 2, St. Louis, ,
Mosby.)
CHAPTER 15 Preliminary Conideration for Operative Dentitry e37
A
C
EB
D
F
• Fig. 15.19 Hole position. A, When maxillary teeth ar e to be isolated, the irst holes punched are for
central incisors, approximately 2.5 cm from superior border. B, Hole position when the anchor tooth is
the mandibular irst molar. C, Hole position when the anchor tooth is the mandibular second molar. D,
Hole position when the anchor tooth is the mandibular third molar. E, Hole position when the anchor
tooth is the mandibular irst premolar. F, Hole position when the anchor tooth is the mandibular second
premolar. Note the hole punched in each of these six representative rubber dam sheets for identiication
of the upper left corner (arrow in A).
e38 CHAPTER 15 Preliminary Conideration for Operative Dentitry
Rubber dam
• Fig. 15.20 The more posterior the mandibular anchor tooth, the more
dam material is required to come from behind retainer over the upper lip.
B
A
• Fig. 15.21 Commercial products to aid in locating hole position. A, Dental dam template. B, Dental
dam stamp. (From Boyd LRB: Dental instruments: a pocket guide, ed 4, St. Louis, , Saunders.)Until these guidelines and suggestions related to hole posi -
tion are mastered, an inexperienced operator may choose to
use commercial products to aid in locating hole position ( Fig.
15.21 ). A rubber stamp that imprints permanent and primary
arch forms on the rubber dam is available, and several sheets
of dam material may be stamped in advance. A plastic template
also may be used to mark hole position. Experienced operators
and assistants may not require these aids, and accurate hole loca -
tion is best achieved by noting the patient’s arch form and tooth
position.Placement
Administration of the local anesthetic precedes application of the
rubber dam. Peripheral anesthesia in the area of the procedure
allows for more comfortable retainer placement on the anchor
tooth. Occasionally the posterior anchor tooth in the max illary
arch may need to be anesthetized if it is remote from the anesthetized
operating site. he onset of profound anesthesia will usually occur
while the rubber dam is being placed.
he technique for the application of the rubber dam has been
presented by numerous authors.7,27,28 he step-by-step application
and removal of the rubber dam, using the maxillary left irst molar
for the posterior retainer and including the maxillary right lateral
incisor as the anterior anchor, is described and illustrated here.
he procedure is described as if the operator and the assistant are
working together.
Procedure 15.1 demonstrates sequential placement of the retainer
and the dam. his approach provides for maximal visibility when
placing the retainer, which reduces the risk of impinging on gingival
tissue. Isolating a greater number of teeth, as illustrated in Procedure
15.1, is indicated for quadrant operative procedures. For limited
operative procedures, it is often acceptable to isolate fewer teeth.
Appropriate seal of each tooth is accomplished by inversion of the
rubber material in a gingival direction. Interproximal inversion is
accomplished irst by using dental loss. Inversion of the dam on
the facial and lingual surfaces is accomplished by air-drying the
surfaces and use of a blunt instrument ( Procedure 15.1 , step 18).
Procedure 15.2 demonstrates the sequential removal of the dam.
Alternative and Additional Methods and Factors
Applying the Dam and Retainer Simultaneouly
he retainer and dam may be placed simultaneously to reduce the
risk of the retainer being swallowed or aspirated before the dam
is placed ( Fig. 15.22 ). his approach also solves the occasional
diiculty of trying to pass the dam over a previously placed r etainer,
the bow of which is pressing against oral soft tissues. In this method
the posterior retainer is applied irst to verify a stable it. he
operator removes the retainer and, still holding the retainer with
forceps, passes the bow through the proper hole from the underside
CHAPTER 15 Preliminary Conideration for Operative Dentitry e39
PROCEDURE 15.2
Removal of Rubber Dam Iolation
Before the removal of the rubber dam, rinse and suction away any debris
that may ha ve collected to prevent it from falling onto the loor of the mouth
during the removal procedure. If a saliva ejector was used, remove it at this
time. Each numbered step has a corresponding illustration.
Step 1: Cutting the Septa
Stretch the dam facially, pulling the septal rubber away from gingival tissue
and the tooth. Protect the underlying soft tissue by placing a ingertip
beneath the septum. Clip each septum with blunt-tipped scissors, freeing the
dam from the interproximal spaces, but leave the dam over the anterior and
posterior anchor teeth. To prevent inadvertent soft tissue damage, curved
nose scissors are preferred.
1
Step 1: Cutting the septa.
Step 2: Removing the Retainer
Engage the retainer with retainer forceps. It is unnecessary to remove any
rigid retaining material, if used, because it will break free as the retainer is
spread and lifted from the tooth. While the operator removes the retainer, the
assistant releases the neck strap, if used.
2
Step 2: Removing the retainer. Step 3: Removing the Dam
After the retainer is removed, release the dam from the anterior anchor
tooth, and remove the dam and frame simultaneously. While doing this,
caution the patient not to bite on newly inserted restoration(s) (especially
newly placed amalgam) until the occlusion can be evaluated.
3
Step 3: Removing the dam.
Step 4: Wiping the Lips
Wipe the patient’s lips with the napkin immediately after the dam and frame
are removed. This helps prevent saliva from getting on the patient’s face and
is comforting to the patient.
4
Step 4: Wiping the lips.
Step 5: Rinsing the Mouth and Massaging the Tissue
Rinse teeth and the mouth using the air-water spray and the high-volume
evacuator. To enhance circulation, particularly around anchor teeth, massage
the tissue around the teeth that were isolated.
Continuedof the dam (the lubricated rubber dam is held by the assistant)
(see Fig. 15.22A ). he free end of the loss tie should be threaded
through the anchor hole before the retainer bow is inserted. When
using a retainer with lateral wings, place the retainer in the hole
punched for the anchor tooth by stretching the dam to engage
these wings ( Fig. 15.23 ).
he operator grasps the handle of the forceps in the right hand
and gathers the dam with the left hand to clearly visualize the jaws of the retainer and facilitate its placement (see Fig. 15.22B ). he
operator conveys the retainer (with the dam) into the mouth and
positions it on the anchor tooth. Care is needed when applying
the retainer to prevent the jaws of the retainer fr om sliding gingivally
and impinging on the soft tissue (see Fig. 15.22C ).
he assistant gently pulls the inferior border of the dam toward
the patient’s chin, while the operator positions the superior border
over the upper lip. As the assistant holds the borders of the dam,
e40 CHAPTER 15 Preliminary Conideration for Operative Dentitry
A B
C D
• Fig. 15.22 A, Bow being passed through the posterior anchor hole from the underside of the dam.
B, Gathering the dam to facilitate placement of the retainer. C, Positioning the retainer on the anchor
tooth. D, Stretching the anchor hole borders over and under the jaws of the retainer.
5
Step 5: Rinsing the mouth and massaging the tissue.
Step 6: Examining the Dam
Lay the sheet of rubber dam over a light-colored lat surface or hold it up to
the operating light to determine that no portion of the rubber dam has
remained between or around the teeth. Such a remnant would cause gingival inlammation. Use loss to remove any rubber dam material that
remains lodged between the teeth.
6
Step 6: Examining the dam. PROCEDURE 15.2
Removal of Rubber Dam Iolation —cont’d
CHAPTER 15 Preliminary Conideration for Operative Dentitry e41
• Fig. 15.23 The lip of hole for the anchor tooth is stretched to engage
the lateral wings of the retainer.
the operator uses the second or middle inger of both hands,
one inger facial and the other inger lingual to the bow, to pass
the anchor hole borders over and under the jaws of the retainer
(see Fig. 15.22D ). At this point, the application procedure
continues as was previously described, beginning with step 7 in
Procedure 15.1 .
Applying the Dam Before the Retainer
he dam may be stretched over the anchor tooth before the ret ainer
is placed. he advantage of this method is that it is not necessary
to manipulate the dam over the retainer. he operator places the
retainer, while the dental assistant stretches and holds the dam
over the anchor tooth ( Fig. 15.24 ). he disadvantage is the reduced
visibility of underlying gingival tissue, which may become impinged
on by the retainer.
Cervical Retainer Placement
he use of a No. cervical retainer for restoration of Class V
tooth preparations was recommended by Markley.29 When punching
holes in the rubber dam, the hole for the tooth to receive this
retainer for a facial cervical restoration should be positioned slightly
facial to the arch form to compensate for the extension of the dam
to the cervical area ( Fig. 15.25A ). he farther gingivally the lesion
extends, the farther the hole must be positioned from the arch
form. In addition, the hole should be slightly larger, and the distance
between it and the adjacent holes should be slightly increased ( Fig.
15.26 ). If the cervical retainer is to be placed on an incisor, isolation
• Fig. 15.24 The retainer is applied after the dam is stretched over the
posterior anchor tooth. should be extended to include the irst premolars, and metal retainers
usually are not needed to anchor the dam (see Fig. 15.25B ). If
the cervical retainer is to be placed on a canine or a posterior
tooth, the anchor tooth r etainer is positioned suiciently posterior
so as to not interfere with placement of the cervical retainer. If
this is not possible, the anchor tooth retainer should be removed
before positioning the cervical retainer. A heavier rubber dam
usually is recommended for better tissue retraction for such
procedures.
he operator engages the jaws of the cervical retainer with the
forceps, spreads the retainer suiciently, and positions its lingual
jaw against the tooth at the height of contour (see Fig. 15.25C ).
he operator gently moves the retainer jaw gingivally, depressing
the dam and soft tissue, until the jaw of the retainer is positioned
slightly apical of the height of contour (see Fig. 15.25D ). Care
should be exercised in not allowing the lingual jaw to pinch the
lingual gingiva or injure the gingival attachment. While positioning
the lingual jaw, the index inger of the left hand should help in
supporting and guiding the retainer jaw gingivally to the proper
location.
While stabilizing the lingual jaw with the index inger, the
operator uses the thumb of the left hand to pull the dam apically
to expose the facial lesion and gingival crest (see Fig. 15.25E ). he
operator positions the facial jaw gingival to the lesion and releases
the dam held by the thumb. Next the operator moves the thumb
onto the facial jaw to secure it (see Fig. 15.25F ). Care should be
exercised while positioning the facial jaw so as to not scar enamel
or cementum. he tip of each retainer jaw should not be sharp
and should conform to the contour of the engaged tooth surface.
he retainer jaw should not be positioned too close to the lesion
because of the danger of collapsing carious or weak tooth structure.
Such proximity also would limit access and visibility to the operating
site. As a rule, the facial jaw should be at least 0.5 mm gingival
to the anticipated location of the gingival margin of the completed
tooth preparation. While maintaining the retainer’s position with
the ingers of the left hand, the operator removes the forceps.
At times, the No. retainer needs to be stabilized on the
tooth with a fast-setting rigid material (e.g., polyvinyl siloxane
[PVS] bite registration material or stick compound) (see Fig. 15.25G
and H ). To remove the cervical retainer, the operator engages it
with the forceps, spreads the retainer jaws to free the compound
support, and lifts the retainer incisally (occlusally), being careful
to spread the retainer suiciently to prevent its jaws from scraping
the tooth or damaging the newly inserted restoration (see Fig.
15.25I ). he embrasures are freed of any remaining PVS or stick
compound before removing the rubber dam.
A modiied No. retainer is recommended, especially for
treatment of cervical lesions with greatly extended gingival margins.
he modiied No. retainer may be ordered, if speciied, or
the operator may manually modify an existing No. retainer.
he modiication technique involves heating each jaw of the retainer
in an open lame, then bending it with No. pliers from its
oblique orientation to a more horizontal one. Allowing the modiied
retainer to bench-cool returns it to its original hardened state.
Fixed Bridge Iolation
It is sometimes necessary to isolate one or more abutment teeth
of a ixed bridge. Indications for ixed bridge isolation include
restoration of an adjacent proximal surface and cervical restoration
of an abutment tooth.
he technique suggested for this procedure30 is as follows: he
rubber dam is punched as usual, except for providing one large
e42 CHAPTER 15 Preliminary Conideration for Operative Dentitry
AB C
DE F
GH I
• Fig. 15.25 Applying a cervical retainer. A, The hole for maxillary right central incisor is punched facial
to the ar ch form. B, Isolation is extended to include the irst premolars; metal posterior retainers are
unnecessary. C, First position the lingual jaw touching the height of contour, while keeping the facial jaw
from touching the tooth; steady the retainer with the ingers of the left hand using the index inger under
the lingual bow and the thumb under the facial bow. D, Note the inal position of the lingual jaw after
gently moving it apical of height of contour, with ingers continually supporting and guiding the retainer
and with the facial jaw away from the tooth. E, Stretch the facial rubber apically by the thumb to expose
the lesion and soft tissue, with the foreinger maintaining the position of the lingual jaw and with the facial
jaw not touching. F, Note the facial jaw having apically retracted the tissue and the dam and in position
against the tooth 0.5 to 1 mm apical of lesion. The thumb has now moved from under the facial bow to
apply holding pressure, while the index inger continues to maintain the lingual jaw position. G, Apply
stabilizing material over and under the bow and into the gingival embrasures, while the ingers of left hand
hold the retainer’s position. H, Application of the retainer is completed by the addition of a stabilizing
material to the other bow and into the gingival embrasures. The retainer holes are accessible to the forceps
for removal. I, Note the removal of the retainer by ample spreading of the retainer jaws before lifting the
retainer from the site of the operation.
hole for each unit in the bridge. Fixed bridge isolation is accom -
plished after the remainder of the dam is applied ( Fig. 15.27A ).
A blunted, curved sutur e needle with dental loss attached is threaded
from the facial aspect through the hole for the anterior abutment
and then under the anterior connector and back through the same
hole on the lingual side (see Fig. 15.27B ). he needle’s direction
is reversed as it is passed from the lingual side through the hole
for the second bridge unit, then under the same anterior connector,
and through the hole of the second bridge unit on the facial side
(see Fig. 15.27C ). A square knot is tied with the two ends of the
loss, pulling the dam material snugly around the connector and
into the gingival embrasure. he free ends of the loss should be
cut closely so that they neither interfere with access and visibility
nor become entangled in a rotating instrument. Each terminal
abutment of the bridge is isolated by this method (see Fig. 15.27D ). If the loss knot on the facial aspect interferes with cervical restora -
tion of an abutment tooth, the operator may tie the septum from
the lingual aspect. Removal of the rubber dam isolating a ixed
bridge is accomplished by cutting the interseptal rubber over the
connectors with scissors and removing the loss ties (see Fig. 15.27E ).
As always, after dam removal, the operator needs to verify that no
dam segments are missing and massage the adjacent gingival tissue
(as in Procedure 15.2 , step 5).
Subtitution of a Retainer With a Matrix
When a matrix band must be applied to the posterior anchor
tooth, the jaws of the retainer often prevent proper pos itioning
and wedging of the matrix ( Fig. 15.28A ). Successful application
of the matrix may be accomplished by substituting the retainer
with the matrix. Fig. 15.28B–D illustrates this exchange on a
CHAPTER 15 Preliminary Conideration for Operative Dentitry e43
• Fig. 15.26 The hole position for the tooth (maxillary right canine) to
receive the cervical retainer is positioned facially to the arch form.
AB C
D E
• Fig. 15.27 Procedure for isolating a ixed bridge. A, Apply the dam except in the area of the ixed
bridge. B, Thread the blunted suture needle from the facial to the lingual aspect through the anterior
abutment hole, then under the anterior connector and back through the same hole on the lingual surface.
C, Pass the needle facially through the hole for the second bridge unit, then under the same connector
and through the hole for the second unit. D, Tie off the irst septum. E, Cut the posterior septum to initiate
removal of the dam. mandibular right molar, as the index inger of the operator depresses
the rubber dam adjacent to the facial jaw, gingivally and distally,
and while the assistant similarly depresses the dam on the lingual
side. After the matrix band is placed, the tension is released on
the dam allowing it to invert around the band. he matrix, in
contrast to the retainer, has neither jaws nor a bow, so the dam
tends to slip occlusally and over the matrix unless dryness is
maintained.
he operator obtains access and visibility for insertion of the
restorative material by relecting the dam distally and occlusally
with the mirror. Care must be exercised, however, not to stretch
the dam so much that it is pulled away from the matrix, permitting
leakage around the tooth or slippage over the matrix. After insertion
the occlusal portion is contoured before removing the matrix. To
complete the procedure the operator has the choice of removing the matrix, replacing the retainer, and completing the contouring
or removing the matrix and rubber dam and then completing the
contouring of the restoration while using an alternative means of
isolation.
Variation With Patient Age
he age of a patient often dictates changes in the procedures of
rubber dam application. A few variations are described here. Because
young patients have smaller dental arches compared with adult
patients, holes should be punched in the dam accordingly. For
primary teeth, isolation is usually from the most posterior tooth
to the canine on the same side. he sheet of rubber dam may need
to be smaller for young patients so that the rubber material does
not cover the nose. he unpunched rubber dam is attached to the
frame, the holes are punched, the dam with the frame is applied
over the anchor tooth, and the retainer is applied ( Fig. 15.29 ).
Because the dam is generally in place for shorter intervals than in
an adult patient, the napkin might not be used.
he jaws of the retainers used on primary and young permanent
teeth need to be directed more gingivally because of short clinical
crowns or because the anchor tooth’s height of contour is below
the crest of the gingival tissue. he S.S. White No. 27 retainer is
recommended for primary teeth. he Ivory No. W14 retainer is
recommended for young permanent teeth.
Isolated teeth with short clinical crowns (other than the anchor
tooth) may require ligation with dental loss to hold the dam in
position. Generally, ligation is unnecessary if enough teeth are
isolated by the rubber dam. When ligatures are indicated, however,
a surgeon’s knot is used to secure the ligature ( Fig. 15.30 ). he
knot is tightened as the ligature is moved gingivally and then
secured. Ligatures may be removed by teasing them o cclusally with
an explorer or by cutting them with a hand instrument or scissors.
Ligatures should be removed irst during rubber dam removal.
e44 CHAPTER 15 Preliminary Conideration for Operative Dentitry
A
CB
D
• Fig. 15.28 Substituting the retainer with matrix on the terminal tooth. A, Completed preparation of
the terminal tooth with the retainer in place. B, The dentist and the assistant stretch the dam distally and
gingivally as the retainer is being removed. C, The retainer is removed before placement of the matrix. D,
Completed matrix is in place. To maximize access and visibility during insertion, the mouth mirror is used
to relect the dam distally and occlusally.
• Fig. 15.29 In pediatric dentistry the rubber dam often is attached to
a frame before holes are punched. The dam is positioned over the anchor
tooth before a retainer is applied (as in Fig. 15.24 ).
Error in Application and Removal
Certain errors in application and removal can prevent adequate
moisture control, reduce access and visibility, or cause injury to
the patient.
Of-Center Arch Form. A rubber dam punched of center
(of-center arch form) may not shield the patient’s oral cavity adequately, allowing foreign matter to escape down the patient’s
throat. An of-center dam may result in an excess of dam material
superiorly that may occlude the patient’s nasal airway ( Fig. 15.31A ).
If this happens, the superior border of the dam should be folded
under or cut from around the patient’s nose (see Fig. 15.31B and
C). It is important to verify that the rubber dam frame has been
applied properly so that the ends of the frame are not dangerously
close to the patient’s eyes.
Inappropriate Distance Between the Holes. Too little distance
between holes precludes adequate isolation because the hole margins
in the rubber dam are stretched and do not it snugly around
the necks of the teeth. Conversely, too much distance results
in excess septal width, causing the dam to wrinkle between the
teeth, interfere with proximal access, and provide inadequate tissue
retraction.
Incorrect Arch Form of Holes. If the punched arch form is too
small (incorrect arch form), the holes are stretched open around
the teeth, permitting leakage. If the punched arch form is too
large, the dam wrinkles around the teeth and may interfere with
access.
Inappropriate Retainer. An inappropriate retainer may (1) be
too small, resulting in deformation or breakage when the retainer
jaws are overspread; (2) be unstable on the anchor tooth; (3)
impinge on soft tissue; or (4) impede wedge placement. An
appropriate retainer should maintain a stable four-point contact
with the anchor tooth and not interfere with wedge placement.
Tissue Trauma From Retainer. he jaws and prongs of the
rubber dam retainer usually slightly depress, but should no t
traumatize (puncture, lacerate), the gingiva.
CHAPTER 15 Preliminary Conideration for Operative Dentitry e45
A
CB
D
• Fig. 15.30 Surgeon’s knot. A and B, Dental loss is placed around the tooth gingival to the height of
contour (A), and a knot is tied by irst making two loops with the free ends, followed by a single loop (B).
C, The free ends are not cut but tied to frame to serve as a reminder that ligature is in place. D, To remove
the ligature, simply cut the tape with a scalpel blade, amalgam knife, or scissors.
Shredded or T orn Dam. Care should be exercised to prevent
shredding or tearing the dam, especially during hole punching or
passing the septa through the contacts.
Sharp Tips on No. Retainer. Sharp tips on a No.
retainer should be sufficiently dulled to prevent damaging
cementum.
Incorrect Technique for Cutting Septa. During removal of the
rubber dam, an incorrect technique for cutting the septa may
result in cut tissue or torn septa. Stretching the septa away from
the gingiva, protecting the lip and cheek with an inde x inger, and
using curve-beaked scissors decreases the risk of cutting soft tissue
or tearing the septa with the scissors as the septa are cut.
Cotton Roll Iolation and Celluloe Wafer
Absorbents such as cotton rolls ( Fig. 15.32 ) also may provide
isolation. Absorbents are isolation alternatives when rubber dam
application is impractical or impossible. In selected situations,
cotton r oll isolation may be as efective as rubber dam isolation.2,31
In conjunction with profound anesthesia, absorbents provide
acceptable moisture control for most clinical procedures. Using
high-volume evacuation and/or a saliva ejector in conjunction with
absorbents may abate salivar y low further. Cotton rolls should
be replaced as needed. It is sometimes permissible to suction the
free moisture from a saturated cotton roll while it is in place and thereby extend its use; this is done by placing the evacuator
tip next to the end of the cotton roll while the operator secures
the roll.
Several commercial devices for holding cotton rolls in position
are available ( Fig. 15.33 ). It is generally necessary to remove the
holding appliance from the mouth to change the cotton rolls. An
advantage of cotton roll holders is that they may slightly retract
the cheeks and tongue from teeth, which enhances access and
visibility.
Placing a cotton roll in the facial vestibule ( Fig. 15.34 ) isolates
maxillary teeth. Placing a cotton roll in the vestibule and another
between teeth and the tongue ( Fig. 15.35 ) isolates mandibular
teeth. Although placement of a cotton roll in the facial vestibule
is simple, placement on the lingual of mandibular teeth is more
diicult. Lingual placement is facilitated by holding the mesial end
of the cotton roll with operative pliers and positioning the cotton
roll over the desired location. he index inger of the other hand
is used to push the cotton roll gingivally while twisting the cotton
roll with the operative pliers toward the lingual aspect of teeth.
Cellulose wafers may be used to retract the cheek and provide
additional absorbency. After the cotton rolls, cellulose wafers, or both
are in place, the saliva ejector may be positioned. When removing
cotton rolls or cellulose wafers, it may be necessary to moisten
them using the air-water syringe to prevent inadvertent removal
of the epithelium fr om the cheeks, loor of the mouth, or lips.
e46 CHAPTER 15 Preliminary Conideration for Operative Dentitry
A
B
C
• Fig. 15.31 A, An inappropriately punched dam may occlude the
patient’s nasal airway. B, Excess dam material along the superior border
is folded under to the proper position. C, Excess dam material is cut from
around the patient’s nose.
AC BD
• Fig. 15.32 Absorbents such as cotton rolls (A and B), r elective shields (C), and gauze sponges (D)
provide satisfactory dryness for short periods. (Courtesy Richmond Dental, Charlotte, NC.)
• Fig. 15.33 A cotton roll holder in position. (Courtesy R. Scott Eidson,
DDS.)Other Iolation Technique
Throat Shields
When the rubber dam is not being used, throat shields are indicated
when the risk of aspirating or swallowing small objects is present.
hroat shields are particularly important when treating teeth in
the maxillary arch. A gauze sponge (5 × 5 cm), unfolded and
spread over the tongue and the posterior part of the mouth, is
helpful in recovering a small object (e.g., an indirect restoration)
should it be dropped ( Fig. 15.36 ). It is possible for a small object
to be aspirated or swallowed if a throat shield is not used ( Fig.
15.37 ).32
• Fig. 15.34 Isolate maxillary posterior teeth by placing the cotton roll
in the vestibule adjacent to teeth. (Courtesy R. Scott Eidson, DDS.)High-Volume Evacuators and Saliva Ejectors
Air-water spray is supplied through the head of the high-speed
handpiece to wash the operating site and act as a coolant for the
bur and the tooth. High-volume evacuators are preferred for suction -
ing water and debris from the mouth ( Fig. 15.38 ) because saliva
ejectors remove water slowly and have little capacity for picking
up solids. A practical test for the adequacy of a high-volume
evacuator is to submerge the evacuator tip in a -mL cup of
water. he water should disappear in approximately 1 second. he
CHAPTER 15 Preliminary Conideration for Operative Dentitry e47
B
A
• Fig. 15.35 A, Position a large cotton roll between the tongue and teeth by “rolling” the cotton to place
it in the direction of the arrow. B, Properly positioned facial and lingual cotton rolls improve access and
visibility. (Courtesy R. Scott Eidson, DDS.)
• Fig. 15.36 A throat screen is used during try-in and removal of indirect
restorations. (Courtesy R. Scott Eidson, DDS.)
A
B
• Fig. 15.37 A, Radiograph of swallowed casting in the patient’s
stomach. B, Radiograph of casting lodged in the patient’s throat. combined use of water spray or air-water spray and a high-volume
evacuator during cutting procedures has the following
advantages:
1. Cuttings of tooth and restorative material and other debris are
removed from the operating site.
2. A clean operating ield improves access and visibility.
3. Dehydration of oral tissues does not occur.
4. Precious metals may be more readily salvaged if desired.
he assistant places the evacuator tip as close as possible to the
tooth being prepared. It should not, however, obstruct the operator’s
access or vision. Also the evacuator tip should not be so close to
the handpiece head that the air-water spray is diverted from the
rotary instrument (i.e., bur or diamond). he assistant should
place the evacuator tip in the mouth before the operator positions
the handpiece and the mirror. he assistant usually places the tip
of the evacuator just distal to the tooth to be prepared. For maximal
eiciency, the oriice of the evacuator tip should be positioned
such that it is parallel to the facial (lingual) surface of the tooth
being prepared. he assistant’s right hand holds the evacuator tip;
the left hand manipulates the air-water syringe. (Hand positions
are reversed if the operator is left-handed.) When the operator needs to examine the progress of tooth preparation, the assistant
rinses and dries the tooth using air from the syringe in conjunction
with the evacuator.
In most patients, the use of saliva ejectors is not required for
removal of saliva because salivar y low is greatly reduced when the
operating site is profoundly anesthetized. he dentist or assistant
positions the saliva ejector if needed. he saliva ejector removes
saliva that collects on the loor of the mouth. It may be used in
conjunction with sponges, cotton rolls, and the rubber dam. It
e48 CHAPTER 15 Preliminary Conideration for Operative Dentitry
A
B
• Fig. 15.38 Position of evacuator tip for maximal removal of water and
debris in operating area. A, With rubber dam applied. B, With cotton roll
isolation.
• Fig. 15.39 Saliva ejectors. (From Boyd LRB: Dental instruments: a
pocket guide, ed 4, St. Louis, , Saunders.)
should be placed in an area least likely to interfere with the operator’s
movements.
he tip of the ejector must be nonabrasive. Disposab le, adjustable
plastic ejectors are preferable because of improved infection control
(Fig. 15.39 ). he ejector should be placed to prevent occluding
its tip with tissue from the loor of the mouth. Some ejectors are
designed to prevent suctioning of tissue. It also may be necessary
to adjust the suction for each patient to prevent this occurrence.
Svedopter (saliva ejector with tongue retractor) moisture control
systems, which aid in providing suction, retraction, illumination,
and jaw opening support, are available (Isolite Systems, Santa
Barbara, CA). A reduction in operating time when placing sealants
has been reported when using the Isolite.33 he same study reported
that the majority of patients wer e indiferent with regard to isolation
with Isolite or cotton rolls, considering both techniques
comfortable.33
Retraction Cord
When properly applied, retraction cord often may be used for
isolation and retraction in direct procedures involving accessible
subgingival areas and in indirect procedures involving gingival
margins. When the rubber dam is not used, is impractical, or is inappropriate, retraction cord, usually moistened with a noncaustic
hemostatic agent, may be placed in the gingival sulcus to displace
the gingiva and allow local control of sulcular seepage and hem -
orrhage. To achieve adequate moisture control, retraction cord
isolation should be used in conjunction with salivation control.
A properly applied retraction cord improves access and visibility
and helps prevent abrasion of gingival tissue during tooth prep aration. Retraction cord may help limit excess restorative material
from entering the gingival sulcus and provide better access for
contouring and finishing the restorative material. Anesthesia
of the operating site may or may not be needed for patient
comfort.
he operator chooses a diameter of cord that will it in the
gingival sulcus and cause lateral displacement of the free gingiva
(“opening” the sulcus) without “blanching” it (i.e., without causing
tissue ischemia secondary to pressure from the cord). he length
of the cor d should be suicient to extend approximately 1 mm
beyond the gingival width of the tooth preparation. A thin, bluntedged instrument blade or the side of an explorer is used to progres -
sively insert the cord. To prevent dislodgment of previously inserted
cord, the placement instrument should be moved slightly backward
at each step as it is stepped along the cord ( Fig. 15.40 ). Cord
placement should not harm gingival tissue or damage the epithelial
attachment. If ischemia of gingival tissue is observed, the cord
may need to be replaced with a smaller diameter cord. he objective
is to obtain minimal yet suicient lateral displacement of the free
gingiva and not to force it apically. Cord insertion results in adequate
displacement of the gingival crest in a short time. Occasionally it
may be helpful to insert a second, usually larger, cord over the
initially inserted cord.
In procedures for an indirect restoration, inserting the cord
before removal of infected dentin and placement of any necessary
liner assists in providing maximum moisture control. It also opens
the sulcus in readiness for any beveling of the gingival margins,
when indicated. he cord may be removed before beveling or it
may be left in place during beveling. Inserting the cord as early
as possible in tooth preparation helps prevent abrasion of the
gingival tissue, thus reducing the potential for bleeding and allowing
only minimal absorption of any medicament from the cord into
the circulatory system.
Mirror and Evacuator Tip Retraction
A secondary function of the mirror and the evacuator tip is to
retract the cheek, lip, and tongue ( Fig. 15.41 ). his retraction is
particularly important when a rubber dam is not used.
Mouth Props
A potential aid to restorative procedures on posterior teeth (for a
lengthy appointment) is a mouth prop ( Fig. 15.42A and B ). A
prop should establish and maintain suitable mouth opening. Its
use may also help relieve masticatory muscle fatigue. he ideal
characteristics of a mouth prop are as follows:
1. Adaptable to all mouths.
2. Easily positioned, without causing discomfort to the patient.
3. Readily adjusted, if necessary, to provide the proper mouth
opening or improve its position in the mouth.
4. Stable once applied.
5. Rapidly removed in case of emergency.
6. Sterilizable or disposable.
Mouth props are generally available as either a block type or a
ratchet type (see Fig. 15.42C–E ). Although the ratchet type is
adjustable, its size and cost are disadvantages.
CHAPTER 15 Preliminary Conideration for Operative Dentitry e49
A
CB
• Fig. 15.40 Retraction cord placed in the gingival crevice. A, Cor d placement initiated. B, A thin, latbladed instrument is used for cord placement. C, Cord placed.
• Fig. 15.41 Chairside assistant uses air syringe to retract the lip while
teeth dry to keep the mirror clear. he use of a mouth prop may be beneicial to the operator
and the patient. he most outstanding beneits to the patient
are relief of responsibility of maintaining adequate mouth
opening and relief of muscle fatigue and associated discom -
fort. For the dentist, the prop ensures constant and adequate
mouth opening and permits extended or multiple operations, if
desired.
Drugs
he use of drugs to control salivation is rarely indicated in restorative
dentistry and is generally limited to atropine. As with any drug,
the operator should be familiar with its indications, contraindica -
tions, and adv erse efects. Atropine is contraindicated for nursing
mothers and patients with glaucoma.34
e50 CHAPTER 15 Preliminary Conideration for Operative Dentitry
EA
CB
D
• Fig. 15.42 Mouth props. A, Block-type prop maintaining mouth opening. B, Ratchet-type prop main -
taining mouth opening. C, Block-type prop. D, Ratchet-type prop. E, Foam-type disposable prop. (A and
B, From Malamed SF: Sedation: a guide to patient management, ed 5, St. Louis, , Mosby. C and
D, From Hupp JR, Ellis E, Tucker MR: Contemporary oral and maxillofacial surgery, ed 5, St. Louis, ,
Mosby.)
Summary
A thorough knowledge of the preliminary procedures addressed
in this chapter afords maximum comfort for the patient while
reducing physical strain on the dental team. Maintaining optimal moisture control is a necessary component in the delivery of
high-quality operative dentistry.
Reference
1. Shugars DA, Williams D, Cline SJ, et al: Musculoskeletal back pain
among dentists. Gen Dent 32: – , .
2. Raskin A, Setcos JC, Vreven J, et al: I nluence of the isolation method
on the 10-year clinical behaviour of posterior resin composite restora -
tions. Clin Oral Investig 25: – , .
3. Fusayama T: Total etch technique and cavity isolation. J Esthet Dent
4: – , .
4. Heling I, Sommer M, Kot I: Rubber dam—an essential safeguard.
Quintessence Int 19: – , .
5. Huggins DR: he rubber dam—an insurance policy against litigation.
J Indiana Dent Assoc 65:23–24, .
6. Anusavice KJ, editor: Phillips’ science of dental materials , ed 11, St.
Louis, , Saunders.
7. Medina JE: he rubber dam—an incentive for excellence. Dent Clin
North Am – , .8. Christensen GJ: Using rubber dams to boost quality, quantity of
restorative services. J Am Dent Assoc :81–82, .
9. American D ental Association Council on Scientiic Afairs: ADA
Council on Dental Beneit Programs: Statement on posterior resinbased composites. J Am Dent Assoc : – , .
10. Barghi N, Knight GT, Berry TG: Comparing two methods of moisture
control in bonding to enamel: A clinical study. Oper Dent 16: – ,
.
11. Smales RJ: Rubber dam usage related to restoration quality and
survival. Br Dent J : – , .
12. Roy A, Epstein J, Onno E: Latex allergies in dentistry: Recognition
and recommendations. J Can Dent Assoc 63: – , .
13. Albani F , Ballesio I, Campanella V, et al: Pit and issure sealants:
Results at ive and ten years. Eur J Paediatr Dent 6:61–65, .
14. Nimmo A, Werley MS, Martin JS, et al: Particulate inhalation during
the removal of amalgam restorations. J Prosthet Dent 63: – ,
.
CHAPTER 15 Preliminary Conideration for Operative Dentitry e51
15. Berglund A, Molin M: Mercury levels in plasma and urine after
removal of all amalgam r estorations: he efect of using rubber dams.
Dent Mater 13: – , .
16. Kremers L, Halbach S, Willruth H, et al: Efect of rubber dam on
mercury exposure during amalgam removal. Eur J Oral Sci
: – , .
17. Cochran MA, Miller CH, S heldrake MA: he eicacy of the rubber
dam as a barrier to the spread of microorganisms during dental
treatment. J Am Dent Assoc : – , .
18. Samaranayake LP , Reid J, Evans D: he eicacy of rubber dam isolation
in reducing atmospheric bacterial contamination. ASDC J Dent Child
56: – , .
19. Harrel SK, Molinari J: Aerosols and splatter in dentistry: A brief
review of the literature and infection control impl ications. J Am Dent
Assoc : – , .
20. Joynt RB, Davis EL, Schreier PH: Rubber dam usage among practicing
dentists. Oper Dent 14: – , .
21. Marshall K, Page J: he use of rubber dam in the UK: A survey. Br
Dent J : – , .
22. Gilbert GH, Litaker MS, Pihlstrom DJ, et al: DPBRN Collaborative
Group: Rubber dam use during routine operative dentistry procedures:
Findings from the dental PBRN. Oper Dent 35: – , .
23. de Andrade ED, Ranali J, Volpato MC, et al: Allergic reaction after
rubber dam placement. J Endod 26: – , .
24. Jones CM, Reid JS: Patient and operator attitudes toward rubber
dam. ASDC J Dent Child 55: – , .25. Peterson JE, Nation WA, M atsson L: Efect of a rubber dam clamp
(retainer) on cementum and junctional epithelium. Oper Dent
11:42–45, .
26. Ingraham R, Koser JR: An atlas of gold foil and rubber dam procedures ,
Buena Park, CA, , Uni-T ro College Press.
27. Brinker HA: Access—the key to success. J Prosthet Dent 28: – ,
.
28. Cunningham PR, Ferguson GW: he instruction of rubber dam
technique. J Am Acad Gold Foil Oper 13:5–12, .
29. Markley MR: Amalgam restorations for Class V cavities. J Am Dent
Assoc 50: – , .
30. Baum L, Phillips RW, Lund MR: T extbook of operative dentistry , ed
3, Philadelphia, , Saunders.
31. Brunthaler A, König F , Lucas T, et al: Longevity of direct resin
composite restorations in posterior teeth. Clin Oral Investig 7:63–70,
.
32. Nelson JF: Ingesting an onlay: A case report. J Am Dent Assoc :73–74,
.
33. Collette J, Wilson S, Sullivan D: A study of the Isolite system during
sealant placement: Eicacy and patient acceptance. Pediatr Dent
32: – , .
34. Ciancio SG, editor: ADA/PDR dental therapeutics , ed 5, , PDR
Network.
e52 CHAPTER 16 Rein-Bonded Splint and Bridge
e5216
Resin-Bonded Splints and Bridges
HARALD O. HEYMANN, ANDRÉ V. RITTER
Mobility of teeth has many causes, including traumat ic
injury to the face, advanced periodontal disease, habits
such as thumb sucking and tongue thrusting, and maloc -
clusion. In addition, teeth often need stabilization and retention
after orthodontic treatment. In the past, clinical procedures for
the stabilization of teeth either involved extensive loss of the tooth
structure or were poor in appearance. A conservative and esthetic
alternative has been made possible by using resin-bonded splints.
Certain criteria must be met when mobile teeth are splinted.
Occlusal adjustment may be necessary initially . he splint should
have a hygienic design so that the patient is able to maintain good
oral hygiene. It also should allow further diagnosti c procedures
and treatment, if necessary. he resin-bonded splinting technique
satisies these criteria. Light-cured composites are recommended
for splinting because they aford extended working time for place -
ment and contouring.
Periodontally Involved Teeth
Loss of bone support allows movement of teeth, resulting in
increased irritation to the supporting tissues and possible malpo -
sitioning of teeth. Stabilizing mobile teeth is a valuable treatment
aid before, during, and after periodontal therapy. Splinting of teeth
aids in occlusal adjustment and tissue healing, thus allowing better
evaluation of the progression and prognosis of treatment.
A resin-bonded splint via the acid-etch technique is a conservative
and efective method of protecting teeth from further injury by
stabilizing them in a favorable occlusal relationship. If the peri -
odontal problem is complicated by missing teeth, a bridge
incorporating a splint design is indicated (see section Conservative
Bridges ).
Techniques for Splinting Anterior Teeth
In short-span segments subject to minimal occlusal forces, a relatively
simple technique can be used for splinting periodontally involved
teeth. Fig. 16.1A illustrates a maxillary lateral incisor that remains
mobile because of insuicient bone support even after occlusal
adjustment and elimination of a periodontal pocket. Esthetic
recontouring with composite augmentation can be accomplished
along with the splinting procedure.
Anesthesia generally is not required for a splinting procedure
when enamel covers the clinical crown. When root surfaces are
exposed and extreme sensitivity exists, however, local anesthesia is
necessary. Teeth are cleaned with a pumice slurry, and the shade
of light-cured composite is selected. A cotton roll and retraction
cords are used for isolation in this instance.With a coarse, lame-shaped diamond instrument, enamel on
both teeth at the proximal contact area is reduced to produce an
interdental space approximately 0.5 mm wide. his amount of
space enhances the strength of the splint by providing more bulk of
composite material in the connector between teeth. Other enamel
areas of the tooth or teeth that need more contour are prepared by
roughening the surface with a coarse diamond instrument. Where
no enamel is present, such as on the root surface, a mechanical
lock is prepared with a No. 14 round bur in the dentin at the
gingivoaxial line angle of the preparation. After the prepared
tooth surfaces are acid etched, rinsed, and dried, a lightly frosted
appearance should be observed on the etched enamel surfaces (see
Fig. 16.1B ).
he adhesive is applied, lightly blown with air, and polymerized.
A hand instrument is used to place a small amount of composite
material in the gingival area. Additional shaping w ith a No. 2
explorer reduces the amount of inishing necessary later. It is helpful
to add and cure composite in small increments, building from the
gingival aspect toward the incisal aspect. Finishing is accomplished
with r ound and lame-shaped carbide burs, ine diamonds, and
polishing disks and points. he retraction cord is removed and
the occlusion is evaluated to assess centric contacts and functional
movements. Instructions on br ushing and lossing are reviewed
with the patient. he result at 4 years is shown in Fig. 16.1C .
Splinting also can be used when the mandibular incisors are
mobile because of severe bone loss. he same general steps are
followed as described earlier. If further reinforcement is deemed
necessary, however, a plasma-coated woven polyethylene strip such
as Ribbond (Ribbond Inc., Seattle, WA) can be used to strengthen
the splint. Additionally , the use of lowable composites greatly
facilitates the placement of interproximal composite connectors.
Fig. 16.2 illustrates a typical case. Following isolation with a
rubber dam, small spaces (approximately 0.5 mm in width) are
created between teeth with a lame-shaped diamond instrument
to enable cross-sectionally strong composite connectors (see
Fig. 16.2A–C ).
Because a iber-reinforcing material will be used, the lingual
surfaces to be bonded also should be lightly roughened with an
oval diamond to enhance the resin bonds. All interproximal and
lingual surfaces to be bonded are etched for 15 seconds with a
phosphoric acid-etching gel (see Fig. 16.2D ), followed by thorough
rinsing and drying. Round wooden wedges can be used to stabilize
the mobile teeth and to help maintain an open gingival embrasure
form. To prevent any resin from sticking to the wooden wedges,
a light coat of petroleum jelly can be placed on the wedges prior
to positioning the wedges interproximally. Bonding agent is applied
CHAPTER 16 Rein-Bonded Splint and Bridge e53
A B C
• Fig. 16.1 Splinting and recontouring a mobile tooth using a light-cured composite. A, Maxillary right
lateral incisor is mobile from lack of bone support. B, Preparations completed and etched. C, Splinted
and recontoured tooth after 4 years.
F
E
D
C
B
A
• Fig. 16.2 Splinting of mobile mandibular incisors reinforced with a plasma-coated, polyethylene-woven
strip (Ribbond; Ribbond Inc.). A and B, Facial and lingual preoperative views of mobile mandibular incisors
that need splinting. C, Preparation consists of roughening proximal surfaces and creating slight interdental
spaces to provide bulk to the connector areas of the composite splint. D, All interproximal and lingual
surfaces to be bonded are etched with a phosphoric acid gel. E, Teeth are stabilized with wooden wedges,
and a bonding agent is applied. F, Interproximal composite connectors are generated by injecting lowable
composite.
e54 CHAPTER 16 Rein-Bonded Splint and Bridge
H
G
J
I
G, A iber-reinforcing strip is pressed into the uncured composite on lingual with
a gloved inger. H, The bonded strip is covered incrementally with lowable composite. I and J, Completed
iber-reinforced composite-bonded periodontal splint seen from facial and lingual views. • Fig. 16.2, cont’d
and cured to all etched surfaces (see Fig. 16.2E ). he interproximal
composite connectors are then generated b y injecting lowable
composite into these areas and shaped (if needed) with a No. 2
explorer (see Fig. 16.2F ). A small amount of lowable composite
is placed onto the lingual surfaces (but not cured) to receive the
auxiliary splinting strip. An appropriate length of splinting material
(polyethylene-coated woven fabric) is cut and irst saturated with
bonding agent. hen, by using a gloved inger, the strip is pressed
into uncured composite and cured initially into place (see Fig.
16.2G ). he bonded strip is then covered incrementally with
lowable composite, resulting in a smooth lingual surface (see Fig.
16.2H ). Facial and incisal embrasures are deined with inishing
burs to enhance esthetics. After inishing procedures, the rubber
dam is removed and the occlusion is ev aluated. he inal result is
seen in Fig. 16.2I and J .
Stabilization of Teeth After
Orthodontic Treatment
After orthodontic treatment, teeth may require stabilization with
either ixed or removable appliances. he latter method allows
continued minor movements for the inal positioning of teeth.
When this position is reached, it is better to stabilize teeth with
a ixed retainer. Removable retainers tend to irritate soft tissue.
Also, they may be damaged, lost, or not worn, which usually leads
to undesired movement of teeth.
Fig. 16.3A shows a patient with a removable orthodontic retainer.
Optimal positioning of teeth has been achieved by orthodontic movement; however, stabilization of teeth is required, and the
unattractive spaces caused by undersized maxillary teeth need to
be closed (see Fig. 16.3B ). A carefully planned appointment is
required to accomplish the following: (1) Remove any fixed
orthodontic appliance, (2) add composite to close the diastemas,
and (3) stabilize teeth with a twisted stainless steel wire and
composite.
Technique
After the orthodontic appliance is removed and routine procedures
are followed for closing the diastemas (see Fig. 16.3C ), the occlusion
is examined carefully to determine the best position for locating
the twisted wire because it will be placed only on the lingual
surfaces. A suicient length of twisted stainless steel wire (i.e.,
0.45 mm [0. inch] in diameter) is adapted to the lingual
surface of anterior teeth. A stone cast is helpful for adapting the
wire. he wire must rest against the lingual surfaces passively without
tension or interference with the occlusion. In the mouth, waxed
dental tape is used to position the wire against teeth and hold it
in place while the occlusal excursions are evaluate d. he wire is
attached only to the lingual fossa of each tooth. After the position
of the wire has been determined, it is removed and only the enamel
in the fossae (not the marginal ridges or embrasures) is etched,
rinsed, and dried.
Light-cured composite is best used for attaching the ixed wire
splint. he wire is repositioned and held in place with dental tape,
while a sparing amount of resin-bonding agent is applied and
lightly blown with air. After polymerization of the adhesive, a
CHAPTER 16 Rein-Bonded Splint and Bridge e55
referral to an oral surgeon may be necessary. A partially avulsed
tooth is repositioned digitally and may or may not need splinting.
T raumatically avulsed teeth that are reimplanted immediately or
within 30 minutes have a good prognosis for being retained.1,2
After 30 minutes, the success rate declines rapidly . he avulsed
tooth should be repositioned as soon as possible. In the interim,
it should be placed in a moist environment such as saliva (i.e.,
held in the cheek or under the tongue), tooth-saver solution (i.e.,
Hank balanced solution), milk, saline, or a wet towel. he replace -
ment of avulsed teeth has immediate psychologic value and
maintains the natural space in the event that a ixed prosthesis is
required later.
Technique
he maxillary right incisors that were completely avulsed in an
accident ( Fig. 16.4A ) are repositioned immediately. After the teeth
are repositioned, radiographs reveal that no other complications
exist. Isolation with cotton rolls or gauze is preferable to the use
of a rubber dam, which could cause malpositioning of the loose
teeth. he occlusion should be evaluated to ensure that the teeth
are properly positioned.
he facial surfaces of the crowns are quickly cleaned with
hydrogen peroxide, rinsed, and dried by blotting with a gauze or
cotton roll or by lightly blowing with air. he denti st should avoid
blowing air into areas of avulsion or deep wounds to prevent air small amount of composite material is placed to encompass the
wire in each fossa and bond it to the enamel. he operator must
be careful not to involve the proximal surfaces (see Fig. 16.3D ).
After polymerization of composite, the occlusion is evaluated and
adjusted, as needed, for proper centric contacts and functional
movements.
his unique splint allows some physiologic movement of teeth,
yet it holds them in the correct position. he splint should remain
in place for at least 6 months to ensure stabilization. Longer
retention may be necessary, depending on the individual situation
and recommendations of the orthodontist.
Avuled or Partially Avuled Teeth
Facial injuries often involve the hard and soft tissues of the mouth.
he damage may range from lacerations of soft tissue to fractures
of teeth and alveolar bone. Partial or complete avulsion of teeth
can occur. Maxillary central incisors are involved mor e often than
are other teeth. A thorough clinical examination of soft tissue,
lips, tongue, and cheeks should be made to locate lacerations and
embedded tooth fragments and debris. Radiographic examination
is necessary to diagnose deeply embedded fragments or root
fractures.
T reatment of soft tissue lacerations should include lavage,
conservative debridement, and suturing. Consultation with or
A B
C D
• Fig. 16.3 Stabilizing teeth after orthodontic treatment. A, Patient with existing removable retainer.
B, Residual spaces resulting from undersized teeth. C, Closure of spaces with composite additions is
completed. D, Orthodontic wire is held in position with dental tape and bonded into place with
composite.
A B
• Fig. 16.4 Splinting avulsed teeth. A, Patient with traumatically avulsed maxillary right incisors.
B, Completed splint stabilizes repositioned incisors.
e56 CHAPTER 16 Rein-Bonded Splint and Bridge
Conservative bridges are especially indicated for young pati ents
because the teeth usually have large pulp chambers and short
clinical crowns. Many older patients with gingival recession and
mobile teeth are prime candidates because splinting can be incor -
porated with the bridge. Mor e speciic indications and clinical
procedures for each of the four types of bridges are presented in
the following sections.
Natural Tooth Pontic
he crowns of natural teeth (primarily incisors) often can be used
as acid-etched, resin-bonded pontics. Considerations for this type
of treatment include the following: (1) Periodontally involved teeth
warrant extraction, (2) teeth have fractured roots, (3) teeth are
unsuccessfully reimplanted after avulsion, and (4) root canal
treatment has been unsuccessful. However lost, the immediate
replacement of a natural anterior tooth has great psychologic value
for most patients, although the procedure may be temporary. Natural
tooth pontics also can be placed as interim restorations until an
extraction site heals if conditions require a conven tional bridge or
an implant.
Certain prerequisites must exist to ensure a successful result:
(1) he extracted tooth and abutments must be in reasonably good
condition, especially the pontic, because it may become brittle
and more susceptible to fracture; (2) the abutment teeth should
be fairly stable; and (3) the pontic must not participate in heavy
centric or functional occlusion. Because of this third restriction,
canines and posterior teeth are not usually good candidates for
this procedure. If the adjacent teeth are mobile, it is frequently
necessary to secure them by splinting with composite (see the
section on Techniques for Splinting Anterior Teeth ).
Technique
A maxillary right central incisor must be extracted for periodontal
reasons ( Fig. 16.5A and B ). Before the tooth is extracted, a small
round bur is used to place a shallow identifying mark on the facial
surface to indicate the level of the gingival crest. If the tooth to
be extracted is well positioned in the dental arch, a PVS bite registra -
tion or putty impression material can be used to generate an index
to reposition the natural tooth pontic in the correct preextraction
position. After extraction, a 5-cm by 5-cm (2-inch by 2-inch)
sponge is held in the space with pressure for hemorrhage control.
By using a separating disk or a diamond instrument, the extracted
tooth is transversely cut a few millimeters apical to the identiication
mark. When pontic length is determined, shrinkage of the healing
tissue underlying the pontic tip must be anticipated. he root end
is discarded.
If the pulp canal and chamber have completely calciied, the
next procedure is shaping and polishing the apical end of the
natural tooth pontic as described in the following paragraphs. If
the chamber is calciied as disclosed on the radiograph and the
canal is nearly calciied, the canal is opened from the apical end
by using a small round bur or diamond to the extent of the canal.
he operator should be as conservative of the tooth structure as
possible and yet provide access for subsequent injection of the
composite material to ill the canal. A large chamber and canal
are instrumented and debrided using conventional endodontic
procedures with access from the apical end (see Fig. 16.5C ). Access
is provided for subsequent injection of composite. Removal of the
pulpal tissue in this manner prevents discoloration of the tooth
caused by degeneration products. T raditional lingual access for
instrumentation is avoided to prevent weakening the pontic. After emboli. If a crown is fractured, deeply exposed dentin may need
to be protected with a liner or base material. A twisted orthodontic
wire (0.49 mm [0. inch]) must be long enough to cover the
facial (or lingual) surfaces of enough teeth to stabilize the loose
teeth. he wire is adapted and the ends rounded to p revent irritation
to soft tissue. In an emergency, a disinfected paper clip can be
used as a temporary splint.
No preparation of the enamel surface is necessary other than
that provided by acid etching. he middle third of the facial surfaces
are etched, rinsed, and dried of all visible moisture. Drying should
be accomplished by blotting with a gauze or cotton roll and a
light stream of air. Self-cured or light-cured composite may be
used. he wire is positioned and held lightly in place, and the
ends are attached with composite material (see Fig. 16.4B ). Light
pressure is applied to the repositioned teeth as the facial surfaces
are bonded to the wire in succession. Care is exercised not to allow
composite to low into the proximal areas. When the teeth are
stabilized, any fractured areas can be conservatively repaired by
the acid-etch, resin-bond technique. Finishing is accompl ished by
a lame-shaped carbide inishing bur and abrasive disk s. he
occlusion is evaluated carefully to ensure that no premature contacts
exist.
he patient is advised to maintain gentle care of the involved
teeth. Antibiotic therapy may be required if the alveolar bone is
fractured or signiicant soft tissue damage has occurred. Tetanus
shots or boosters are advised, if indicated by the nature of the
accident; the patient’s physician should be contacted about this.
Appointments are made for follow-up examinations on a weekly
basis for the irst month. he patient is warned about symptoms
of pulpal necrosis and advised to call if a problem develops. If
root canal therapy is required, it is better accomplished with the
splint in position.
Removal of the splint is accomplished in 4 to 8 weeks provided
that recall visits have shown normal pulp test results and the teeth
are asymptomatic. he wire is sectioned, and the resin material is
remov ed with a lame-shaped, carbide inishing bur at high speed
with air-water spray and a light, intermittent application. Abrasive
disks are used to polish the teeth to a high luster.
Conervative Bridge
In selected cases, conservative bridges can be made by bonding a
pontic to the adjacent natural teeth. hese conservative bridges
are classiied according to the type of pontic: (1) natural tooth
pontic, (2) denture tooth pontic, (3) porcelain-fused-to-metal pontic
or all-metal pontic with metal retainers, and (4) all-porcelain pontic.
Although the four types difer in the degree of permanency, they
share a major advantage—conservation of the natural tooth
structure. In addition, they can be viable alternatives to conventional
ixed bridges in circumstances where age, expense, and clinical
impracticality are considerations.
Because of the conservative preparation and bonded nature of
all of these bridge types, retention is never as strong as in the case
of a conventional bridge. As part of informed consent, patients
should be told of the risk, although remote, of swallowing or
aspirating bonded bridges that are dislodged. To reduce the risk
of dislodgment, patients should be cautioned not to bite hard
foods or objects with bonded bridge pontics.
he ideal site for a conservative bridge is where the edentulous
space is no wider than one or two teeth. Other considerations
include bite relation, oral hygiene, periodontal condition, and
extent of caries, defects, and restorations in the abutment teeth.
CHAPTER 16 Rein-Bonded Splint and Bridge e57
Light-cured composite is preferred for bonding natural tooth
pontics because the extended working time allows the operator to
contour the connectors before polymerization. First, the adhesive
is applied to the etched surfaces of the pontic and lightly blown
with air to remove the ex cess. hen it is polymerized by application
of light, and the pontic is set aside (ready for bonding in the
mouth). Next, the adhesive is applied to the etched surfaces of
the abutment teeth and cured. A small amount of composite material
is placed on the proximal contact areas of the natural tooth pontic,
and the pontic is inserted carefully in the proper position in the
mouth. he composite is shaped around the contact areas with
an explorer tip. After inal veriication that the pontic position is
correct, composite is polymerized with light. Next, additional
composite is applied in the proximal areas (more material is added these procedures, the canal (and chamber, if present) is illed and
closed with composite.
After composite has been fully polymerized, the apical end is
contoured to produce a bullet-shaped ovate design (see Fig. 16.5C ).
his design provides adaptation of the pontic tip to the residual
ridge, and yet it allows the tissue side of the pontic tip to be cleaned
with dental loss. It is also the most esthetic pontic tip design
that can be used. While being contoured, the tip is occasionally
evaluated by trying the pontic in the space. In the maxillary arch,
passive contact between the pontic tip and the healed residual ridge
is considered ideal for maximal phonetic and esthetic potential. In
the mandibular arch (where esthetics is not generally a problem),
the pontic tip is best shaped into the same bullet-shaped design
but positioned as a hygienic pontic type that does not contact
tissue ( Fig. 16.6A ). he pontic tip is smoothed and polished
using a proper sequence of abrasive disks or polishing points.
A polished pontic tip not only is easier to clean but also retains
less plaque.
Usually, a rubber dam is needed for isolation of the region to
prevent seepage of blood and saliva. Isolation using cotton rolls
and gingival retraction cords is acceptable if the hemorrhage has
been controlled. Any caries lesions or faulty proximal restorations
on involved proximal surfaces of the pontic and the abutments
are restored with light-cured composite (preferably the same material
to be used subsequently for the bridge connectors) by using modiied
preparation designs. It is recommended that the resulting restored
surfaces be undercontoured rather than overcontoured to facilitate
positioning of the natural tooth pontic.
Next, the involved proximal surfaces on the abutmen t teeth
and the pontic are roughened with a coarse, lame-shaped diamond
instrument. Spaces of approximately 0.5 mm should exist between
the pontic and the abutment teeth because stronger connectors
are provided by the additional bulk of the composite material.
Now, the operator should acid-etch, rinse, and dry all the prepared
(i.e., roughened) surfaces (see Fig. 16.5D ).
A B C
D E F
• Fig. 16.5 Resin-bonded maxillary natural tooth pontic. A, Preoperative photograph before extraction
of periodontally involved maxillary right central incisor. B, Extraction site immediately after the removal of
an incisor. C, Enlarged apical opening ready to be illed with composite. The pontic tip has been contoured
to an ovate design. D, The abutment teeth are isolated, roughened, and acid etched. E, Immediate
postoperative photograph of natural tooth pontic bonded in place. F, Resin-bonded natural tooth pontic
with healed residual ridge 6 weeks later.
AB
• Fig. 16.6 Pontic tip design. A, Hygienic-type pontic with ovate or
bullet-shaped tip. B, Modiied ridge lap-type pontic with slight concavity
conforming to residual ridge.
e58 CHAPTER 16 Rein-Bonded Splint and Bridge
best accomplished with acrylic burs and a Burlew wheel in a straight
handpiece. he tissue side of the pontic should be contoured to
a modiied ridge lap coniguration that is convex mes iodistally and
slightly concave faciolingually (see Fig. 16.6B ). his type of design
not only allows the pontic tip to adapt to the residual ridge, but
it also allows for efectiv e cleaning with dental loss. After it is
contoured, the pontic tip should be smoothed and highly polished
with pumice and an acrylic-polishing agent (see Fig. 16.8D ).
Because composite does not normally bond to acrylic resin,
provisions must be made to facilitate a strong connection between
the pontic and the adjacent teeth. One provision may be completed
in the laboratory by preparing large Class III conventional prepara -
tions in the pontic that mechanically retain the composite material.
he outline of the preparations must be large enough to provide
adequate surface area of the composite restoration for bonding to
the adjacent teeth (see Fig. 16.8E–G ). An appropriately sized round
bur (No. 2 or No. 4) is used to cut each preparation to a depth
of approximately 1.5 mm and extend the outline approximately
0.5 mm past the contact areas into the gingival, incisal, and facial
embrasures. Even more extension should be made into the lingual
embrasure to provide for bulk of composite material in the connector
areas. he lingual extensions should not be connected because this
unnecessary step would unduly weaken the pontic. Mechanical
undercuts are placed at the incisoaxial and gingivoaxial line angles
with a No. 12 bur to lock the composite material (to be inserted
later in the technique) mechanically in the acrylic resin pontic (see
Fig. 16.8G and H ).
At the next appointment, the pontic is tried in place to conirm
that the shade and contours are correct. Approximately 0.5 mm
of space should exist between each proximal “contact” and the
abutment tooth. he pontic is cleaned with acetone t o remove
dust and debris. Retention of the pontic by undercuts, as previou sly
described, also can be augmented by a second provision—the
conditioning of the proximal aspects of the pontic with two
applications of ethyl acetate, a polymer softener. A thin layer is
applied in the Class III preparations and on the cavosurface areas
and allowed to dry for 5 minutes. his process is repeated to ensure
optimal bonding. he preparations are illed with the same lightcured composite material expected to be used for bonding the
pontic in place. he composite should be applied and cured in
the retentive areas before the remainder of the preparation is illed.
his step ensures complete polymerization. After the entire prepara -
tion is illed, it should be polymerized again with the light source.
It is better to leave the contact areas slightly undercontoured for
the pontic to it easily between the abutment teeth. he pontic is
set aside in a safe place for some time.
Isolation of the abutment teeth should be accomplished with
cotton rolls and retraction cords (rather than with a rubber dam) on the lingual than on the facial surface), contoured, and cured.
Adequate gingival embrasures must be pro vided to facilitate lossing
and ensure gingiv al health. After suicient material has been added
and polymerized, the embrasure areas should be shaped and
smoothed with carbide inishing burs or ine diamonds and polishing
disks or points. he rubber dam is removed, and the occlusion is
evaluated for centric contacts and functional movements. Heavy
contacts on the pontic or the connector areas must be adjusted.
he inished bridge immediately after bonding is illustrated in Fig.
16.5E . he patient should return in 4 to 6 weeks for evaluation
of the relationship of the pontic tip to the tissue. Passive contact
should exist between the pontic tip and the underlying tissue to
prevent ulceration. If tissue ulceration is present, the pontic must
be removed, recontoured, and rebonded. he inished bridge and
healed residual ridge are shown in Fig. 16.5F .
As stated earlier, abutment teeth that are mobile often can be
splinted with composite to aford stability to periodontally involved
teeth. he abutments are isolated, roughened, and acid etched
(Fig. 16.7A ). Because esthetics is not as crucial, a hygienic pontic
tip is recommended for mandibular incisors (see Fig. 16.6A ). he
inished bridge splint is illustrated in Fig. 16.7B .
Denture Tooth Pontic
An acrylic resin denture tooth can be used as a pontic for the
replacement of missing maxillary or mandibular incisors by using
the resin-bonding technique ( Fig. 16.8A–H ). Although this type
of bridge is sometimes used as an interim prosthesis and is called
a temporary bridge , it can be a viable alternative to a conventional
bridge and may last for years in some circumstances. As with the
natural tooth pontic, the major contraindications to this type of
resin-bonded bridge are abutment teeth that have extensive caries,
restorations, or mobility or a pontic area that is subjected to heavy
occlusal forces. In the illustrated example, the permanent maxillary
right lateral incisor is missing and the adjacent teeth are in favorable
condition and position (see Fig. 16.8A ). Further examination reveals
an ideal situation for a conservative bridge that uses a denture
tooth pontic.
Technique
Although the entire procedure can be completed at chairside in
one appointment, considerable time can be saved by an indirect
technique. During the irst appointment, the shade (see Fig. 16.8 )
and mold of the denture tooth are selected, and impressions are
made. In the laboratory, stone casts are poured, and the ridge area
is relieved slightly and marked with a soft lead pencil. As the pontic
is trial positioned, the pencil markings rub of onto its tip to
facilitate contouring of this area (see Fig. 16.8C ). Contouring is
A B
• Fig. 16.7 Resin-bonded mandibular bridge splint using natural tooth pontic. A, The anterior segment
is splinted with composite, and the abutment teeth are isolated, roughened, and etched. B, Natural tooth
pontic is bonded in place.
CHAPTER 16 Rein-Bonded Splint and Bridge e59
inishing procedur es. he facial, incisal, and gingival embrasures
should be deined with a lame-shaped inishing bur or ine diamond
and polished with appr opriate disks or points. he lingual aspect
of the bridge is contoured with a round inishing bur without
deining lingual embrasures because this could weaken the con -
nectors. he retraction cords are removed from the gingival crevice.
Articulating paper is used to mark the occlusion, and any ofensive
contacts are removed. he inal restoration is shown in Fig. 16.8I .
Porcelain-Fued-to-Metal Pontic or All-Metal
Pontic With Metal Retainer
A stronger and more permanent type of acid-etched, resin-bonded
bridge is possible by use of a cast-metal framework.3,4 In anterior
areas where esthetics is a consideration, the design of the bridge
includes a porcelain-fused-to-metal (PFM) pontic with metal winged
retainers extending mesially and distally for attachment to the
proximal and lingual surfaces of the abutment teeth. In posterior
areas where esthetics is not a critical factor, the bridge can have
either a PFM or an all-metal pontic. he technique is more
complicated and time consuming than the previously described to relate the pontic better to the residual ridge area. Any caries or
old restorations in the adjoining proximal areas of the abutment
teeth should be removed at this time, and any indicated liners
should be applied. he proximal surfaces of the abutment teeth
are roughened with a coarse lame-shaped diamond instrument.
his step is followed by acid etching, rinsing, and drying. he
adhesive is applied, lightly blown with air, and cured. Tooth
preparations, if present, are restored with the same composite
material. Care is taken not to overcontour the restoration or
restorations.
he pontic is evaluated by positioning it temporarily in the
edentulous space. If adjustments are made, the surfaces should be
cleaned with acetone. Next, a small amount of compo site is wiped
onto the contact areas (mesial and distal) of the pontic, and the
pontic is placed into the proper position between the abutment
teeth. An explorer tip is helpful in placing the material evenly
around the contact area. Care must be taken to place the pontic
so that it lightly touches the ridge, but does not cause tissue
blanching. he composite material used to position the pontic is
polymerized. It is helpful to add and cure the additional composite
in small increments to obtain the correct contour and minimize
A B C
D E F G
H Iba
• Fig. 16.8 Resin-bonded denture tooth pontic. A, Preoperative photograph shows a missing maxillary
lateral incisor. B, Shade and mold selection. C, Positioning pontic on working model while contouring.
D, Contoured and polished pontic (lingual view). E–G, Outline form of Class III preparations: facial (E),
lingual (F), and proximal (G) views. H, Cross section of denture tooth (longitudinal section) in plane ab as
seen in G showing the mechanical retention form incisally and gingivally as prepared with a No. 12 bur.
I, Denture tooth pontic is bonded in place with composite.
e60 CHAPTER 16 Rein-Bonded Splint and Bridge
diameter of 1.5 mm on the tooth side. Each hole is countersunk
so that the widest diameter is toward the outside of the retainer.
When the bridge is bonded with a resin cement, it is mechanically
locked in place by microscopic undercuts in the etched enamel
and the countersunk holes in the retainer ( Fig. 16.10A ).
he advantages of this design include the following:
• It is easy to see the retentive perforations in the metal.
• If the bridge must be removed or replaced, the bonding medium
can be cut away in the perforations to facilitate easy removal.
• No metal etching is required.
he disadvantages of this design include the following:
• he perforations, if improperly sized or spaced, could weaken
the retainers.
• he exposed resin cement is subject to wear.
• It is not possible to place perforations in proximal or rest areas.
A second type of cast-metal framework, commonly known as
the Maryland bridge, is reported to have improved bonding strength
(see Fig. 16.9B ).3,5 Instead of perforations, the tooth side of the
metal framework is electrolytically or chemically etched, which
produces microscopic undercuts (see Fig. 16.9C ). he bridge is
attached with a self-cured, resin-bonding medium that locks into
the microscopic undercuts of the etched retainer and the etched
enamel (see Fig. 16.10B ). It can be used for anterior and posterior
bridges. Although this design has been reported to be stronger, it
is more technique sensitive because the retainers may not be properly
etched or may be contaminated before cementation. Because the
retentive features cannot be seen with the unaided eye, the etched
metal surfaces must be examined under a microscope to verify
proper etching (minimum magniication).
More recently, Maryland bridges have been fabricated with no
electrolytic etching of the surface and chemically bonded to the
tooth after a process called silicoating or with a 4-META or
phosphate ester–containing, resin-bonding medium.6,7 Resin
materials containing 4-META or other resin monomers are capable
of strongly bonding to metal surfaces.8,9 Surface roughening with
microetching (i.e., sandblasting) is commonly used in conjunction
with these adhesive cements. hese types of Maryland bridges are
referred to as adhesion bridges and difer only in the means of
retention. he design of adhesion bridges is the same for this
alternative Maryland bridge design. Successes and failures have
been observed with both bonded bridge designs. Because the
procedures are technique sensitive, every step must be followed
carefully.
Maxillary Anterior Bridge
In Fig. 16.11A , a maxillary lateral incisor is congenitally missing
and the teeth on either side are sound. he occlusion is favorable, methods because it requires some initial tooth preparation, an
impression, laboratory procedures, and a second appointment for
etching and bonding. Compared with conventional bridges, resinbonded bridges of this type ofer ive distinct advantages:
1. Anesthesia is usually not required.
2. he tooth structure is conserved (i.e., no dentin involvement).
3. Gingival tissues are not irritated because margins usually are
not placed subgingivally.
4. An esthetically pleasing result can be obtained more easily.
5. he cost is lower because less chair time is required, and labora -
tory fees are lower as well.
Ideally, this type of conservative bridge is used for short spans
in the anterior or posterior areas with sound abutment teeth in
good alignment. he most favorable occlusal relationship exists
where little or no centric contact and only light functional contact
are present. However, teeth can be prepared and the bridge
framework designed to withstand moderately heavy occlusal forces.
Orthodontics may be required to improve tooth alignment. he
bridge also can be extended to splint adjacent periodontally involved
teeth. Surgical crown-lengthening procedures sometimes are
indicated for teeth with short clinical crowns.
Although minimal, some preparation of the enamel of the
abutment teeth is mandatory in the retainer area of the bridge to
(1) provide a deinite path of insertion or seating or both, (2)
enhance retention and resistance forms, (3) allow for the thickness
of the metal retainers, and (4) provide physiologic contour to the
inal restoration. he importance of the tooth preparation design
cannot be overemphasized. he success of these types of bridges
depends on the preparation design. he bridges must be indepen -
dently retentive by design and cannot rely solely on resin bonding
for retention. Preparation design for these types of bridges is similar
to that for a cast three quarter crown; however, it is restricted to
enamel.
he preparation for each abutment varies, depending on the
individual tooth position and anatomy. Approximately the same
amount of surface area should be covered on each abutment tooth.
In some situations, recontouring of the adjacent and opposing teeth
may be indicated. he details of the preparations are described later.
T wo primary types of resin-bonded bridges with metal retainers
currently exist: (1) Rochette and (2) Maryland.3,4 Each type has
advantages and disadvantages. The Rochette type uses small
countersunk perforations in the retainer sections for retention and
is best suited for anterior bridges ( Fig. 16.9A ).4 Care must be
exercised in placing the perforations to prevent weakening the
framework. Perforations that are too large or too closely spaced
invite failure of the metal retainer by fracture. he perforations
should be approximately 1.5 to 2 mm apart and have a maximum
A B C
• Fig. 16.9 Acid-etched, resin-bonded metal bridges. A, Rochette type. B, Maryland type. C, Scanning
electron micrograph of etched metal surface. (Courtesy Dr. John Sturdevant.)
CHAPTER 16 Rein-Bonded Splint and Bridge e61
the partial denture as a temporary prosthesis. A small amount of
self-curing acrylic resin is added to the mesial and distal portions
of the removable partial denture tooth to maintain proximal
relationships.
Laboratory Phae
he impression, bite registration, patient information, and instruc -
tions are sent to the dental laboratory. A perforated retention
design (i.e., Rochette) is speciied in this instance, although the
other types could be used. he bridge is fabricated in the laboratory
(porcelain contoured but unglazed, and perforations prepared in
the retainers).
Try-in Stage
During the initial try-in, the bridge is examined for proper shade,
contour, tissue compatibility, marginal it, and occlusion. Adjust -
ments are made, and the bridge is returned to the laboratory for
corrections (if needed), glazing, and polishing of the metal
framework. Fig. 16.11F and G show the completed bridge from
facial and lingual views.
Bonding Step
he steps in bonding require an exacting coordination between
the dentist and the assistant. All of the equipment and materials
needed for isolation, etching, and bonding must be kept ready at
the beginning of the appointment: prophylaxis angle handpiece,
pumice slurry, self-curing resin cement kit with all accessories,
plastic hand instrument, polyester strip, and cotton rolls. Alter -
natively, rubber dam isolation can be used; it is particularly recom -
mended for the placement of posterior bonded bridges.
he abutment teeth are cleaned with pumice slurry, rinsed,
dried, and isolated with cotton rolls. If the cervi cal area of the
retainer is subgingival, the dentist inserts a retraction cord in the
gingival crevice to displace the tissue and prevent seepage. he
bridge should be carefully tried in place to review the path of
insertion and to verify the it. On removal, the bridge is placed
in a convenient location near where the resin-bonding medium
will be mixed.
he dentist artfully applies the etching gel for 30 seconds to
the prepared enamel and slightly past the margins. he acid must
not be allow ed to low onto the unprepared proximal areas of the
abutment or adjacent teeth. After rinsing, the teeth are dried of
all visible moisture (see Fig. 16.11H ). If a lightly frosted surface
is not present, the etching procedure is repeated. A clean, dry
surface is absolutely essential. he slightest amount of saliva
contaminates the etched enamel and necessitates an additional 10
seconds of etching, followed by rinsing and drying. A rubber dam
is preferred for isolation; however, cotton rolls and gingival retraction
cord provide adequate isolation in selected areas where salivary
low can be controlled.
he manufacturer’s instructions for the bonding procedure
should be read and followed. Usually, equal parts of the resin
cement (i.e., base and catalyst) are placed on one mixing pad, and
equal parts of the adhesive (i.e., base and catalyst) are placed on
another mixing pad. he operator mixes the adhesive with a small
foam sponge or brush and quickly paints a thin layer on the tooth
side of the bridge and then onto the etched enamel. While the
operator uses the air syringe to blow the excess adhesive of the
bridge and then the enamel, the assistant mixes the resin cement
and places a thin layer on the tooth side of the bridge retainers.
he bridge is positioned on the abutment teeth and held in place
with a polyester strip over the lingual surface. he retainers are and no periodontal problems are present (see Fig. 16.11B ). he
patient has been wearing a removable partial denture that is
undesirable. Radiographs and study casts are made to complete
the diagnosis and to facilitate preparation design. he outline of
the proposed preparation is penciled on the cast to cover as much
enamel surface as possible for maximal bonding area but with the
following two stipulations: (1) he lingual portions are extended
neither subgingivally nor too far incisally, and (2) the proximal
portions are not extended facially of the contact areas but enough
to allow preparation of retention grooves (see Fig. 16.11C and E ).
Before tooth preparation, the dentist cleans the teeth, selects
the shade of the pontic, and marks the occlusion with articulating
paper to evaluate centric contacts and functional movements. If
adjustment or recontouring of the abutment teeth is indicated,
it should be accomplished at this time. When a base metal alloy
rather than a high gold alloy is used for the bridge framework,
less tooth structure is removed because the metal retainers
can be made thinner. Base metal alloys have superior tensile
strength.
Preparation
Several depth cuts (0.3–0.5 mm) are made in the enamel with a
small, round, coarse diamond instrument (1–1.5 mm in diameter).
he depth cuts are joined with the same instrument or a round
diamond instrument (see Fig. 16.11D ). A large surface area (i.e.,
outline form) is desirable to obtain maximum bonding and strength
of the bridge. A shallow groove is cut in the enamel of each proximal
portion of the preparations with a small, tapered, cylindrical
diamond instrument to establish a path of draw in an incisal
direction. his feature provides a deinite path of insertion and
positional stability for the prosthesis during try-in and bonding
(see Fig. 16.11E ). In addition, the retention of the bridge is
improved because a shear force is required to unseat the bridge.
Fig. 16.1E illustrates this groove on the working cut.
he dentist makes an elastomeric impression of the completed
preparations and a bite registration. he patient continues to wear
ABae
pae
mp
• Fig. 16.10 Cross-sectional diagram of two types of resin-bonded
bridges. A, In addition to acid-etching prepared enamel surfaces (ae), the
Rochette type uses small countersunk perforations (p) in the retainer
section. B, In the Maryland type, the tooth side of the framework is either
etched to produce microscopic pores (mp) or bonded with no etching
with an adhesive cement.
e62 CHAPTER 16 Rein-Bonded Splint and Bridge
more resin is mixed and added. Additions bond to the previously
placed resin cement without additional surface tr eatment. he
dentist removes excess resin along the lingual margins with a
discoid-cleoid hand instrument, evaluates the occlusion, and makes
any necessary adjustment. Contouring and polishing are accom -
plished in the usual manner with carbide inishing burs, ine
diamonds, hand instruments, and disks. A completed Rochette-type
bridge is shown in Fig. 16.11J and K , as viewed from the facial
and lingual aspects. When the bridge is complete, the patient is
instructed on ho w to use a loss threader and dental loss to clean
under the pontic and around the abutment teeth. Another example
of an anterior resin-bonded bridge replacing both maxillary central
incisors is shown in Fig. 16.12 .seated and held irmly in place with the index ingers positioned
on the strip over the lingual retainers, and the thumbs are held
on the facial aspect of the abutment teeth to equalize the pressure
(see Fig. 16.11I ). he amount of resin cement at the facial and
gingival embrasures is quickly inspected. Sometimes, the assistant
may need to add more cement or remove excess unpolymerized
resin with an explorer or plastic instrument. Priority is given to
the gingival embrasure because later correction is mor e diicult
in this area.
Finihing Procedure
After the resin cement has hardened, the dentist removes the
polyester strip and inspects the lingual area. If voids are present,
A B C
D E F
G H I
J K
• Fig. 16.11 Resin-bonded, porcelain-fused-to-metal maxillary anterior bridge. A, Congenitally missing
maxillary lateral incisor. B, Occlusion marked with articulating paper. C, Model with outline of preparations.
D, Preparing the lingual surface with a diamond instrument. E, The working cast shows the proximal
groove prepared (a second groove is on mesial of canine) to establish path of insertion for prosthesis and
provide positional stability and increase the retention form. F and G, Completed Rochette-type bridge
from the facial (F) and lingual (G) views. H, Teeth isolated with a gingival-retraction cord and cotton rolls.
Preparations are etched and ready for bonding. I, Holding the bridge in place during polymerization.
Bonded bridge: facial view (J) and lingual view in mirror (K).
CHAPTER 16 Rein-Bonded Splint and Bridge e63
he preparations for the splint-and-bridge combination consist
of removing approximately 0.3 mm of enamel on the lingual aspect
of the lateral incisors and canines (as outlined on the laboratory
cast) and preparing proximal retention grooves (see Fig. 16.13C ).
he perforated design of the winged retainers was the Rochette
type for ease of replacement or repair (see Fig. 16.13D and E ).
he splint bridge is bonded by the method previously described
(see Fig. 16.13F and G ). he gingival aspect of the pontic is
free of tissue contact and has suicient space for cleaning. A Mandibular Anterior Splint-and-Bridge Combination
An indication for a conservative bridge that incorporates a splint
design of the PFM framework is illustrated in Fig. 16.13 . he
patient’s mandibular central incisors were extracted because of
advanced periodontal disease. he weak lateral incisors are stabilized
by including the canines in a splint-and-bridge design. hese teeth
are caries free and have no restorations. An ill-itting, removable
partial denture was uncomfortable and did not support the adjacent
teeth (see Fig. 16.13A and B ).
A B
• Fig. 16.12 A and B, Anterior resin-bonded bridge with multiple pontics. Before and after views of a
porcelain-fused-to-metal, resin-bonded bridge replacing both maxillary central incisors.
A B C
D E F
G
• Fig. 16.13 Resin-bonded mandibular anterior porcelain-fused-to-metal bridge and splint. A, The
patient is wearing ill-itting removable acrylic partial denture. B, Edentulous space resulting from missing
mandibular central incisors. C, Laboratory model with preparations outlined. D, Lingual view of completed
prosthesis (Rochette type with multiple countersunk perforations). E, Facial view of completed prosthesis.
F, Lingual view of prosthesis bonded in place with composite. The anterior segment is stabilized by the
splinting effect of the bridge retainers. G, Facial view of porcelain-fused-to-metal pontics bonded in place.
e64 CHAPTER 16 Rein-Bonded Splint and Bridge
the patient’s teeth hav e suicient crown length to avoid subgingival
margination.
Preparation
Prophylaxis, shade selection, and any needed occlusal adjustment
are accomplished before the preparations are begun. As with the
anterior teeth, some preparation is necessary to provide draw, to
increase retention and resistance forms, and to provide bulk to
the retainers for strength without overcontouring. Preparation is
minimal and involves only enamel. Using the surveyed penciled
cast as a reference, the dentist prepares the patient’s teeth with a
coarse, tapered, rounded-end diamond instrument (see Fig. 16.14C ).
he occlusal rests are prepared with a round diamond instrument.
An elastomeric impression and a bite registration a re made for
laboratory use.
Laboratory Phae
he dentist includes a sketch of the bridge design with the laboratory
instructions. he nonperforated, etched metal design (Maryland)
is speciied in this instance because the “wings” are very thin, and
other areas of the bridge are inaccessible for placing perforations.
It is helpful to the technician if the margins of t he preparation similar splint also can be achieved with a Maryland bridge
design.
Mandibular Posterior Bridge With
Metal-and-Porcelain Pontic
In Fig. 16.14A , a missing mandibular irst molar needs to be
replaced to maintain proper occlusal contacts and to preserve the
integrity of the arch. A clinical examination with radiogra phs
conirms that the abutment teeth are in good alignment and are
sound, and that the occlusion is favorable. Conservative amalgam
restorations have been inserted to correct the occlusal issures on
the abutment teeth. Impressions and a bite registration are made
for study casts. An acid-etched, resin-bonded, cast-metal bridge
(Maryland type), including a porcelain pontic with metal, occl usal,
and centric stops, provides for optimal occlusal wear resistance
and an acceptable esthetic result.
he dentist uses a surveyor to determine the most favorable
path of draw and marks the outline of the retainer area with a
pencil (see Fig. 16.14B ). he occlusal rest areas provide rigidity
and resistance form to vertical forces, and the extensions on the
facial and lingual surfaces provide a “wrap-around” design for
added retention and resistance against lateral forces. In this example,
A B C
D E F
G H
• Fig. 16.14 Conservative mandibular posterior bridge with a combination metal and porcelain pontic.
(A, G, and H are mirror views.) A, Missing mandibular irst molar with occlusion identiied by marks from
articulating paper. B, Study model surveyed and outlines of the preparation marked with pencil. C, Prepa -
ration of axial surfaces with coarse, cylindrical, diamond instrument. D, Laboratory model with margins
outlined. E, Completed bridge on cast ready for try-in. Note the centric contacts on metal to minimize
wear of the opposing teeth. F, Teeth cleaned, isolated, and etched. G, Occlusal view of bonded bridge.
H, Facial view of the bonded bridge.
CHAPTER 16 Rein-Bonded Splint and Bridge e65
for mixing and applying the bonding materials to teeth and the
bridge. he preparations must be clean and dry to ensure proper
bonding. When the bridge is in place, a polyester strip is placed
over the pontic, and inger pressure is used to secure the bridge
until polymerization is complete. After removal of the excess resin,
the occlusion is evaluated. he occlusal and facial views are esthetic
with only the centric contacts in metal (see Fig. 16.14G and H ).
Another example of a posterior, resin-bonded, Maryland-t ype bridge
is shown in Fig. 16.15 .
Maxillary Bridge With Porcelain-Fused-to-Metal Pontic
Fig. 16.16A illustrates a space resulting from the extraction of a
maxillary second premolar. As with the mandibular bridge, resistance
to lateral forces must be provided by the design of the pr eparations
and resulting prosthesis. Because esthetics is more critical in the
maxillary arch, however, the wrap-around design used in the
mandibular arch cannot be employed to as great an extent, especially
in the area adjacent to the facial aspect of the pontic. Proximal
grooves are prepared (in enamel) in the same occlusogingival orienta -
tion as the path of draw to provide additional resistance form to
lateral forces. he lingual extensions and occlusal rests are prepared
as described for the mandibular bridge (see Fig. 16.16B and C ).
For retention, perforations in the retainer (e.g., Rochette design) are marked with an indelible pencil (see Fig. 16.14D ). Before any
glazing of porcelain or polishing of framework or etching of metal,
the bridge is returned to the dentist for the try-in stage (see Fig.
16.14E ).
Try-in Stage
he dentist seats the bridge and evaluates for proper it, occlusion,
and color matching. After adjustments are made, the bridge is
returned to the laboratory for corrections, inal glazing, polishing
of the metal framework, and etching or other metal treatment
procedures. he etched metal must be examined under a microscope
to ensure that proper etching of the metal has occurred.
Bonding Step
Care must be exercised in handling the bridge because the etched
area can be contaminated easily. he bridge should not be tried
in place (again) until teeth are isolated, and enamel has been etched
(see Fig. 16.14F ). Rubber dam isolation is preferable when bonding
mandibular resin-bonded bridges. Cotton roll isolation can be
used with retraction cords if a rubber dam cannot be placed. Being
careful not to touch or contaminate the etched metal, try-in of
the bridge is done to verify it and path of draw. Everything must
be “ready to go” as the manufacturer’s instructions are followed
AB
• Fig. 16.15 A and B, Maryland-type, resin-bonded posterior bridge. A missing mandibular right irst
molar is conservatively replaced by a porcelain-fused-to-metal, resin-bonded bridge.
A B C
D E F
• Fig. 16.16 Maxillary posterior resin-bonded bridge with porcelain-fused-to-metal pontic. A, Preopera -
tive photograph (mirror view) of a missing maxillary second premolar. B and C, Outlined inal tooth prepa -
rations: occlusal (B) and lingual (C) views. D, Completed prosthesis. E, Etched preparations isolated and
ready for bonding. F, Porcelain-fused-to-metal bridge bonded in place.
e66 CHAPTER 16 Rein-Bonded Splint and Bridge
enamel surfaces that are intact or contain very small composite
restorations. Second, the abutment teeth should be stable with
little mobility present. If the abutment teeth are mobile, it is
frequently necessary to secure them as well by splinting with
composite to adjacent teeth before placement of the bonde d pontic
(see section Techniques for Splinting Anterior Teeth ). hird, the
pontic must not be placed in a position that would subject it to
heavy centric or functional occlusal contacts. Because of these
occlusion concerns, canines and posterior teeth are not usually
good candidates for these types of resin-bonded bridges.
Technique
Fig. 16.18A and B illustrates a typical case of congenitally missing
lateral incisors in which tooth contours contraindi cated the use
of resin-retained bridges with metal retainers. Central incisors are
very translucent, and the mesial contours of canines are deicient
(see Fig. 16.18C and E ). After assessing centric and functional
occlusions, it was determined that all-porcelain pontics could be
placed without subjecting them to heavy occlusal forces. At the
irst appointment, the involved abutments ar e cleaned with lour
of pumice and an accurate shade selection is made, noting any
desired color gradients or characterizations.
No preparation of the teeth is recommended unless the proximal
surfaces of the abutment teeth adjacent to the edentulous space
are markedly convex. In such cases, slight lattenin g of the proximal
surfaces with a diamond instrument facilitates closer adaptation
of the pontic to the abutment teeth, increasing strength of the
connectors. Otherwise, no retentive features are recommended for
the preparation in the abutment teeth; the connector areas are
entirely made of composite.
Bridge connectors composed of porcelain are subject to eventual
fatigue fracture, after which repair is made mor e diicult. Studies
show that “veneer bridges” (i.e., all-porcelain pontics retained by
adjacent etched porcelain veneers) in particular are the weakest
design of all and should be avoided.11 hese types of bridges not
only provide little bond strength to the pontic but also needlessly
cover adjacent, healthy facial tooth surfaces. All-porcelain pontics
(composite used for bonding to the abutment teeth) are similar
to extracted natural tooth pontics in this regard. hose that have
connector areas consisting of the design feature allow for easy
repair and replacement of the composite connector should a fracture
in this area be encountered.
If high-strength ceramics that are totally immune to crack
propagation and cohesive fracture are developed, retentive features
prepared in the adjacent abutment teeth may be desired. hese
features, prepared in enamel, would consist of proximal grooves
or boxes, depending on the faciolingual dimension of the proximal are used in addition to acid etching the preparatio ns. Perforations
are placed in the accessible lingual extensions. his design aids in
removing the bridge if replacement becomes necessary (see Fig.
16.16D ). he etched preparations, which are ready for bonding,
are illustrated in Fig. 16.16E . he completed bonded bridge is
shown in Fig. 16.16F .
Mandibular Posterior Bridge With Metal Pontic
Fig. 16.17A illustrates a space between the mandibular premolars
resulting from extraction of the permanent irst molar at an early
age and subsequent distal migration of the second premolar. Because
esthetics was not a factor, an all-metal bridge (e.g., Maryland type)
with a hygienically designed pontic was used. he st eps are identical
to the steps for the mandibular posterior bridge with a PFM pontic
(as discussed earlier). he bridge, after several years of service, is
shown in Fig. 16.17B and C .
All-Porcelain Pontic
Improvements in dental porcelains along with the capacity to etch
and bond strongly to porcelain surfaces have made all-porcelain
pontics a viable alternative to pontics with metal winged retainers
(e.g., Maryland and Rochette bridges).10,11 Although all-porcelain
pontics are not as strong as pontics with metal retainers, far superior
esthetic results can be achieved because no metal substructure or
framework is present. All-porcelain pontics often can be used when
tooth anatomy precludes or restricts the preparation and placement
of a metal winged pontic. Long, pointed canines with proximal
surfaces exhibiting little occlusogingival height often lack adequate
areas for the placement of retention grooves. Anterior teeth that
are notably thin faciolingually also are not good candidates for
metal, resin-bonded bridge retainers and often are esthetic failures
because of metal showing through the tooth. In both instances,
custom-fabricated, etched porcelain pontics frequently can provide
an esthetic, functional alternative.
All-porcelain pontics are particularly indicated in adolescents
and young adults, in whom virgin, unrestored teeth are often
encountered. Because teeth are not extensively prepared, this
procedure is almost entirely reversible. his is a major beneit in
young patients, where all-porcelain pontics can be placed as interim
restorations until implants or a more permanent prosthesis can be
placed at an older age. Because of their limited strength, all-porcelain
pontics should be considered provisional in nature, similar to the
natural tooth pontic and the acrylic denture tooth pontic.
Similar to the natural tooth and denture tooth pontics, certain
prerequisites must be met to ensure a successful result. First, the
abutment teeth must be in reasonably good condition with proximal
A B C
• Fig. 16.17 Resin-bonded mandibular posterior all-metal bridge. A, Edentulous space resulting from
loss of irst molar and distal migration of second premolar. B and C, All-metal bridge with electrolytically
etched retainers (Maryland type) bonded in place: occlusal view (B) and lingual view (C). Note non–tissuecontacting, hygienic-type pontic. (Courtesy Dr. William Sulik.)
CHAPTER 16 Rein-Bonded Splint and Bridge e67
A B
C
ED
F
H G
• Fig. 16.18 All-porcelain pontics. A and B, Patient with congenitally missing lateral incisors. C and D,
Right side before and after treatment. E and F, Left side before and after placement of all-porcelain pontic.
G, Lingual view of completed bridges. H, Facial view of all-porcelain pontics.
e68 CHAPTER 16 Rein-Bonded Splint and Bridge
is recommended, however, so that optimal gingival pressure can
be maintained for best tissue adaptation. he dentist shapes the
excess composite extruding from the connector areas around the
contact areas with an explorer tip or small plugger end of a composite
instrument. After inal veriication that the pontic position is correct,
the composite is polymerized with light for a minimum of 40 to
60 seconds each from facial and lingual directions (for a total of
80– seconds).
Additional composite is applied in the proximal areas (more
material is added on the lingual surface than on the facial surface),
contoured, and polymerized. Adequate gingival embrasures must
be maintained to facilitate lossing and ensure good gingival health.
After su icient material has been added and polymerized, the dentist
shapes and smooths the embrasure ar eas with carbide inishing burs,
ine diamonds, and polishing disks. Facial embrasures are deined
for esthetics, but lingual embrasures are closed with composite to
strengthen the connectors (see Fig. 16.18D, F , and G ).
he dentist evaluates the occlusion centric contacts and functional
movements. Heavy contacts on the pontic or the connector areas
must be adjusted. he inished bridges (immediately after bonding)
are illustrated in Fig. 16.18D and F–H . As with all resin-bonded
bridges, patients must be advised to avoid biting into hard foods
or objects to reduce the risk for dislodgment. Also, as noted earlier,
the patient must be advised as part of informed consent that
although the chances are remote, the potential for dislodgment
and the risk of swallowing or aspirating the pontic do exist. his
possibility exists for all resin-bonded bridges, and patients must
be warned of this hazard even though the risk is minimal.
Reference
1. Andreasen JO: he efect of pulp extirpation or root canal treatment
on periodontal healing after replantation of permanent incisors in
monkeys. J Endod 7: , .
2. O’Riorden MW, Ralstrom CS, Doerr SE: T reatment of avulsed
permanent teeth: An update. J Am Dent Assoc : , .
3. Livaditis G: Cast metal resin-bonded retainers for posterior tooth. J
Am Dent Assoc : , .
4. Rochette AL: Attachment of a splint to enamel of lower anterior
teeth. J Prosthet Dent 30: , .
5. Livaditis G, hompson VP: Etched castings: an improved retentive
mechanism for resin-bonded retainers. J Prosthet Dent 47:52, .
6. Hamada T, Shigeto N, Yanagihara T: A decade of progress for the
adhesive ixed partial denture. J Prosthet Dent 54:24, .
7. Hansson O: he Silicoater technique for resin-bonded prostheses:
Clinical and laboratory procedures. Quintessence Int 20:85, .
8. Cooley RL, Burger KM, Chain MC: Evaluation of a 4-META
adhesive cement. J Esthet Dent 3:7, .
9. Matsumura H, Nakabayashi N: Adhesive 4-META/MMA-TBB
opaque resin with poly(methyl methacrylate)-coated titanium dioxide.
J Dent Res 67:29, .
10. Heymann HO: he “Carolina Bridge”: A novel interim all-porcelain
bonded prosthesis. J Esthet Restor Dent 18(2):81–91, .
11. Moore DL, Demke R, Eick JD, et al: Retentive strength of anterior
etched porcelain bridges attached with composite resin: An in vitro
comparison of attachment techniques. Quintessence Int 20: , .surfaces. In the absence of such totally fracture-resistant ceramics,
however, all-porcelain pontics are best placed with composite
connectors for ease of repair and replacement.
An elastomeric impression is made, and a working cast is gener -
ated from it. A modiied ridge lap pontic tip design as previously
described (see Fig. 16.6B ) is recommended. An occlusal bite registra -
tion should be made and forwarded to the laboratory so that the
occlusal relationship can be considered during fabrication of allporcelain pontics. he proximal surfaces of the pontics are etched
with hydr oluoric acid . he area etched must include all areas
anticipated for bonding to the composite-bonding medium. he
etched proximal surfaces should extend just beyond the lingual
line angles so that additional composite can be placed in the lingual
embrasure areas for additional connector strength.
At the subsequent appointment, teeth are isolated with cotton
rolls. A 5-cm by 5-cm (2-inch by 2-inch) cotton gauze is placed
across the back of the patient’s mouth to act as a protective shield
should the pontic be inadvertently dropped. A rubber dam is not
recommended for this procedure because it precludes accurate
assessment of the adaptation of the pontic tip to the residual ridge.
Before the teeth dehydrate, the position of each pontic is tested
in the edentulous space to assess the shade and relationship of the
pontic tip to the residual ridge. he pontic tip should contact the
residual ridge passively with no blanching of the underlying tissue
evident. Spaces of approximately 0.3 to 0.5 mm should exist between
the pontic and the abutment teeth because stronger connectors
are provided by the additional bulk of composite material. Care
must be taken not to allow contamination of the etched pontic
from saliva to occur during the try-in phase. If saliva con tamination
occurs, the etched proximal surfaces of the pontic must be cleaned
thoroughly with alcohol and dried. After try-in, all etched proximal
surfaces of the porcelain pontics are primed with a suitable silanecoupling agent (see the manufacturer’s instructions for the speciic
technique). he pontics are now ready for bonding.
he involved proximal enamel surfaces of the abutment teeth
are roughened with a coarse, lame-shaped diamond instrument.
hereafter, all of the prepared (i.e., roughened) enamel surfaces
should be acid etched, rinsed, and dried. Care must be taken to
maintain clean, dry, uncontaminated etched surfaces until the
pontic is positioned and bonded. he abutment teeth are now
ready for bonding.
A light-cured composite is preferred for bonding all-porcelain
pontics because the extended working time allows the operator to
contour the connectors initially before polymerization. he dentist
applies the adhesive to the etched surfaces of the porcelain pontic
and the abutment teeth and lightly blows with air to remove the
excess. A 20-second application of light from the light-curing
unit is used to polymerize the bonding agent on each etched
surface.
A small amount of composite material is placed on the proximal
contact areas of the natural tooth pontic, and the pontic is inserted
carefully into the proper position in the edentulous space. A stent,
or index, made from bite registration material or fast-setting plaster
can be used to position the pontic, if desired. Positioning by hand
e6917
Direct Gold Restorations
GREGORY E. SMITH
Direct gold is a gold restorative material that is manufactured
for compaction directly into prepared cavities. T wo types
of direct gold are manufactured for dental use: gold foil
and powder ed gold. hese gold materials difer in their metallurgic
structure.
Pure gold has been in use in dentistry in the United States for
more than years.1-6 Various techniques have been advanced
for its use in the restoration of teeth. It is generally agreed that
this noble metal is a superior restorative material for treatment of
many small lesions and defects in teeth, given sound pulpal and
periodontal health. Success is achieved with direct gold restorations
if meticulous care is given to an exacting technique in tooth
preparation design and material manipulation. Direct gold restora -
tions can last for a lifetime if attention is paid to details of restorative
technique and to proper home care. he longevity of direct gold
restorations is a result of the superb biocompatibility of gold with
the oral environment and its excellent marginal integrity.
his chapter discusses the various forms of direct gold presently
available and explains the principles required for their manipulation.
he principles of tooth preparation are reviewed as they are applied
to direct gold restorations. Class I, V, and III preparations and
their restoration are considered in detail.
Material and Manufacture
Several physical types of direct-illing gold have been produced.7
All are “compactable” in that they are inserted into tooth prepara -
tions under force and compacted or condensed into preparation
line and point angles and against preparation walls.
he gold foil referred to in the restorative sections of this chapter
is in pellet form ( Figs. 17.1 and 17.2). Each piece is placed on
clean ingertips, and the corners are tucked into th e center (see
Fig. 17.1B and C ), and then the foil is lightly rolled into pellet
form (see Fig. 17.1D ). In addition, cylinders of gold foil may be
rolled from the segments of a sheet (see Fig. 17.1A ). After pellets
of gold are rolled, they may be conveniently stored in a gold foil
box (see Fig. 17.2 ), which is divided into labeled sections for
various sizes of pellets. Cylinders of foil and selected sizes of other
types of gold also may be stored in the box. Prefer ential contamina -
tion is suggested by placing a damp cotton pellet dipped into 18%
ammonia into each section of the box. his serves to prevent deleteri -
ous oxides from forming on the gold until it is used.
Powdered gold is made by a combination of chemical precipita -
tion and atomization, with an average particle size of 15 mm ( Fig.
17.3A ).8 he atomized particles are mixed together in wax, cut into pieces, and wrapped in No. 4 or No. 3 foil (see Fig. 17.3B ).
Several sizes of these pellets are available. his product is marketed
as Williams E-Z Gold (Ivoclar-Williams, Amherst, NY).
Coheion and Degaing
Direct gold is inserted into tooth preparations under force. he
purpose of the force is to weld the gold into restorations containing
minimal porosity or internal void spaces.9-11 Welding occurs because
pure gold with an absolutely clean surface coheres as a result of
metallic bonding. As the gold is forced and compressed into a
tooth preparation, succeeding increments cohere to those previously
placed. For successful welding to occur during restoration, the
gold must be in a cohesive state before compaction, and a suitable,
biologically compatible compacting force must be delivered.
Direct gold may be either cohesive or noncohesive. It is non -
cohesive in the presence of surface impurities or wax, which prevents
one increment of gold from cohering to another. he manufacturer
supplies books of gold foil or prerolled cylinders in a cohesive or
noncohesive state. E-Z Gold pellets are supplied with a wax coating
that must be burned of before compaction.
Because gold attracts gases that render it noncohesive, such
gases must be removed from the surface of the gold before dental
compaction. his process usually is referred to as degassing or
annealing and is accomplished by application of heat. he term
degassing is preferable because the desired result is to remove residual
surface contamination (although further annealing, resulting in
additional internal stress relief or recrystallization, also may occur
in this process). All direct-filling gold products are degassed
immediately before use except when noncohesive foil is speciically
desired. Underheating during degassing should be avoided because
it fails to render the gold surface pure. Overheating also should
be avoided because it may cause the gold to become brittle or melt
and render it unusable. Degassing is accomplished by heating the
gold foil on a mica tray over a lame or on an electric annealer or
by heating each piece of gold over a pure ethanol lame ( Fig. 17.4 ).
he advantage of the technique involving use of the pure ethanol
lame is that each piece of gold is selected and heated just before
insertion, and waste of gold is avoided. A careful technique is
needed to degas an increment of gold in the lame correctly. he
gold is passed into the blue inner core of the lame on the tip of
a foil-passing instrument and held just until the gold becomes
dull red, and then the instrument is withdrawn from the lame.
After a few seconds are allowed for cooling, the gold is placed in
the preparation. Although any of the three degassing procedures
e70 CHAPTER 17 Direct Gold Retoration
A technique preferred by many clinicians uses a hand mallet
to deliver light blows to a condenser held by the d entist ( Fig.
17.5A ). his technique allows great control of malleting forces
when variations are called for, and it allows for rapid change in
condenser nibs, or tips, when a multitude of condensers is required.
In any case, a suitable condenser must be stepped over the gold
systematically to achieve a dense, well-compacted restoration (see
Fig. 17.8 later in the chapter).
Condensers are designed to deliver forces of compaction to
direct gold. Condensers used in the handpieces of the Electro-Mallet
or pneumatic mallet consist of a nib, or working tip, and a short
shank (approximately 2.5 cm in length) that its into the malleting
handpiece. Condensers used with the hand mallet are longer
(approximately 15 cm) and have a blunt-ended handle that receives
light blows from the hand mallet.
Condenser nibs are available in several shapes and sizes (see
Fig. 17.5B ). All have pyramidal serrations on the nib faces to
prevent slipping on the gold. Condensers described in this chapter
are (1) the round condensers, 0.4 to 0.55 mm in diameter; (2)
the Varney foot condenser, which has a rectangular face that is
approximately 1 to 1.3 mm; and (3) the parallelogram condensers,
which are used only for hand pressure compaction and have nib
faces that measure approximately 0.5 to 1 mm.
Condenser shanks may be straight, monangled, or ofset, and
their nib faces may be cut perpendicular to the long axis of the
handle or perpendicular to the end portion of the shank ( Fig. 17.6 ).
he smaller the nib face size (i.e., area), the grea ter the pounds
per square inch delivered (given a constant malleting force). If the
nib diameter is reduced by half , the efective compaction force in
pounds per square inch is four times greater (because the area of
a circle is proportional to the square of the diameter). For most
gold, the 0.4to 0.55-mm diameter nibs are suitable. Smaller
condensers tend to punch holes in the gold, whereas larger ones are
less efective in forcing the gold into angles in the tooth preparation.
T wo fundamental principles involved in compaction of cohesive
gold are to (1) weld the gold into a cohesive mass and (2) wedge
as much gold as possible into the tooth preparation.15 Welding is satisfactory for gold foil, this is not the case for E-Z G old. he
E-Z Gold pellet must be heated 12 to 2.5 cm (1 inch) above the
ethanol lame until a bright lame occurs (caused by ignition of
the wax) and the pellet becomes dull red for 2 to 3 seconds, then
it is withdrawn from above the lame.
Principle of Compaction
Direct-illing gold must be compacted during insertion into tooth
preparations.12 With the exception of E-Z Gold, the compaction
takes the form of malleting forces that are delivered either by a
hand mallet used by the assistant or by an Electro-Mallet (McShirley
Products, Glendale, CA) or a pneumatic mallet used by the dentist.
E-Z Gold, because of its powdered form, may be compacted by
heavy hand pressure delivered in a rocking motion with specially
designed hand condensers.13,14 Successful malleting of the gold foil
may be achieved with any of the currently available equipment.
Some operators prefer the Electro-Mallet or the pneumatic mallet
because a dental assistant is not required for the procedure.
A B
C D
• Fig. 17.1 A, 10 × 10 cm (4 × 4 inch) book of foil marked for cutting and rolling into pellets of various
sizes. B and C, Corners of foil piece are tucked into center. D, Foil is rolled into a completed pellet. (A,
Courtesy Terkla and Cantwell.)
• Fig. 17.2 Gold foil box. Compartments are labeled to show pellet size.
CHAPTER 17 Direct Gold Retoration e71
A B
• Fig. 17.3 Scanning electron micrographs of dir ect-illing golds. A, Spheres of E-Z Gold. B, Wrapped
E-Z pellet that contains spheres. (Courtesy Ivoclar-Williams Company, Inc., Amherst, NY.)
A B C
• Fig. 17.4 A, Pellet of gold foil is degassed in pure ethanol lame. B, Mica tray mounted over alcohol
lamp for degassing several increments of gold simultaneously. C, Gold foil degassed on an electric
annealer. (Courtesy of Terkla and Cantwell.)
A B
• Fig. 17.5 A, Hand mallet and condensers used for hand mallet compaction of direct gold. B, Selection
of variously shaped nibs. Left to right , Three round-faced nibs, oblique-faced nib, foot condenser, and
rounded rectangular nib. (A, Courtesy of Terkla and Cantwell.)
e72 CHAPTER 17 Direct Gold Retoration
the condenser overlaps (by half) the previous one as the condenser
is moved toward the periphery ( Fig. 17.8 ). he gold moves under
the nib face of the condenser, efecting compaction as malleting
proceeds.
he most eicient compaction occurs directly under the nib
face.15 Some compaction also occurs by lateral movement of the
gold against surrounding preparation walls. he result of compaction
is to remove most of the void space from within each increment
of gold, to compact the gold into line and point angles and against
walls, and to attach it to any previously placed gold via the process
of cohesion.16
he line of force is important when any gold is compacted.
he line of force is the direction through which the force is delivered
(i.e., the direction in which the condenser is aimed) ( Fig. 17.9 ).
Speciic instructions regarding line of force are given in subsequent
sections as they relate to the restorations.
Research has shown that a biologically acceptable pulpal response
occurs after proper direct gold procedures.17 Care is required when
condensing forces are applied to preclude pulpal irritation. he
Electro-Mallet is an acceptable condenser if the manufacturer’s A B
a
bc
• Fig. 17.6 A, Oblique-faced condenser with the nib face established
perpendicular to long axis of handle and perpendicular to line of force (a).
B, Conventional monangle condenser; the nib face is not perpendicular
to line of force (b); the condenser nib face is established perpendicular to
end portion of shank rather than perpendicular to handle (c).
• Fig. 17.7 Compacted gold foil. Linear channels are evident between
creases in the foil pellet. Dark spots are void spaces in the compacted
mass.
5
4
3
2
1
• Fig. 17.8 Diagrammatic order of compaction for increment of directilling gold. Condensers are moved across surface of gold in an orderly
stepping motion. Each succeeding step of the nib overlaps the previous
one by at least half of the nib face diameter. Condensation begins at
position 1 and moves to the right, then resumes at 2 and repeats move -
ment to the right. Finally, it continues in rows 3, 4, and 5.
aa
• Fig. 17.9 Line of force (a) remains parallel with the shaft or handle of
the condenser, regardless of any angles in the shank of the instrument. takes place primarily as a result of the coherence of the noble metal
to itself. Wedging results from careful compacting technique.
Regardless of the technique used, some bridging occurs, resulting
in void spaces not only in the compacted gold but also along the
preparation walls. Success depends on minimizing these voids,
particularly on the surface of the restoration and at the cavosurface
interface, where leakage to the internal aspects of the restoration
may begin. Gold foil compacts readily because of its thin form
and produces a mass with isolated linear channels of microporosity
(Fig. 17.7 ). Because the thin folds of the gold pellet weld to each
other, the remaining channels of microporosity do not appear to
be entirely conluent with one another.
It is recommended that compaction of E-Z Gold be done by
hand pressure. As compaction is performed, the bag of atomized
gold is opened and the spheres of gold powder move over one
another and against the preparation walls. Heavy and methodic
hand pressure with the condensers is required to compact this
form of gold efectively.
Compaction Technique for Gold Foil
Compaction begins when a piece of gold is placed in a tooth
preparation. he gold is irst pressed into place by hand, then a
condenser of suitable size is used to begin malleting in the center
of the mass (often this is done while this irst increment is held
in position with a holding instrument). Each succeeding step of
CHAPTER 17 Direct Gold Retoration e73
Indication and Contraindication
Class I direct gold restorations are one option for the treatment
of small carious lesions in pits and issures of most posterior teeth
and the lingual surfaces of anterior teeth. Direct gold also is indicated
for treatment of small, cavitated Class V carious lesions or for the
restoration, when indicated, of abraded, eroded, or abfraction areas
on the facial surfaces of teeth (although access to the molars is a
limiting factor). Class III direct gold restorations can be used on
the proximal surfaces of anterior teeth where the lesions are small
enough to be treated with esthetically pleasing results. Class II
direct gold restorations are an option for restoration of small cavi -
tated proximal surface carious lesions in posterior teeth in which
marginal ridges are not subjected to heavy occlusal forces (e.g.,
the mesial or distal surfaces of mandibular irst premolars and the
mesial surface of some maxillary premolars). Class VI direct gold
restorations may be used on the incisal edges or cusp tips. A
defective margin of an otherwise acceptable cast-gold restoration
also may be repaired with direct gold.
Direct gold restorations are contraindicated in some patients
whose teeth have very large pulp chambers, in patients with severely
periodontally weakened teeth with questionable prognosis, in
patients for whom economics is a severely limiting factor, and in
handicapped patients who are unable to sit for the long dental
appointments required for this procedure. Root canal–illed teeth
are generally not restored with direct gold because these teeth are
brittle, although in some cases gold may be the material of choice
to close access preparations (for root canal therapy) in cast-gold
restorations.
Tooth Preparation and Retoration
his section presents the preparation and the restoration of Class
I, V, and III lesions. he preparations described may be restored
entirely with pellets of gold foil, or E-Z Gold may be used. If
powdered gold is selected, heavy hand pressure compaction may
be substituted for hand mallet or automatic mallet techniques.
Class I and V E-Z Gold restorations may be veneered with gold
foil pellets, if desired. he Class III tooth preparation discussed
in this chapter is recommended by Ferrier, and only pellets of gold
foil are used for the restoration. All tooth preparations and restorative
procedures ar e accomplished after a suitable ield of operation has
been achieved (usually by application of rubber dam).
Cla I Tooth Preparation and Retoration
Tooth Preparation Design
he marginal outline form for the Class I tooth preparation for
compacted gold is extended to include the lesion on the tooth
surface tr eated and any issur ed enamel. he preparation outline
may be a simple circular design for a pit defect or it may be oblong,
triangular, or a more extensive form (if needed to treat a defective
issure) ( Fig. 17.10A ). Preparation margins are placed beyond the
extent of pits and issures. All noncoalesced enamel and structural
defects are removed; the outline is kept as small as possible,
consistent with provision of suitable access for instrumentation
and for manipulation of gold.
For Class I tooth preparations, the external walls of the prepara -
tion are parallel to each other. In extensive occlusal preparations,
the mesial or distal wall (or both) may diverge slightly occlusally,
however, to avoid undermining and weakening marginal ridges.
he pulpal wall is of uniform depth, parallel with the plane of the instructions for mallet intensity are followed. Correct hand-malleting
technique requires a light, bouncing application of the mallet to
the condenser, rather than delivery of heavy blows.
Compaction Technique for E-Z Gold
Using an amalgam condenser or a gold foil condenser , the irst
pellet of E-Z Gold is pressed into the depth of the tooth preparation
and tamped into position. A small condenser is selected to thrust
and wedge the gold into opposing line angles and against opposing
walls, to secure the mass in the preparation. Additional pellets are
added (one at a time, banking against the preparation walls) until
the entire preparation is illed. To avoid creation of large void
spaces in the restoration, a dense, fully condensed surface is obtained
with each pellet before subsequent pellets are added.
Principle of Tooth Preparation for Direct
Gold Retoration
Fundamental of Tooth Preparation
he principles of tooth preparation for all direct gold restorations
demand meticulous attention to detail for success. Failure to give
attention to outline form may result in an unsightly restoration
or, at the least, one in which cavosur face deiciencies are immediately
obvious. Poor resistance form can result in tooth fracture; inadequate
retention form may result in a loose restoration that is frustrating
to the dentist. Lack of detailed convenience form may render an
otherwise excellent tooth preparation unr estorable. he preparation
must be smoothed and debrided to permit the irst increments of
gold to be stabilized.
he margins in outline form must not be ragged. hey are
established on sound areas of the tooth that can be inished and
polished. he outline must include all structural defects associated
with the lesion. he marginal outline must be designed to be
esthetically pleasing because the inal restoration may be visible.
Resistance form is established by orienting preparation walls
to support the integrity of the tooth, such as a pulpal wall that is
lat and perpendicular to occlusal forces. All enamel must be
supported by sound dentin. Optimally placed axial or pulpal walls
promote the integrity of the restored tooth, providing a suitable
thickness of remaining dentin.
he retention form is established by parallelism of some walls
and by strategically placed converging walls (as described in detail
for each tooth preparation). In addition, walls must be smooth
and lat where possible (to provide resistance to loosening of the
gold during compaction), and internal line angles must be sharp
(to resist movement). Internal form includes an initial depth into
dentin, ranging from 0.5 mm from the dentinoenamel junction
(DEJ) in Class I preparations to 0.75 mm from cementum in
Class V preparations.
Optimal convenience form requires suitable access and a dry
ield provided by the rubber dam. Access additionally may require
the use of a gingival retractor for Class V restorati ons or a separator
to provide a minimal amount of separation (0.5 mm maximum)
between anterior teeth for Class III restorations. Sharp internal
line and point angles are created in dentin to allow convenient
“starting” gold foil as compaction begins. Rounded form is permitted
when E-Z Gold is used to begin the restorative phase. Removal
of remaining carious dentin, inal planing of cavosurface margins,
and debridement complete the tooth preparation for direct gold.
e74 CHAPTER 17 Direct Gold Retoration
use of a high-speed handpiece with air-water spray, the No.
or No. bur is aligned, and the outline form (which includes
the limited initial depth) is established (see Fig. 17.11B ). When
the preparation is extensiv e because of the inclusion of issured
enamel, a small hoe ( - -9) may be used to complete the
desired degr ee of latness of the pulpal wall. With a No. bur
at low speed, small retentive undercuts are prepared into the dentinal
portion of the external walls at the initial pulpal wall depth; these
also may be prepared using a -(90)- -9 angle-former chisel.
Round burs of suitable size are used to remove any infected carious
dentin that remains on the pulpal wall. he preparation is completed
by inishing the cavosurface with an angle former, a small inishing
bur (e.g., No. ), or a lame-shaped white stone (see Fig.
17.11C–E ).
Restoration
he restorative phase begins with the insertion of a pellet of E-Z
Gold or gold foil. he gold is irst degassed in the alcohol lame,
cooled in air for a few moments, and inserted into the preparation
with the passing instrument. he gold is pressed into place with
the nib of a small round condenser. In larger preparations a pair
of condensers is used for this initial stabilization of the gold. Next,
compaction of the gold begins with a line of force directed against
the pulpal wall ( Fig. 17.12A ). Hand pressure is used for E-Z Gold;
malleting is used for gold foil. he gold is compacted into the
pulpal line angles and against the external walls, and the line of
force is changed to a 45-degree angle to the pulpal and respective
external walls (to compact the gold best against the internal walls)
(see Fig. 17.12B ). Additional increments of gold are added, and
the procedure is repeated until the preparation is about three quarters
full of compacted gold. If E-Z Gold is to be the inal restoration
surface, compaction is continued until the restoration is slightly
overilled.
If gold foil is selected to veneer this restoration, p ellets of suitable
size are selected; in larger preparations, large pellets are convenient,
whereas for small pit preparations, the operator should begin with
-size pellets ( Fig. 17.13 ). he pellet is degassed and carried surface treated, and established at 0.5 mm into dentin. he pulpal
wall meets the external walls at a slightly rounded angle created
by the shape of the bur. Small undercuts may be placed in dentin
if additional retentive features are required to provide convenience
form in beginning the compaction of gold (see Fig. 17.10B ).
Undercuts, when desired, are placed facially and lingually in
posterior teeth (or incisally and gingivally on the lingual surface
of incisors) at the level of the ideal pulpal loor position. hese
undercut line angles must not undermine marginal ridges. A slight
cavosurface bevel may be placed to (1) create a 30to 40-degree
metal margin for ease in inishing the gold and (2) remove remaining
rough enamel. he bevel is not greater than 0.2 mm in width and
is placed with a white rotary stone or suitable inishing bur.
Instrumentation
For description and illustration, the preparation of a carious pit
on the mandibular irst premolar is presented ( Fig. 17.11A ). By
a
b
A B
• Fig. 17.10 A, Typical Class I occlusal marginal outlines for pit restora -
tions with direct gold. B, Cross section of model of lingual Class I prepara -
tion on maxillary incisor. Undercuts (a, b) are placed in dentin incisally and
gingivally for additional retention.
A B C
D E
• Fig. 17.11 Class I preparation for direct gold. A, Preoperative view of pit lesion. B, No. bur is
aligned properly for occlusal preparation. C, Occlusal cavosurface bevel is prepared with white stone. D,
The bevel may be placed with an angle former. E, Completed tooth preparation.
CHAPTER 17 Direct Gold Retoration e75
restorations. Care must be taken at this stage to avoid abrading
the surface enamel. After use of the discoid-cleoid, a small round
inishing bur (No. ) is used to begin polishing (see Fig. 17.15C ).
It is followed b y the application of lour of pumice and tin oxide
or white rouge (see Fig. 17.15D ). hese powdered abrasives are
applied dry, with a webless, soft rubber cup in a low-speed hand -
piece. Care is taken to use light pressure. Gentle blasts of air cool
the surface during polishing. he completed restoration is illustrated
in Fig. 17.16 .
Cla V Tooth Preparation and Retoration
Operating Field
As with all direct gold restorations, the rubber dam must be in
place to provide a suitable, dr y ield for a Class V restoration. For
lesions near the gingiva or that extend into the gingival sulcus, it
is necessary to provide appropriate access to the lesion by placing
a No. retainer or gingival retractor. he punching of the rubber
dam is modiied to provide ample rubber between teeth and to
provide enough rubber for coverage and retraction of the soft
tissue on the facial side of the tooth. he hole for the tooth to be
treated is punched 1 mm facial of its normal position, and an
extra 1 mm of dam is left between the hole for the treated tooth
and the holes for the immediately adjacent teeth.
Several modiications may be made to the No. retainer to
facilitate its use. If the notches that are engaged by the retainer
forceps are shallow, they may be deepened slightly with a large,
carbide issure bur to provide a more secure lock for the forceps
(Fig. 17.17A ). If the tips of the retainer jaws are very sharp, they
may be slightly rounded with a garnet disk, then polished to avoid
scratching cementum during placement. For application to narrow
teeth (e.g., mandibular incisors), the facial and lingual jaws may
be narrowed by grinding with a heatless stone or carboru ndum
disk, after which they are polished with a rubber wheel. To expedite to the preparation. First, hand pressure compaction is used to
secure the pellet against the compacted E-Z Gold and spread it
over the surface; next, mallet compaction is used. Likewise, each
succeeding pellet is hand compacted, and then is compacted with
the mallet. he condenser point is systematically stepped over
the gold twice as malleting proceeds. Generally the line of force
is perpendicular to the pulpal loor in the center of the mass and
at a 45-degree angle to the pulpal loor as the external walls are
reached. At this stage and during all building of the restoration,
the compacted surface should be saucer shaped, with the compac -
tion of gold on the external walls slightly ahead of the center.
he surface should never be convex in the center because this
may result in voids in the gold and poor adaptation of the gold
along the external walls when the condenser nib is “crowded out”
along the wall by the center convexity. he operator continues
building the restoration until the cavosurface margin is covered
with foil ( Fig. 17.14 ). One needs to exercise extreme care that gold
is always present between the condenser face and the cavosurface
margin; otherwise the condenser may injure (i.e., fracture) the
enamel margin. he central area of the restoration’s surface is illed
in to the desired level. Tooth surface contour of the gold is created
to simulate the inal anatomic form, and a slight excess of gold is
compacted on the surface to allow for the inishing and polishing
procedures.
he irst step in the inishing procedure is to burnish the gold
(Fig. 17.15A ). A lat beaver-tail burnisher is used with heavy hand
pressure to harden the surface gold. A discoid-cleoid carver is used
to continue the burnishing process and remove excess gold on the
cavosurface margin. he cleoid, always directed so that a portion
of the working edge is over or resting on enamel adjacent to or
near the margins, is pulled from gold to tooth across the surface.
his is done to smooth the surface and trim away excess gold (see
Fig. 17.15B ). If considerable excess gold has been compacted, a
green stone may be necessary to remove the excess in Class I
A B
• Fig. 17.12 A, Compaction forces are delivered by the condenser held at 90-degree angle to the pulpal
wall. B, Gold is condensed against the external preparation walls.
• Fig. 17.13 Placement of pellet of gold foil and compaction into tooth
preparation.
• Fig. 17.14 Compaction of gold foil has proceeded suf iciently to cover
all the cavosurface margins.
e76 CHAPTER 17 Direct Gold Retoration
to distribute compaction forces among all the teeth included in
the retainer application.
Tooth Preparation Design
he typical Class V tooth preparation for restoration with direct
gold is trapezoidal ( Figs. 17.20, 17.21, and 17.22 ). his outline
form is created to satisfy esthetic needs and the requirements for
the retention and convenience forms in the treatment of lesions
in the gingival third of the clinical crowns of teeth. he straight
occlusal margin improves the esthetic result, and by virtue of its
straight design, excess gold is readily discerned and removed in
the inal stages of the restorative process. he gingival outline is
shorter than the occlusal route because the tooth narrows in the
gingival area. In addition, it is prepared parallel with the occlusal
margin for easy identiication in the inishing phases. he mesial
and distal margins connect the gingival margin to the occlusal
margin.
he occlusal margin is straight and parallel with the occlusal
plane of the teeth in the arch (see Fig. 17.20 ); it is extended
occlusally to include the lesion. (When several adjacent teeth are
restored, some additional extension is permissible to create a uniform
level that may be more esthetically pleasing.) Often, the mesiodistal
extension to the line angles of the tooth places the junction of the
occlusal and mesial and distal margins gingival to the crest of the
free gingiva, rendering the most esthetic result. h e gingival margin
is also straight, parallel with the occlusal margin, placed only far
enough apically to include the lesion, and it extends mesiodistally
to the line angles of the tooth.
he mesial and distal margins are parallel to the proximal line
angles of the tooth (see Fig. 17.22A ) and usually are positioned
suiciently mesially and distally to be covered by the free gingiva.
he mesial and distal margins are straight lines that meet the
occlusal margin in sharp, acute angles and meet the gingival margin
in sharp, obtuse angles, both of which complete the trapezoidal
form.
he depth of the axial wall varies with the position of the
preparation on the tooth. he axial wall is approximately 1 mm placement on rotated teeth, the jaws may be modiied by grinding
suitable contour to the tip edge (see Fig. 17.17B ). he jaws may
be bent for use on teeth where gingival access to lesions is diicult.
his is done by heating the jaws to a cherry-red color in a lame,
then grasping the entire facial jaw with suitable pliers and slightly
bending the jaw apically. he procedure is repeated for the lingual
jaw, bending it slightly occlusally ( Fig. 17.18 ).
he No. retainer must be applied carefully to avoid damage
to soft or hard tissue. he retainer is secured in the retainer forceps
and carried to the mouth after the rubber dam has been placed.
he lingual jaw is positioned just apical to the lingual height of
contour, and the index inger is placed against the jaw to prevent
its movement. he retainer is rotated faciogingivally with the
forceps, while the thumb retracts the dam; the facial jaw is set
against the tooth ( Fig. 17.19A ). Next, a ball burnisher is placed
into one of the retainer notches and used to move the facial jaw
gingivally (without scraping the jaw against the to oth) to the inal
position (i.e., 0.5–1 mm apical of the expected gingival margin)
(see Fig. 17.19B ). Gentle pressure is used to position the facial
jaw so that only the free gingiva is retracted, and the epithelial
attachment is not harmed. he retainer is supported and locked
into this desired position with the compound, which is softened,
molded by the ingers, and placed between the bows and the
gingival embrasures (see Fig. 17.19C ). he compound also serves
A B
C D
• Fig. 17.15 Steps in inishing Class I direct gold restoration. A, Burnisher work-hardens the surface
gold. B, The discoid-cleoid instrument removes the excess gold from the cavosurface margins. C, A
No. bur is used to begin the polishing phase. D, Polishing abrasives are applied with a rubber cup.
• Fig. 17.16 Completed restoration.
CHAPTER 17 Direct Gold Retoration e77
to remove infected caries that has progressed deeper than the ideal
axial wall placement.
he occlusoaxial internal line angle is a sharp right angle. he
occlusal wall also forms a right angle with the external enamel
surface, precluding undermining of the enamel. he gingivoaxial
internal line angle is a sharp, acute angle, created at the expense of
the gingival wall (see Fig. 17.22B ). he mesioaxial and distoaxial
internal line angles are sharp, obtuse angles. hese obtuse line
angles are created to prevent the undermining of the mesial
and distal enamel, although still providing some resistance to
movement of the gold during compaction. hey must never be
acute angles.
he mesial and distal prepared walls are lat and straight. hey
meet the occlusal wall in a sharp, acute line angle and meet the
gingival wall in a sharp, obtuse line angle. he mesial and distal deep in the occlusal half of the preparation. As the outline
approaches the cervical line, the axial wall depth may decrease
from 1 to 0.75 mm. he axial wall must be established in dentin,
and occlusogingivally it should be relatively flat and parallel
(approximately) with the facial surface of the tooth (see Fig. 17.22B ).
Mesiodistally, the axial wall also is prepared approximately parallel
with the surface contour of the tooth. his contour may create a
slight mesiodistal curvature in the axial wall in convex contoured
teeth and where the preparation is extensive proxima lly. Mesiodistal
curvature of the axial wall prevents encroachment of the tooth
preparation on the pulp. Excessive axial curvature results in a
preparation that is either too shallow in the center or too deep at
the proximal extensions, and it further complicates restoration by
failing to provide a reasonably lat wall against which to begin
compaction. A subaxial wall may be created within the axial wall
A B
• Fig. 17.17 A, Notches are deepened for secure holding of the No. retainer. B, Jaws may be
modiied with a disk to facilitate retainer placement on rotated teeth.
A B
• Fig. 17.18 A, Drawing of a No. retainer as received from the manufacturer. B, Modiied facial and
lingual jaws.
A B C
• Fig. 17.19 Placement of No. retainer. A, Initial placement of facial jaw after irst placing lingual
jaw. B, Use of ball burnisher to carry the facial jaw to the inal position. C, Retainer stabilized with com -
pound to distribute compaction forces, prevent tipping, and to prevent either apical or occlusal movement
of retainer.
e78 CHAPTER 17 Direct Gold Retoration
• Fig. 17.21 Facioocclusal view of design of gingival wall in Class V
preparation for direct gold. The axiogingival line angle is acute and has
been prepared at the expense of the gingival wall. This gingival margin is
on cementum. If on enamel, the gingival cavosurface would be beveled
slightly (see also Fig. 17.26E ).
A
B
• Fig. 17.22 A, Clinical Class V tooth preparation. Note the proper isolation of the operating ield. This
gingival margin is on cementum. B, Longitudinal section, facioocclusal view, and cross section. Line and
point angles are sharp.
• Fig. 17.20 Facial view of Class V tooth preparation for direct gold. The
occlusal and gingival margins are straight, parallel with each other, and
extend mesially and distally to the respective mesiofacial and distofacial
tooth crown line angles. The mesial and distal walls diverge facially and
form obtuse angles with the axial wall. Line angles and point angles are
sharp (see also Fig. 17.22B ).
walls provide resistance for gold compaction, but they provide no
retention.
he orientation of the gingival wall is the key to the retention
form of the preparation. It is straight mesiodistally, meeting the
mesial and distal walls in sharp line angles. Retention is provided by sloping the gingival wall internally to meet the axial wall in a
sharply deined acute line angle. Retention is provided by the facial
convergence of the occlusal and gingival walls. Gold wedged between
these two walls is locked into the tooth. If the gingival margin is
established on enamel, the cavosurface is beveled slightly to remove
CHAPTER 17 Direct Gold Retoration e79
walls (see Fig. 17.25C and D ). he gingival and mesial walls may
be prepared with the side of the bur if access so dictates (see Fig.
17.25E and F ). he end of the bur is used to place the axial wall
in dentin (see Fig. 17.25G ).
he - –9 hoe or the larger 10-4-8 hoe is useful for planing
preparation walls, establishing sharp internal line angles ( Fig.
17.26A ), and inishing margins. he Wedelstaedt chisel is used to
inish the occlusal cavosurface margin (see Fig. 17.26B ) and may
be used to plane the axial wall. he acute axiogingival angle is
established with the - -9 hoe, cutting from the cavosurface
to the axial wall in a push-cut stroke (see Fig. 17.26C ). he chips
of dentin produced at the axiogingival angle may be removed with
the tip of an explorer (see Fig. 17.26D ) or the point of a -
(90)- -9 small angle former. Care must be taken not to gouge
the axial wall. When its use is indicated, the gingival bevel is
prepared with the Wedelstaedt chisel or a hoe (see Fig. 17.26E ).
Restoration
Restoration of the Class V preparation begins with application of
cavity varnish (if desired), after which a piece of degassed E-Z
Gold is placed into the preparation. he gold is degassed in the
alcohol lame and carried to its place in the preparation with the
passing instrument. Parallelogram foil condensers or other suitable
serrated condensers are used to force the gold irmly against the
axial wall and to wedge it into the line angles. One instrument
may be put aside (and the other is used as a holding instrument
to prevent movement of the entire piece of gold), and compaction
can begin by delivering heavy compacting forces to the gold.
After stabilization of the gold, completion of compaction of
the initial mass of gold begins in the center of the mass with
a 0.5-mm-diameter, round, serrated condenser nib. C areful,
methodical stepping of the gold proceeds outward toward the
external walls (to wedge the gold in the tooth and remove internal
voids). As soon as the gold is stabilized, a holding instrument is
no longer necessary. As the walls are reached, a line of force of
45 degrees to the axial wall is used to drive the gold into the line
angles and against the external walls. he entire surface of the
gold is condensed twice to complete the compaction of the gold.
Additional increments of E-Z Gold are added until the preparation
is illed to at least half its depth. E-Z Gold pellets are used to
complete the restoration, covering the margins irst, and to complete
compacting in the center of the facial surface. Pellets of gold foil
also may be used to complete the outer one half of the rest oration
(Fig. 17.27 ).
If gold foil is used for the outer half of the restoration, compac -
tion proceeds with medium-sized pellets at the mesioocclusal or
distoocclusal line angle and then across the occlusal wall. he
entire wall and occlusal cavosurface margin are covered with
compacted gold foil (see Fig. 17.27A ). To ensure that gold protects unsupported enamel (see Fig. 17.26E later in the chapter). When
placed on cementum, the gingival cavosurface is not beveled (see
Fig. 17.24B later in the chapter).
he outline of the preparation may be modiied. In clinical
situations demanding reduced display of gold, such as in anterior
teeth, the incisal outline may be curved to follow the contour of
soft tissue mesiodistally ( Fig. 17.23 ). his modiication is made
only when required because preparation instrumentation and
inishing of gold are more diicult than when a straight marginal
outline is created. A similar modiication may be made in the
occlusal outline when caries extends more occlusally as the proximal
extensions are reached. Also the mesiodistal extension (i.e., dimen -
sion) of a preparation may be limited when caries is minimal,
conserving intact tooth structure. When access requires, the gingival
wall may be modiied also to curve mesiodistally to include the
gingival extent of advanced caries. he entire axial wall should not
be extended pulpally to the depth of the lesion when deep cervical
abrasion, abfraction, or erosion is treated; rather the axial wall is
positioned normally, leaving a remaining V notch at its center to
be restored with gold. When failing restorations are removed and
restored with direct gold, the preparation outline is partially dictated
by the previous restoration ( Fig. 17.24 ).
Instrumentation
he No. bur is used to establish the general outline form of
the preparation. he end of the bur establishes the distal wall ( Fig.
17.25A ); the side establishes the axial depth and the occlusal,
gingival, and mesial walls (see Fig. 17.25B ). When access permits,
the end of the bur may be used to establish the mesial and gingival
• Fig. 17.23 Completed Class V gold restoration. Incisal margin curved
to follow contour of gingival tissue for best esthetic result.
A B
• Fig. 17.24 A, Failing Class V amalgam restoration. B, Replacement direct gold restoration.
e80 CHAPTER 17 Direct Gold Retoration
DD
MM
/2
D MMD
212A
B C
D
• Fig. 17.25 Use of No. bur in straight handpiece for initiating Class V preparation. A, The end
of the bur is used to establish the distal wall. B, The side of the bur is used to establish the occlusal wall.
C, The end of the bur prepares the mesial wall, if access permits. D, The end of the bur is used to
establish the gingival wall, if access permits. The use of a No. bur in the straight handpiece for
initiating Class V preparation. the margin from blows of the condenser face, care should be
exercised when the condenser approaches any enamel margin. Next
the gingival, mesial, and distal walls are covered, which leaves the
restoration concave (see Fig. 17.27B ). It is essential that all cavo -
surface margins be covered at this time, befor e the inal convex
surface of the restoration is formed.
Medium and large pellets (sizes and ) are compacted in
the center of the restoration to complete the formation of the
appropriate contour. A slight excess contour is developed and is
removed later when the gold is inished and polished. Any small
remaining deiciencies in the surface contour are illed with small
pellets. A Varney foot condenser (or other large condenser) is malleted over the entire surface to make it smooth and assist in
detection of any poorly compacted areas (see Fig. 17.27C ).
Finishing begins with application of a beaver-tail burnisher to
work-harden and smooth the surface ( Fig. 17.28A ). Petroleum
jelly may be applied to the dam to avoid abrasion from disks; it
also may be applied to the disks. Gross excess contour, if any, is
removed with a ine garnet disk applied with a Sproule or other
suitable mandrel in a low-speed handpiece (see Fig. 17.28B ). Excess
gold is removed from the cavosurface margins with the discoid-cleoid
instrument (using pull-cut strokes) or the gold knife (using only
push-and-cut strokes from the gold to the tooth) (s ee Fig. 17.28C
and D ). When removing the excess gold over the gingival margin,
CHAPTER 17 Direct Gold Retoration e81
of the 20th century and is still used today.18 It has the advantage
of not only conserving the tooth structure but also providing access
for compaction of gold foil directly against all preparation walls
and cavosur face margins. his results in a dense, esthetically pleasing
result (if careful attention is given to management of the outline
design). his preparation is instrumented primarily from a facial
approach, although lingual instrumentation may be used in maxillary
teeth. he pr eparation may be modiied for mandibular anterior
teeth, the distal surface of maxillary canines, and the distal surface
of some lateral incisors.
Tooth Preparation Design for Maxillary Incisors
he marginal outline is the most important. From a facial view,
the gingiv al four ifths of the facial margin is straight and (generally)
parallel with the contour of the tooth ( Fig. 17.30 ). he facial
margin forms a gentle curve in its incisal one ifth to blend with
the incisal margin. When viewed from a proximofacial aspect, the
facial outline follows the general contour of the adjacent tooth
(Fig. 17.31 ) and meets the gingival outline in a slightly obtuse
angle. his juncture may be curved slightly to enhance esthetics.
he gingival margin is crucial to the entire preparation. Its
faciolingual length dictates the remainder of the preparation. Where
possible, the gingival margin is established just apical to the crest
of the free gingiva to enhance the esthetic result. It is straight
faciolingually and is approximately at a right angle to the long
axis of the tooth. I t meets the facial margin in a sharply deined
obtuse angle that may be rounded slightly (as previously described),
and it meets the lingual margin in a sharply deined acute angle.
Viewed from the lingual aspect, the lingual margin generally
parallels the long axis of the tooth ( Fig. 17.32 ). It may diverge
slightly proximally from the long axis, however, to parallel more care is exercised not to remove cementum or “ditch” the root
surface (especially when using rotary instruments).
When the inal contour has been obtained, cuttle disks may
be used in decreasing abrasiveness (i.e., coarse to medium to ine)
to ready the surface for inal polishing. hese disks and the cleoid
are helpful in removing ver y ine ins of gold from margins. Polishing
is performed with ine pumice followed by tin oxide or white
rouge (applied with a soft, webless rubber cup). Ca re also is required
at this stage to avoid ditching cementum with the polishing abrasive.
he abrasives are used dr y so that the ield may be kept clean, and
the exact position of the rubber cup can be seen at all times ( Fig.
17.29 ).
After polishing has been completed, the No. retainer and
rubber dam are removed. Removal of the retainer is best accom -
plished with the forceps irmly locked into the notches on the
retainer . he retainer jaws are opened from the tooth with the
forceps and carefully removed occlusally (without scratching the
restoration or the surface enamel of the tooth). he gingival sulcus
is rinsed and examined to ascertain that it is free of debris. Soft
tissue is massaged gently before the patient is dismissed.
Cla III Tooth Preparation and Retoration
Many styles of Class III preparations are advocated for use with
direct gold. Some preparations are based on the lingual approach
and are restored with E-Z Gold. Others may be instru mented
from either the facial or the lingual surface and use gold foil as
the restorative material. he outline form selected must provide
adequate access for placing the restoration and developing an
acceptable esthetic result. he preparation design presented in
subsequent sections was irst described by Ferrier in the early years E F
G
M D
E, Preparation of the gingival wall with the side of the bur. F, Preparation of the
mesial wall with the side of the bur. G, The end of the bur may be used to establish the initial axial wall
depth in dentin. • Fig. 17.25, cont’d
e82 CHAPTER 17 Direct Gold Retoration
-4-8
61/2 -21/2 -9A
B
C
D E
• Fig. 17.26 Use of hand instruments in Class V tooth preparation. A, The small hoe planes the prepa -
ration walls. B, The Wedelstaedt chisel r eines the occlusal wall and the margin. C, The small hoe creates
an acute axiogingival line angle in dentin. D, The explorer is used to remove debris from the completed
preparation. E, The chisel blade bevels the gingival cavosurface margin, when indicated. (E, From Howard
WC, Moller RC: Atlas of operative dentistry , St. Louis, , Mosby.)
CHAPTER 17 Direct Gold Retoration e83
he incisal margin is placed incisally to the contact area to
provide access to the preparation; however, it is not extended enough
to weaken the incisal angle of the tooth. It forms a smooth curve
that connects the facial and lingual margins of the preparation.
To provide a suitable resistance form, the internal aspects of
the preparation are precisely instrumented. he gingival wall nearly the proximal contour. It meets the gingival margin in
a sharply deined angle that is nearly 90 degrees when viewed
from the lingual aspect ( Fig. 17.33 ), but it is acute when viewed
from the proximal aspect. he lingual margin is straight in its
gingival two thirds, but then it curves abruptly to meet the incisal
margin.
A B C
• Fig. 17.27 Completion of compaction where gold foil is used to overlay the E-Z Gold. A, Condensa -
tion of foil proceeds to cover the cavosurface margins. A slight excess of gold has been condensed over
the mesial half of the occlusal cavosurface margin. B, All cavosurface margins are covered with a slight
excess of gold. The restoration, at this stage of insertion, is concave. C, After additional foil pellets are
compacted in the central area to form a convex restoration surface with slight excess, a foot condenser
is used to conirm condensation.
A B
C D
• Fig. 17.28 Finishing the Class V restoration. A, Burnisher work-hardens surface. B, A small, ine garnet
disk removes the excess gold contour. C, The gold knife’s secondary edge used with push-stroke (arrow)
removes excess gold from the gingival margin. D, After inal surfacing with a cuttle disk, any remaining
marginal excess is removed with the cleoid carver.
A B
• Fig. 17.29 A, A soft-rubber cup is used to apply polishing abrasives. B, The explorer is used to
remove any remaining polishing powder from site of completed restoration.
e84 CHAPTER 17 Direct Gold Retoration
because of the length of the preparation incisogingivally and because
of the diiculty of access in compacting the gold.
Provision for the convenience form is made by the abrupt
incisolingual curve (which permits introduction of a condenser
directed toward the gingival wall), by adequate clearance of all
margins from the adjacent tooth, and by placement of sharp internal
point angles suitable for beginning compaction of gold. he
facioaxiogingival and linguoaxiogingival point angles may be
enlarged slightly to assist in initial stages of foil compaction, if
desired.19
he inishing of enamel walls requires placement of a facioin -
cisolingual cavosurface bevel, which determines the inal marginal
outline. his bevel is made with hand instruments and is established
totally in enamel. It is designed to create maximum convenience
form, to remove all surface irregularities and any unsupported
enamel, and to establish a more esthetically pleasing result ( Fig.
17.35 ; see also Fig. 17.30 ).is flat faciolingually. The axial wall is flat faciolingually and
incisogingivally, and it is established 0.5 mm into dentin. he
resistance form also is created by establishing sharp, obtuse axio -
facial and axiolingual line angles in dentin. he facial and lingual
walls diverge only enough to remove undermined enamel, and
yet they provide irm, lat walls against which the gold can be
compacted.
As in the Class V restoration, retention form is provided only
between the gingival and incisal walls. In the Class III preparation,
the dentinal portion of the gingival wall (as in the Class V gingival
wall) slopes apically inward to create an acute axiogingival line
angle. In the Class III preparation, the incisal portion is undercut
(Fig. 17.34 ). his undercut is placed in dentin, facioincisally, to
create a mechanical lock between the incisal and gingival walls.
his increased retention form in the Class III preparation is required
b
a
AB
C
• Fig. 17.30 Class III direct gold restoration. A, The model of the preparation shows the esthetic mar -
ginal outline (a). B, Central incisor (b) before distal preparation. C, Completed Class III restoration.
• Fig. 17.31 Proximofacial view of Class III preparation.
• Fig. 17.32 Lingual view of Class III preparation.
CHAPTER 17 Direct Gold Retoration e85
appears as a slice. his modiication provides clearance from the
mesial marginal ridge of the irst premolar and provides considerable
convenience form to allow compaction of gold on the gingival
wall directly from an incisal position. his type of preparation also
is appropriate for the distal surface of highly contoured lateral
incisors ( Fig. 17.36 ).
he mandibular incisors require a modiied Class III preparation
because of their small size and because access from a lingual position
may be exceptionally diicult. he lingual wall is created in one
plane, and extension of the lingual and the incisal walls is limited.
he axiolingual line angle is a right or slightly obtuse angle. Care
is taken to avoid lingual overextension of the lingual wall because
this can result in the removal of dentinal support for lingual enamel,
rendering the preparation unrestorable by direct gold. he outline
form is extended lingually only far enough to include the lesion
and to allow access for inishing of the gold. Incisal extension is
restricted because the proximal contact area between mandibular
incisors is often near the incisal angle. Extension incisally past the
contact may weaken this critical area of the tooth; a mechanical
separator may be necessary to obtain clearance between teeth. his
provides access for tooth preparation and gold compaction. Facial
extension is similar to the maxillary preparation ( Fig. 17.37 ).
Internally, the incisal retentive angle for the mandibular Class
III preparation is placed directly incisally, rather than facioincisally
as in maxillary teeth. his modiication is made to conserve the
thickness of the tooth structure at the facioincisal angle, where
wear of mandibular anterior teeth frequently occurs. Lingual
approach Class III restorations may be made using E-Z Gold. In
such cases, the lingual “slot” type of preparation is made with
rounded internal line angles.
Separation of Teeth
Separation of teeth frequently is needed for instrumentation or
inishing procedures performed on Class III direct gold restorations.
he Ferrier separator is a convenient instrument for accomplishing
this separation. It is applied and stabilized with compound (similar
to stabilization of a No. retainer) ( Fig. 17.38 ). he jackscrews
of the separator are activated with the separator wrench to draw
the teeth slightly apart, creating a maximum space of 0.25 to A B
• Fig. 17.33 Lingual marginal outline of Class III preparation. A, View of
lingual outline. Note the sharp linguogingival angle. B, Proximal view of
preparation. Note that the linguogingival angle is sharp and acute in this
view. (A, From Stibbs GD: Direct golds in dental restorative therapy. Oper
Dent 5: , .)
• Fig. 17.34 View of incisal retention in Class III preparation. The under -
cut is placed in dentin but does not undermine enamel.
A Bx
• Fig. 17.35 Class III preparation internal form and facial marginal outline. A, Incisal view of cross section
of preparation in plane x shown in B. Facial and lingual cavosurface bevels are shown placed in enamel.
B, Facial view of the facial marginal outline of the preparation. (From Stibbs GD: Direct golds in dental
restorative therapy. Oper Dent 5: , .)Modiications of Class III Preparations
he distal surface of maxillary canines may require a modiication
in preparation design for convenience in gold compaction. Because
a highly convex surface is generally present, it is often desirable
to create a “straight-line preparation” in which the facial outline
e86 CHAPTER 17 Direct Gold Retoration
Restoration
he separator is used to obtain a separation of 0.25 to 0.5 mm.
Compaction of gold foil begins at the linguoaxiogingival point
angle ( Fig. 17.46 ). A small (i.e., 0.4 mm) monangle condenser is
used to compact the gold, which is held by a small holding instru -
ment. Pellets size or are used in the beginning of the
restorative phase. he line of force is directed over the facial surface
of the adjacent tooth and into the linguoaxiogingival point angle
(see Fig. 17.46B ). As soon as ample gold has been compacted into
the linguogingival area to cover the linguogingival shoulder,
compaction continues across the gingival wall ( Fig. 17.47 ) and
into the faciogingiv al angle. he ofset condenser (with a facio -
gingival line of force) is used to ill the facioaxi ogingival point
angle ( Fig. 17.48 ). Compaction of gold at the linguogingival area
is conirmed with the oblique-faced monangle condenser (i.e.,
0.5 mm) from the linguoincisal position ( Fig. 17.49 ). Failure to
provide dense gold in this linguogingival area at t his stage may
result in a void at the linguogingival angle and subsequently may
lead to restoration failure.
he bulk of the restoration is compacted with 143or
-sized pellets, mainly from a facial (occasionally from a lingual)
direction ( Fig. 17.50 ). he line of force is maintained in an
axiogingival direction with the 0.5-mm monangle or obliquefaced monangle condenser (see Fig. 17.50B ). This requires 0.5 mm. It is desirable to provide only this minimum separation
and to remove the separator as soon as possible (preventing damage
to periodontal structures).
Instrumentation
he No. bur (or a suitable Wedelstaedt chisel) is used to begin
the preparation ( Fig. 17.39 ). he bur is angled from the facial to
position the gingival outline and the facial wall. A Wedelstaedt
chisel establishes the lingual extension, and the No. bur
deines the linguogingival line angle ( Fig. 17.40 ) and completes
the gingival loor preparation. he outline form is completed by
beveling the cavosurface areas with a Wedelstaedt chisel. Next the
dentinal part of the gingival, lingual, facial, and incisal walls is
planed. A small hoe (i.e., - -9) is used for the lingual and
gingival walls ( Fig. 17.41 ). An angle former is used to plane the
facial dentinal wall ( Fig. 17.42 ). An axial plane (i.e., 8-1-23) smooths
the axial wall, and a bibeveled hatchet (i.e., 3-2-28) establishes the
incisal retentive angle with a chopping motion ( Fig. 17.43 ). Small
angle formers are used to complete the sharp facioaxiogingival and
linguoaxiogingival point angles and the slightly acute axiogingival
angle ( Fig. 17.44 ). he point angles may be enlarged further with
the No. 33S bur (i.e., end-cutting bur) for additional convenience
form. he Wedelstaedt chisel may be used again to complete the
inal planing of the cavosurface margins ( Fig. 17.45 ).
• Fig. 17.36 Direct gold restoration of a clinical Class III preparation of
straight-line design on the distal portion of the maxillary lateral incisor.
A B
• Fig. 17.37 Mandibular Class III preparation. A, Facial view. The facial margin is similar to that in the
maxillary preparation. B, Linguoproximal view.
• Fig. 17.38 Separator placed before clinical Class III preparation for the
mandibular incisor.
CHAPTER 17 Direct Gold Retoration e87
A B C
D E
• Fig. 17.39 A, Preoperative view of the extracted maxillary central incisor that has been mounted in
dentoform. Distal surface to be treated with Class III cavity preparation and restoration of compacted
gold. B, Preoperative lingual view. C, Facial approach initial entry is made with No. bur. D, Initial bur
entry. E, The Wedelstaedt chisel begins to establish the facial outline form.
A B
• Fig. 17.40 Lingual view of preparation instrumentation. A, The Wedelstaedt chisel planing the lingual
enamel wall. B, An inverted cone bur is used to establish the sharp linguogingival shoulder.
e88 CHAPTER 17 Direct Gold Retoration
A BC
• Fig. 17.41 Use of small hoe facial approach in tooth preparation. A, The hoe planes the lingual dentinal
wall from the incisal aspect to the gingival aspect. B, The hoe also planes this wall from the gingival aspect
to the incisal aspect (arrow). C, The hoe planes the gingival cavosurface (arrow).
A B C
• Fig. 17.42 Use of the angle former to plane the facial dentinal wall. A, Angle former before placement
in the preparation. B, Angle former in the preparation. C, The angle former is directed apically (arrow) to
plane the facial dentinal wall.
A B C
• Fig. 17.43 A, Axial plane before placement in the preparation. B, Bibeveled hatchet before placement
in the preparation. C, The bibeveled hatchet is used to establish the incisal retentive angle.
CHAPTER 17 Direct Gold Retoration e89
ab
A B
C D
• Fig. 17.44 A, Angle former before use in the preparation. B, The angle former is moved faciolingually
(a) to establish an acute axiogingival line angle (b). C, The offset angle former thrust faciogingivally estab -
lishes an acute facioaxiogingival point angle. D, Completed incisal, gingivoaxial retention form.
(D, From Stibbs GD: Direct golds in dental restorative therapy. Oper Dent 5: , .)
AB
• Fig. 17.45 A, The Wedelstaedt chisel may be used again to plane margins. B, Completed facial margin
of Class III tooth preparation viewed from the facial position.
e90 CHAPTER 17 Direct Gold Retoration
a
A B C
• Fig. 17.46 A, The irst pellet of the gold foil is placed from the facial aspect into the preparation. Note
the separation of teeth by 0.25 to 0.5 mm. B, Compaction of the pellet into the linguoaxiogingival point
angle. The line of force is directed linguoaxiogingivally, while the holding instrument is placed from the
lingual position. C, The holding instrument (a) prevents dislodgment of foil during compaction.
a
• Fig. 17.47 The holding instrument (a) remains in position as the gold foil is condensed across the
gingival wall toward the facial portion of the preparation.
A B
• Fig. 17.48 A, Offset condenser before placement in the cavity preparation. B, Compacted gold foil
covering the gingival wall and the cavosurface.
that the incisal surface of the growing restoration always slope
apically, with the gold on the axial wall ahead of the proximal
surface of the restoration. During the compaction procedure,
the vector of the line of force always should be toward the
internal portion of the preparation to prevent dislodgment of the
restoration.
he next step is the restoration of the incisal portion of the
preparation, referred to as “making the turn.” It is accomplished
in three phases. First, suicient gold is built up on the lingual wall so that the gold is near the incisal angle ( Fig. 17.51 ). Second, the
incisal ar ea is illed by compacting -size pellets with the rightangle hand condenser ( Fig. 17.52 ). Third, pellets of foil are
compacted into the incisolingual and incisal ar eas with the ofset
condenser . his ills the incisal portion, making a complete turn
from lingual to facial ( Fig. 17.53A ). he entire incisal cavosurface
is covered with gold (see Fig. 17.53B ).
Additional gold compaction inishes the facial one third of
the restoration, and then the Varney foot condenser is used to
CHAPTER 17 Direct Gold Retoration e91
“after-condense” over the contour of the restoration. More separation
is generated by slight activation of the separator, befor e inishing
and polishing the restoration. A sharp, gold foil knife is used
to remove excess in the contact area, permitting a ine inishing
strip or steel matrix strip to pass through. A pull-cut Shooshan
ile or gold knife may facilitate removal of excess gold facially
(Fig. 17.54 ). Initial contouring of the contact area is performed
with long, extra-narrow, extra-ine cuttle inishing strips to gain
access to the proximal surface. Next, a wide, medium cuttle strip
may be used for rapid removal of excess gold. Final contouring
continues with the medium and fine, narrow strips. Finish -
ing is performed with the extra-narrow, extra-ine cuttle strip
• Fig. 17.49 Lingual view . The monangle condenser conirms compac -
tion of gold at the linguogingival aspect of the restoration.
a
A B
• Fig. 17.50 A, The monangle condenser is used to build the bulk of gold in the gingival half of the
preparation. B, Gingival half of the restoration in longitudinal section. The line of force (a) is directed
axiogingivally during compaction of gold to prevent dislodgment of the restoration.
A B
• Fig. 17.51 A, The condenser is directed over the facial surface of the adjacent tooth, while the gold
is built toward the incisal aspect. B, The gold is compacted from the facioincisal aspect to cover the
lingual cavosurface; however, compaction direction must continue to have a major vector (arrow) toward
the axial wall to prevent dislodgment. At this stage, the compacted foil on the axial wall must be well
ahead (incisally) of the “growing” proximal surface.
A B
• Fig. 17.52 A, The right-angle hand condenser begins to press the gold into the incisal retention.
B, This condenser forces the gold deeply into the incisal retentive undercut.
e92 CHAPTER 17 Direct Gold Retoration
Summary
Direct-illing gold is useful in restorative dentistry. If carefully
manipulated by a dentist, this restorative material may provide
lifetime service to patients and promote their oral health (Fig. 17.57 ). Direct-illing gold contributes to the art and the
science of restorative dentistry.(Fig. 17.55 ). Care is taken to inish only the facial or lingual areas
with the strip and to av oid lattening the contact area. he gold
knife or discoid-cleoid instrument can be used to remov e the inal
excess gold from the cavosur face margins. he separator is then A B
• Fig. 17.53 Completing the compaction of gold into the incisal region of the preparation. A, The offset
bayonet condenser condenses the gold into the incisal retention with mallet compaction. B, The incisal
cavosurface is restored with gold foil condensed with the small monangle condenser.
• Fig. 17.54 A sharp, thin-bladed gold knife removes excess gold from
the facial surface.
• Fig. 17.56 Completed maxillary Class III gold foil restoration.
• Fig. 17.55 Fine cuttle inishing strips polish the proximal surface of the
gold foil restoration.
• Fig. 17.57 Completed mandibular Class III gold foil restoration.
removed. F inal polishing is accomplished with a worn, extra-ine
cuttle strip. Polishing powder may be used. Omitting this step
results in a satin inish that is less r elective of light and perhaps
more esthetically pleasing ( Fig. 17.56 ).
CHAPTER 17 Direct Gold Retoration e93
11. Smith GE: he efect of condenser design and lines of force on the dental
compaction of cohesive gold [Master’s thesis] , Seattle, , University
of Washington.
12. Black GV : he nature of blows and the relation of size of plugger
points for ce as used in illing teeth. Dent Rev 21: , .
13. Baum L: Gold foil (illing golds) in dental practice. Dent Clin North
Am : .
14. Ivoclar-Williams Company: E-Z Gold instructional brochure, Amherst,
NY, Ivoclar-Williams.
15. Smith GE: Condenser selection for pure gold compaction. J Am
Acad Gold Foil Oper 15:53, .
16. Hodson JT, Stibbs GD: Structural density of compacted gold foil
and mat gold. J Dent Res 41: , .
17. homas JJ, Stanley HR, Gilmore HW: E fects of gold foil condensation
on human dental pulp. J Am Dent Assoc 78: , .
18. Ferrier WI: T reatment of proximal cavities in anterior teeth with
gold foil. J Am Dent Assoc 21: , .
19. Smith GE, Hodson JT, Stibbs GD: A study of the degree of adaptation
possible in retention holes, convenience points and point angles in
Class III cavity preparations. J Am Acad Gold Foil Oper 15:12–18,
.Reference
1. Dwinelle WH: Crystalline gold, its varieties, properties, and use. Am
J Dent 5: , .
2. Ferrier WI: he use of gold foil in general practice. J Am Dent Assoc
28: , .
3. Hollenback GM: here is no substitute for gold foil in restorative
dentistry. J South Calif Dent Assoc 33: , .
4. Lambert RL: A survey of the teaching of compacted gold. Oper Dent
5:20, .
5. Stibbs GD: Direct golds in dental restorative therapy. Oper Dent
5: , .
6. T rueman WH: An essay upon the relative advantage of crystallized
gold and gold foil as a material for illing teeth. Dent Cosmos 10: ,
.
7. Ingersol CE: Personal communication, .
8. Lund MR, Baum L: Powdered gold as a restorative material. J Prosthet
Dent 13: , .
9. Hodson JT: Structure and properties of gold foil and mat gold. J
Dent Res 42: , .
10. Hodson JT: Compaction properties of various pure gold restorative
materials. J Am Acad Gold Foil Oper 12:52, .
e94 CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration
e9418
Class II Cast-Metal Restorations
JOHN R. STURDEVANT
The cast-metal restoration is versatile and is especially
applicable to Class II onlay pr eparations. he process has
many steps, involves numerous dental materials, and requires
meticulous attention to detail. Typically a dental laboratory is
involved, and the dentist and the laboratory technician must be
devoted to perfection. he high degree of satisfaction and service
derived from a properly made cast-metal restoration is a reward
for the painstaking application required.1 he Class II inlay involves
the occlusal surface and one or more proximal surfaces of a posterior
tooth. When cusp tips are restored, the term onlay is used. he
procedure requires two appointments: the irst for preparing the
tooth and making an impression, and the second for delivering
the restoration to the patient. he fabrication process is referred
to as an indirect procedure because the casting is made on a replica
of the prepared tooth in a dental laboratory.
Material Qualitie
Cast-metal restorations can be made from a variety of casting
alloys. Although the physical properties of these alloys vary, their
major advantages are their high compressive and tensile strengths.
hese high strengths are especially valuable in restorations that
rebuild most or all of the occlusal surface.
he American Dental Association (ADA) Speciication No. 5
for Dental Casting Gold Alloys requires a minimum total goldplus-platinum-metals content of 75 weight percent (wt%). Such
traditional high-gold alloys are unreactive in the oral environment
and are some of the most biocompatible materials available to the
restorative dentist.2 At present, four distinct groups of alloys are
in use for cast restorations: (1) traditional high-gold alloys, (2)
low-gold alloys, (3) palladium–silver alloys, and ( 4) base metal
alloys. Each of the alternatives to high-gold alloys has required
some modiication of technique or acceptance of reduced perfor -
mance, most commonly related to decreased tarnish resistance and
decreased burnishability.3 Also they have been associated with higher
incidences of postrestorative allergy, most often exhibited by irritated
soft tissue adjacent to the restoration.2
Indication
Large Retoration
he cast-metal inlay is an alternative to amalgam or composite
when the higher strength of a casting alloy is needed or when the
superior control of contours and contacts that the indirect procedure
provides is desired. he cast-metal onlay is often an excellent alternative to a crown for teeth that have been greatly weakened
by caries or by large, failing restorations but where the facial and
lingual tooth surfaces are relatively unafected by disease or injury.
For such weakened teeth, the superior physical properties of a
casting alloy are desirable to withstand the occlusal loads placed
on the restoration; also the onlay can be designed to distribute
occlusal loads over the tooth in a manner that decr eases the chance
of tooth fracture in the future. Preserving intact facial and lingual
surfaces is conducive to maintaining the health of the pulp and
the contiguous soft tissue (gingiva). When margins are supragingival
they are easier to inspect for adaptation and seal. When proximal
surface caries is extensive, favorable consideration should be given
to the cast inlay or onlay. he indirect procedure used to develop
the cast restoration allows more control of contours and contacts
(proximal and occlusal).
Endodontically Treated Teeth
A molar or premolar with treatment root canal illing can be
restored with a cast-metal onlay, provided that the onlay has been
thoughtfully designed to distribute occlusal loads in such a manner
as to reduce the chance of tooth fracture.
Teeth at Rik for Fracture
Fracture lines in enamel and dentin, especially in teeth having
extensive restorations, should be recognized as cleavage planes for
possible future fracture of the tooth. Restoring these teeth with a
restoration that braces the tooth against fracture injury may be
warranted sometimes. Such restorations are cast onlays and crowns.
Dental Rehabilitation With Cat-Metal Alloy
When cast-metal restorations have been used to restore adjacent
or opposing teeth, the continued use of the same material
may be considered to eliminate electrical and corrosive activ -
ity that sometimes occurs between dissimilar metals in the
mouth, particularly when they come in contact with each other
(galvanism).
Diatema Cloure and Occlual Plane Correction
Often the cast inlay or onlay is indicated when extension of the
mesiodistal dimension of the tooth is necessary to form a contact
with an adjacent tooth. Cast onlays also can be used to correct
the occlusal plane of a slightly tilted tooth.
CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration e95
Control of Contour and Contact
hrough the use of the indirect technique, the dentist has great
control over contours and contacts. his control becomes especially
important when the restoration is larger and more complex.
Diadvantage
Number of Appointment and Higher
Chair Time
he cast inlay or onlay requires at least two appointments and
much more time than a direct restoration, such as amalgam or
composite.
Temporary Retoration
Patients must have temporary restorations between the preparation
and delivery appointments. Temporaries occasionally loosen or
break, requiring additional visits.
Cot
In some instances, cost to the patient becomes a major consider -
ation in the decision to restore teeth with cast-metal restorations.
he cost of materials, laboratory bills, and the time involved
make indirect cast restorations more expensive than direct
restorations.
Technique Senitivity
Every step of the indirect procedure requires diligence and attention
to detail. Errors at any part of the long, multistep process tend to
be compounded, resulting in less than ideal its.
Splitting Force
Small inlays may produce a wedging efect on facial or lingual
tooth structure and increase the potential for splitting the tooth.
Onlays do not have this disadvantage.
Initial Procedure
Occluion
Before the anesthetic is administered and before preparation of
any tooth, the occlusal contacts of teeth should be evaluated. As
part of this evaluation, the dentist must decide if the existing
occlusal relationships can be improved with the cast-metal restora -
tion. An evaluation should include (1) the occlusal contacts in
maximum intercuspation where teeth are brought into full
interdigitation and (2) the occlusal contacts that occur during
mandibular movements ( Fig. 18.1 ). he pattern of occlusal contacts
inluences the preparation design, selection of interocclusal records,
and type of articulator or cast development needed.
Anetheia
Local anesthesia of the tooth to be operated on and of adjacent
soft tissue usually is recommended. Anesthesia in these areas
eliminates pain and reduces salivation, resulting in a more pleasant
procedure for the patient and the operator.Removable Prothodontic Abutment
Teeth that are to serve as abutments for a removable partial denture
can be restored with cast-metal restorations. he advantages of
cast restorations are as follows: (1) he superior physical properties
of cast-metal alloys allow restorations to better withstand forces
imparted by a partial denture, and (2) rest seats, guiding planes,
and other aspects of contour relating to partial dentures are better
controlled when the indirect technique is used.
Contraindication
High Carie Rate
Facial and lingual (especially lingual) smooth-surface caries indicates
a high caries activity that should be brought under control before
expensive cast-metal restorations are used.
Young Patient
With younger patients, direct restorative materials (e.g., composite
or amalgam) are indicated unless the tooth is severely broken or
endodontically treated. An indirect procedure requires longer and
more numerous appointments, access is more diicult, the clinical
crowns are shorter, and younger patients may neglect oral hygiene,
resulting in additional caries.
Ethetic
he dentist must consider the esthetic impact (display of metal)
of the cast-metal restoration. his factor usually limits the use of
cast-metal restorations to tooth surfaces that are hidden at a
conversational distance. Composite and porcelain restorations are
alternatives in esthetically sensitive areas.
Small Retoration
Because of the success of amalgam and composite, few cast-metal
inlays are done in small Class I and II restorations.
Advantage
Strength
he inherent strength of dental casting alloys allows them to restore
large damaged or missing areas and be used in ways that protect
the tooth from future fracture injury. Such restorations include
onlays and crowns.
Biocompatibility
As previously mentioned, high-gold dental casting alloys are
unreactive in the oral environment. his biocompatibility can be
helpful for many patients who have allergies or sensitivities to
other restorative materials.
Low Wear
Although individual casting alloys vary in their wear resistance,
castings are able to withstand occlusal loads with minimal changes.
his is especially important in large restorations t hat restore a large
percentage of occlusal contacts.
e96 CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration
the area of the defect. An impression is typically made using a
sectional tray ( Fig. 18.2A ). he tray illed with impression material
is seated (see Fig. 18.2B ). After the impression has set, the impression
is removed and examined for completeness (see Fig. 18.2C ). Alginate
impressions can distort quickly if they are allowed to gain or lose
moisture, so the impression is wrapped in wet paper towels to
serve as a humidor (see Fig. 18.2D ). Preoperative PVS impressions
do not need to be wrapped. he preoperative impression is placed
aside for later use in forming the temporary restoration.
Tooth Preparation for Cla II CatMetal Retoration
A small, distal, cavitated caries lesion in the maxillary right irst
premolar is used to illustrate the classic two-surface preparation Conideration for Temporary Retoration
Before preparation of the tooth, consideration must be given to
the method that will be used to fabricate the temporary restoration.
Most temporary restoration techniques require the use of a preopera -
tive impression to reproduce the occlusal, facial, and lingual surfaces
of the temporary restoration to the preoperative contours.
he technique involves making a preoperative impression with
an elastic impression material. Alginate impression materials may
be used and are relatively inexpensive. he preoperative impression
may be made with a polyvinyl siloxane (PVS) impression material
if additional accuracy, stability, and durability are required. If the
tooth to be restored has large defects such as a missing cusp, an
instrument can be used to carve away impression material in the
area of the missing cusp or tooth structure, to simulate the desired
form for the temporary restoration. Alternatively, a material such
as rope wax can be added to the tooth before the impression in
A B C
• Fig. 18.1 A–C, Evaluate occlusal relationships in maximum intercuspation (A) and during mandibular
movements (B and C). Be alert for problems with tooth alignment and contact position. Note the amount
of posterior separation provided by the guidance of anterior teeth (working side) and articular eminence
(nonworking side).
DA B
C
• Fig. 18.2 A, Applying tray adhesive to stock quadrant tray. B, Making preoperative impression. C,
Inspecting preoperative impression for completeness. D, When using alginate, wrap the impression with
wet paper towels to serve as a humidor.
CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration e97
Occlual Step
With the No. carbide bur held parallel to the long axis of the
tooth crown, the dentist enters the fossa or pit closest to the
involved marginal ridge, using a punch cut to a depth of 1.5 mm
to establish the depth of the pulpal wall ( Fig. 18.4A and B ). In
the initial pr eparation, this speciied depth should not be exceeded,
regardless of whether the bur end is in dentin, caries, old restorative
material, or air . he bur should be rotating at high speed (with
air-water spray) before application to the tooth and should not
stop rotating until it is removed; this minimizes perceptible vibration
and prevents breakage or chipping of the bur blades. A general
rule is to maintain the long axis of the bur parallel to the long
axis of the tooth crown at all times (see Fig. 18.4B and C ). For
mandibular molars and second premolars whose crowns tilt slightly
lingually, this rule dictates that the bur should also b e tilted slightly
(5–10 degrees) lingually to conserve the strength of the lingual
cusps (see Fig. 18.4D ). When the operator is cutting at high speeds,
a properly directed air-water spray is used to prov ide the necessary
cooling and cleansing efects.5
Maintaining the 1.5-mm initial depth and the same bur orienta -
tion, the dentist extends the preparation outline mesially along
the central groove or issure to include the mesial fossa or pit (see
Fig. 18.4E and F ). Ideally, the faciolingual dimension of this cut
should be minimal. he dentist takes care to keep the mesial
marginal ridge strong by not removing the dentin support of the
ridge (see Fig. 18.4F and H ). he use of light intermittent pressure
minimizes heat production on the tooth surface and reduces the
incidence of enamel crazing ahead of the bur. Occasionally a issure
extends onto the mesial marginal ridge. his defect, if shallow,
may be treated with enameloplasty, or it may be included in the
outline form with the cavosurface bevel, which is applied in a later
step in the tooth preparation (see Fig. 18.4G ).
Enameloplasty, as presented in earlier chapters, occasionally
reduces extension along the issures, conserving the tooth structure
vital for pulp protection and the strength of the remaining tooth
crown. he extent to which enameloplasty can be used usually
cannot be determined until the operator is in the process of for an inlay ( Fig. 18.3A ). T reatment principles for other defects
are presented later. As indicated previously, few small one-surface
or two-surface inlays are done. Because the description of a small
tooth preparation presents the basic concepts, it is used to illustrate
the technique. More extensive tooth preparations are presented
later.
Tooth Preparation for Cla II Cat-Metal Inlay
Initial Preparation
Carbide burs used to develop the vertical internal walls of the
preparation for cast-metal inlays and onlays are plane cut, tapered
issure burs. hese burs are plane cut so that the vertical walls are
smooth. he side and end surfaces of the bur should be straight to
aid in the development of uniformly tapered walls and smooth pulpal
and gingival walls. Recommended dimensions and conigurations
of the burs to be used are shown in Fig. 18.3B . Suggested burs are
the No. and the No. 169L burs (Brasseler USA, Inc., Savannah,
GA). Before using unfamiliar burs, the operator is cautioned to
verify measurements to judge the depth into the tooth during
preparation. he sides and end surface of the No. bur meet in
a slightly rounded manner so that sharp, stress-inducing internal
angles are not formed in the preparation.4 he marginal bevels are
placed with a slender, ine-grit, lame-shaped diamond instrument
such as the No. bur (Brasseler USA, Inc.).
hroughout the preparation for a cast inlay, the cutting instru -
ments used to develop the vertical walls are oriented to a single
“draw” path, usually the long axis of the tooth crown, so that the
completed preparation has draft (no undercuts) (see Fig. 18.3C ).
he gingival-to-occlusal divergence of these preparatio n walls may
range from 2 to 5 degrees per wall from the line of draw. If the
vertical walls are unusually short, a maximum of 2 degrees occlusal
divergence is desirable to increase retention potential. As the
occlusogingival height increases, the occlusal divergence should
increase because lengthy preparations with minimal divergence
(more parallel) may present diiculties during the s eating and
withdrawal of the restoration.
C4
xy
Inlay
Tooth
A
B0.8 mm 0.5 mm271
169L8862
• Fig. 18.3 A, Proposed outline form for distoocclusal pr eparation. B, Dimensions and coniguration of
No. , No. 169L, and No. instruments. C, Conventional 4-degree divergence from line of draw
(xy).
e98 CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration
are not faulty, suicient facial extension in the mesial pit region
should be made to provide this dovetail retention form against
distal displacement. Minor extension in the transverse ridge area
to include any remaining facial or lingual caries may necessitate
additional facial or lingual extension in the mesial pit to provide
this dovetail feature. (During such facial or lingual extensions to
sound tooth structure, the bur depth is maintained at 1.5 mm.)
If major facial or lingual extension is required to remove undermined
occlusal enamel, capping the weak remaining cuspal structure and
additional features in the preparation to provide adequate retention
and r esistance forms may be indicated. hese considerations are
discussed in subsequent sections.
Continuing at the initial depth, the occlusal step is extended
distally into the distal marginal ridge suiciently to expose the
junction of the proximal enamel and dentin ( Fig. 18.7A and B ).
While extending distally, the dentist progressively widens the
preparation to the desired faciolingual width in anticipation of
the proximal box preparation. he increased faciolin gual width extending the preparation wall, when the depth of the issure in
the enamel wall can be observed ( Fig. 18.5 ). When enameloplasty
shows a issure in a marginal ridge to be deeper than one third
the thickness of enamel, the procedures described in the later
section should be used.
Extend to include faulty facial and lingual issures radiating
from the mesial pit. During this extension cutting, the operator
is cautioned again not to remove the dentin support of the proximal
marginal ridge. To conserve the tooth structure and the strength
of the remaining tooth, the inal extension up these issures can
be accomplished with the slender No. 169L carbide bur ( Fig.
18.6A ). he tooth structure and strength can be conserved further
by using (1) enameloplasty of the issure ends, when possible, and
(2) the marginal bevel of the inal preparation to include (eliminate)
the terminal ends of these issures in the outline form. he facial
and lingual extensions in the mesial pit region should provide the
desired dovetail retention form, which resists distal displacement
of the inlay (see Fig. 18.6B ). When these facial and lingual grooves
B C D
F G H271
Maxillary molar
z
FacialLingualy
x271
w
Mandibular molarFacialLingual
sBevel
Correct Incorrect
A
E
• Fig. 18.4 A and B, Bur after punch cut to a depth of 1.5 mm. C, For maxillary posterior teeth, the
long axis of the bur should parallel the long axis of the tooth crown (yz). D, For molar and second premolar
teeth of mandibular dentition, the long axis of the bur should tilt slightly lingually to parallel the long axis
of the tooth crown (wx). E and F, Extending the mesial wall, taking care to conserve dentin that supports
marginal ridge (s). G, The marginal bevel can provide additional extension. H, Improper extension that
has weakened the marginal ridge.
CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration e99
be checked with the length of the bur b y irst measuring the depth
from the height of the marginal ridge and then removing the bur
and holding it beside the tooth. A periodontal probe also may be
used for this measurement. While penetrating gingivally, the dentist
extends the proximal ditch facially and lingually beyond the caries
to the desired position of the facioaxial and linguoaxial line angles.
If the caries lesion is minimal, the ideal extension facially and
lingually is performed as previously described (see Fig. 18.7F ).
Ideal gingival extension of a minimal, cavitated lesion eliminates
caries on the gingiv al loor and provides a 0.5-mm clearance of
the unbeveled gingival margin with the adjacent tooth. Moderate
to extensive caries on the proximal surface dictates continued
extension of the proximal ditch to the extent of the caries at the
dentinoenamel junction (DEJ), but not pulpally (see Fig. 18.11D
later in the chapter). When preparing the proximal portion of the
preparation, the dentist maintains the side of the bur at the speciied
axial wall depth regardless of whether it is in dentin, caries, old
restorative material, or air. he operator should guard against
overcutting the facial, lingual, and gingival walls, which would
not conserve the tooth structure and could result in (1) overextension
of the margins in the completed preparation, (2) a weakened tooth, enables the facial and lingual walls of the box to project (visually)
perpendicularly to the proximal surface at positions that clear the
adjacent tooth by 0.2 to 0.5 mm (see Fig. 18.7F ). he facial and
lingual walls of the occlusal step should go around the cusps in
graceful curves, and the prepared isthmus in the transverse ridge
ideally should be only slightly wider than the bur, thus conserving
the dentinal protection for the pulp and maintaining the strength
of the cusps. If the occlusal step has been prepared correctly, any
caries on the pulpal loor should be uncovered by facial and lingual
extensions to sound enamel (supported by dentin).
Proximal Box
Continuing with the No. carbide bur, the distal enamel is
isolated by cutting a proximal ditch (see Fig. 18.7C–F ). he harder
enamel should guide the bur. Slight pressure toward enamel is
necessary to prevent the bur from cutting only dentin. If the bur
is allowed to cut only dentin, the resulting axial wall would be
too deep. he mesiodistal width of the ditch should be 0.8 mm
(the tip diameter of the bur) and prepared approximately two
thirds (0.5 mm) at the expense of dentin and one third (0.3 mm)
at the expense of enamel. he gingival extension of this cut may
A
B
• Fig. 18.5 A, Shallow enamel fault that is no deeper than one third the thickness of enamel. B, Using
ine-grit diamond instrument to remove enamel that contains shallow fault.
ABx
y
z
DovetailingDovetail
• Fig. 18.6 A, Extending up the mesiofacial triangular groove using the slender No. 169L bur. B, Dovetail
retention form is created by extension shown in A. As x its into y only in one direction resulting in z, simi -
larly dovetail portion of inlay its into the dovetail portion of the preparation only in an occlusal-to-gingival
direction.
e100 CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration
is held. Also the level of the gingiv al loor is veriied by observing
where the end of the bur emerged through the proximal surface.
If indicated, additional gingival extension can be accomplished
while the remaining enamel still serves to guide the bur and to
prevent it from marring the proximal surface of the adjacent tooth.
At this time, however, the remaining wall of enamel often breaks
away during cutting, especially when high speeds are employed.
If the isolated wall of enamel is still present, it can be fractured
out with a spoon excavator (see Fig. 18.7I ). At this stage, the
ragged enamel edges left from breaking away the proximal sur face
may be touching the adjacent tooth.
Planing the distofacial, distolingual, and gingival walls by hand
instruments to remove all undermined enamel may be indicated
if minimal extension is needed to fulill an esthetic objective. and (3) possible injury of soft tissue. Because the proximal enamel
diminishes in thickness from the occlusal to gingival level, the end
of the bur is closer to the external tooth surface as the cutting
progresses gingivally. he axial wall should follow the contour of
the tooth faciolingually. Any carious dentin on the axial wall should
not be removed at this stage of the preparation.
With the No. carbide bur, the dentist makes two cuts, one
at the facial limit of the proximal ditch and the other a t the lingual
limit, extending from the ditch perpendicularly toward the enamel
surface (in the direction of the enamel rods) (see Fig. 18.7G ).
hese cuts are extended until the bur is nearly through the marginal
ridge enamel (the side of the bur may emerge slightly through the
surface at the level of the gingival loor) as shown in Fig. 18.7H .
his weakens the enamel by which the remaining isolated portion
0.5 mm
/H110060.2 mmx
xj
Distal271
B D
EF G
I
x271
j
AC
H
• Fig. 18.7 A, After exposing the junction (j) of proximal enamel and dentin. B, Sectional drawing of
A. C, Cutting the proximal ditch. D, Sectional drawing of C. E, Proximal view of D. F, Occlusal view
of the proximal ditch with proposed ideal clearance with the adjacent tooth. G and H, Proximal ditch
extended distally. x, penetration of enamel by side of bur at its gingival end. I, Breaking away isolated
enamel.
CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration e101
intermittent cutting. he operator should avoid unnecessarily
desiccating the exposed dentin during this procedure.
Light-cured glass ionomer cement may be applied with a suitable
applicator to these shallow (or moderately deep) excavated regions
to the depth and form of the ideally prepared surface. Placing the
material takes little time and should be considered because it results
in preparation walls with no undercuts and “ideal” position and
contour. his facilitates making the temporary restoration, and
also applying the light-cured glass ionomer at this time minimizes
additional irritation of the pulp during subsequent procedures
necessary for the completion of the restoration. he material is
applied by conveying small portions on the end of a periodontal
probe and is light-cured when the correct form has been achieved
(see Fig. 18.9H and I ). Any excess cement can be trimmed back
to the ideal form with the No. carbide bur after the cement
has hardened.
If the caries lesion is judged to approach the pulp closely, a
rubber dam should be applied and the soft dentin re moved as
indicated (see Chapter 2 ). Rubber dam provides the optimal
environment for successfully treating a pulp exposure should it
occur. If removal of soft dentin leads directly to a pulpal exposure
(carious pulpal exposure), root canal treatment should be accom -
plished before completing the cast-metal restoration.
If the pulp is inadvertently exposed as a result of operator error
or misjudgment (mechanical pulpal exposure), the operator must
decide whether to proceed with the root canal treatment or to
attempt a direct pulp capping procedure. A clinical evaluation
should be made to determine the health of the pulp. A favorable
prognosis for the pulp after direct pulp capping may be expected
if the following criteria are met:
• he exposure is small ( <0.5 mm in diameter).
• The tooth has been asymptomatic, showing no signs of
pulpitis.
• Any hemorrhage from the exposure site is easily controlled.
• he invasion of the pulp chamber was relatively atraumatic
with little physical irritation to the pulp tissue.
• A clean, uncontaminated operating ield is maintained (i.e., by
using a rubber dam).
If the excavation closely approaches the pulp or if a direct pulp
cap is indicated, the dentist should irst apply a lining of calcium
hydroxide using a low technique (without pressure). his calcium
hydroxide liner should cover and protect any possible near or
actual exposure and extend over a major portion of the excavated
dentinal surface ( Fig. 18.10 ). Although undetected, an exposed
recessional tract of a pulp horn may exist in any deep excavation.
Calcium hydroxide treatment of an exposed, healthy pulp promotes
the formation of a dentin bridge, which would close the exposure.3
A resin-modiied glass ionomer base should be applied and should
completely cover the calcium hydroxide lining as well as some
peripheral dentin for good adhesion ( Fig. 18.11 ). he base should
be suiciently thick in dimension to protect the thin underlying
dentin and the calcium hydroxide liner from subsequent stresses.
Usually good resistance form dictates that the pulpal wall should
not be formed entirely by a base; rather, in at least two regions,
one diametrically across the excavation from the other, the pulpal
wall should be in normal position, lat, and formed by sound
dentin (see region S in Fig. 18.11E , which depicts basing in a
mandibular molar). he dentist should consider the addition of
other retention features such as proximal grooves if a major portion
of a proximal axial wall is composed mostly of base because this
base should not be relied on for contributing to retention of the
cast restoration (see Fig. 18.8F ).Depending on access, the operator can use a No. 15 (width) straight
chisel, bin-angle chisel ( Fig. 18.8 ), or enamel hatchet. For a righthanded operator, the distal beveled bin-angle chisel is used on the
distofacial wall of a distoocclusal preparation for the maxillary
right premolar. he dentist planes the wall by holding the instrument
in the modiied palm-and-thumb grasp and uses a chisel-like motion
in an occlusal-to-gingival direction (see Fig. 18.8A and B ). he
dentist planes the gingival wall by using the same instrument as
a hoe, scraping in a lingual-to-facial direction (see Fig. 18.8C ). In
this latter action, the axial wall may be planed with the side edge
(secondary edge) of the blade. he distolingual wall is planed
smooth by using the bin-angle chisel with the mesial bevel (see
Fig. 18.8D ). When proximal caries is minimal, ideal facial and
lingual extensions at this step in the preparation result in margins
that clear the adjacent tooth by 0.2 to 0.5 mm.
he experienced operator usually does not use chisel hand
instruments during the preparation for inlays, considering that
the narrow, lame-shaped, ine-grit diamond instrument, when
artfully used, removes ragged, weak enamel during application of
the cavosurface bevel and lares and causes the patient to be less
apprehensive (see Figs. 18.12 and 18.13 later in the chapter). If
the diamond instrument is to be used exclusively in inishing the
enamel walls and margins, this procedure is postponed until after
the removal of soft dentin, old restorative material, or both and
the application of any necessary base. Waiting prevents any hemor -
rhage (which occasionally follows the beveling of the gingival
margin) from hindering (1) the suitable removal of remaining soft
dentin and old restorative material and (2) the proper application
of a necessary base. Hand instruments are more useful on the
mesiofacial surfaces of maxillary premolars and irst molars, where
minimal extension is desired to prevent an unsightl y display of
metal.
Shallow (0.3-mm deep) retention grooves may be cut in the
facioaxial and linguoaxial line angles with the No. 169L carbide
bur (see Fig. 18.8E–I ). hese grooves are indicated especially when
the prepared tooth is short. When properly positioned, the grooves
are in sound dentin, close to but not contacting the DEJ. he
long axis of the bur must be held parallel to the line of draw.
Preparing these grooves may be postponed until after any required
bases are applied during the inal preparation.
Final Preparation
Removal of Soft Dentin and Pulp Protection
After the initial preparation has been completed, the dentist evaluates
the internal walls of the preparation visually and tactilely (with
an explorer) for indications of any remaining soft dentin. If soft
dentin remains and if it is judged to be shallow or moderate
(≥1 mm of remaining dentin between the caries and the pulp),
satisfactory isolation for the removal of such caries and the applica -
tion of any necessary base may be attained by reducing salivation
through anesthesia and the use of cotton rolls, a saliva ejector, and
gingival retraction cord. he retraction cord also serves to widen
the gingival sulcus and slightly retract the gingiva in preparation
for beveling and laring the proximal margins ( Fig. 18.9 ; see also
Fig. 18.12A and B ). For insertion of the cord, see the sections on
preparation of bevels and lares and tissue retraction . he removal
of the remaining caries and placement of a necessary base can be
accomplished during the time required for the full efect of the
inserted cord. A slowly revolving round bur (No. 2 or No. 4) or
spoon excavator is used to remove soft dentin (see Fig. 18.9F and
G). If a bur is used, visibility can be improved by using air alone.
his excavation is done just above stall-out speed with light,
e102 CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration
169L
FPG
LPGLPG FPGA
E F
GHI
BC
D
• Fig. 18.8 A–D, Using modiied palm-and-thumb grasp (A) to plane distofacial and distolingual walls
(B and D) and to scrape gingival wall (C). E, Before cutting retention grooves. F, Cutting retention grooves.
G and H, Facial proximal groove (FPG) and lingual proximal groove (LPG). I, Section in plane x. Large
arrows depict the direction of translation of the rotating bur.
CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration e103
y' y
4
cCorrectGlass ionomer baseA
CD
B
E
F G H I
• Fig. 18.9 Moderately deep caries lesion. A–C, Extending the proximal ditch gingivally (B) to a sound
loor free from caries (C). D, Remaining caries on the axial wall. E, Section of C in plane yy. F, Removing
the remaining soft dentin. c, Inserted retraction cord. G, Section of F. H, Inserting glass ionomer base
with periodontal probe. I, Completed base.
Rubber damCalcium hydroxide
A B
• Fig. 18.10 A and B, Deep caries excavations near the pulp are lined with calcium hydroxide. Note
the rubber dam.
e104 CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration
and protect the margins and results in a strong ena mel margin
with an angle of to degrees. A cavosurface enamel angle
of more than degrees is incorrect because it results in a lessdeined enamel margin (inish line), and the marginal cast-metal
alloy is too thin and weak if its angle is less than 30 degrees.
Conversely, if the enamel margin is degrees or less, the metal
is too bulky and diicult to burnish when its angle is greater than
40 degrees (see Fig. 18.14F later in the chapter).
Usually it is helpful to insert a gingival retraction cord of suitable
diameter into the gingival sulcus adjacent to the gingival margin
and leave it in place for several minutes just before the use of the
lame-shaped diamond instrument on the proximal margins ( Fig.
18.12A–C ). he cord should be small enough in diameter to
permit relatively easy insertion and to preclude excessive pressure
against the gingival tissue, and yet it should be large enough to
widen the sulcus to about 0.5 mm. Immediately before the lameshaped diamond instrument is used, the cord may be removed to
create an open sulcus that improves visibility for beveling the
gingival margin and helps prevent injury and subsequent hemorrhage
of gingival tissue. Some operators prefer to leave the cord in the
sulcus while placing the gingival bevel.
Using the lame-shaped diamond instrument that is rotating
at high speed, the dentist prepares the lingual secondary lare ( Fig.
18.13A ; also see Fig. 18.12D–F ). he dentist approaches from the
lingual embrasure (see Fig. 18.12F ), moving the instrument
mesiofacially. he direction of the distolingual wall and the position
of the distolingual margin are compared before and after this
extension (see Figs. 18.8G and 18.13A ). he distolingual wall
extends from the linguoaxial line angle into the lingual embrasure Any remaining old restorative material on the internal walls
should be removed if any of the following conditions are present:
(1) he old material is judged to be thin, nonretentive, or both;
(2) radiographic evidence of a caries lesion under the old material
is present; (3) the pulp was symptomatic preoperatively; or (4)
the periphery of the remaining restorative material is not intact
(i.e., some breach exists in the junction of the material with the
adjacent tooth structure that may indicate a caries lesion u nder
the material). If none of these conditions is present, the operator
may elect to leave the remaining restorative material to serve as a
base, rather than risk unnecessary removal of sound dentin or
irritation or exposure of the pulp. he same isolation conditions
described previously for the removal of soft dentin also apply for
the removal of old restorative material.
Future root canal therapy is a possibility for any tooth treated
for deep caries that approximates or exposes the pu lp. When treating
a tooth that has had such extensive caries, the following should
be considered: (1) reducing all cusps to cover the occlusal surface
with metal, for better distribution of occlusal loads, and (2) adding
skirts to the preparation to augment the resistance form because
teeth are more prone to fracture after root canal therapy.
Preparation of Bevel and Flare
After the base (where indicated) is completed, the slender, lameshaped, ine-grit diamond instrument is used to bevel the occlusal
and gingival margins and to apply the secondary lare on the
distolingual and distofacial walls. his should result in 30to
40-degree marginal metal on the inlay (refer to upcoming Figs.
18.12H, 18.13J, and 18.14B ). his cavosurface design helps seal
S S
IncorrectGlass ionomer
Calcium
hydroxideGlass ionomer
Calcium hydroxide
BECA
D
• Fig. 18.11 A–C, Completed base for the treatment of deep caries. D, Never deepen entire axial wall
with the side of a issure bur to remove a caries lesion because the pulp would be greatly irritated from
the resulting closeness of the gingivoaxial region of the preparation. E, Base placed deep in the excava -
tion on the mandibular molar. Note the lat seats in sound dentin (S) that are desirable for adequate
resistance form.
CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration e105
may r esult. he instrument should be tilted slightly mesially to
produce a gingival bevel with the correct steepness to result in
30-degree marginal metal (see Fig. 18.12C, H, and J ). If the
instrument is not tilted in this manner, the bevel is too steep,
resulting in gingival bevel metal that is too thin ( <30-degree metal)
and too weak. Although the instrument is tilted mesially, its long
axis must not tilt facially or lingually (see Fig. 18.12G ). he gingival
bevel should be 0.5 to 1 mm wide and should blend with the
lingual secondary lare.
he operator completes the gingival bevel and prepares the
facial secondary lare (see Fig. 18.13A–F ). he long axis of the
instrument during this secondary lare is again returned nearly to in two planes (see Fig. 18.13A ). he irst is termed lingual primary
lare; the second is termed lingual secondary lare . During this
(secondary) laring operation, the long axis of the instrument is
held nearly parallel to the line of draw, with only a slight tilting
mesially and lingually for assurance of draft (see Fig. 18.12D and
E), and the direction of translation of the instrument is that which
results in a marginal metal angle of 40 degrees (see Figs. 18.12F
and 18.13J ).
he dentist bevels the gingival margin by moving the i nstrument
facially along the gingival margin (see Figs. 18.12G and 18.13A ).
While cutting the gingival bevel, the rotational speed should be
reduced to increase the sense of touch; otherwise, overbeveling
A
C
30°MetalRetraction cord
0.5-1.0 mm
°IncorrectMetal0.05 mm
0.05 mm
0.02 mm30°Axial wall0.05 mm
0.05 mmB
DEF
G
H I J K
• Fig. 18.12 A and B, The retraction cord is inserted in the gingival sulcus and left for several minutes.
C, An open gingival sulcus after the cord shown in A is removed facilitates beveling the gingival margin
with a diamond instrument. D–F, Diamond instrument pr eparing lingual secondary lare. Large arrow in F
indicates the direction of the translation. G, Beveling the gingival margin. Note in C the mesial tilting of
diamond instrument to produce a bevel that is properly directed to result in 30-degree marginal metal as
shown in H. H, Properly directed gingival bevel resulting in 30-degree marginal metal. I, Failure to bevel
the gingival margin results in a weak margin formed by undermined rods (note the easily displaced wedge
of enamel) and -degree marginal metal, an angular design unsuitable for burnishing. J, Lap, sliding
it of prescribed bevel metal decreases the 50μm error of seating to 20 μm. K, A 50μm error of seating
produces an equal cement line of 50 μm along the unbeveled gingival margin.
e106 CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration
minimal, it is usually desirable to use the lingual-to-facial
direction.
he gingival bevel serves the following purposes:
• Weak enamel is removed. If the gingival margin is in the enamel,
it would be weak if not beveled because of the ging ival declina -
tion of the enamel rods (see Fig. 18.12I ).
• he bevel results in 30-degree metal that is burnishable (on the
die) because of its angular design (see Fig. 18.12H ). Bulky
-degree metal along an unbeveled margin is not burnishable
(see Fig. 18.12I ).
• A lap, sliding it is produced at the gingival margin (see Fig.
18.12J ). his helps improve the it of the casting in this region.
With the prescribed gingival bevel, if the inlay fails to seat by
50 μm, the void between the bevel metal and the gingival bevel
on the tooth may be 20 μm; however, failure to apply such a
bevel would result in a void (and a cement line) as great as in
the failure to seat (see Fig. 18.12K ).
Uninterrupted blending of the gingival bevel into the secondary
lares of the distolingual and distofacial walls results in the disto -
lingual and distofacial margins joining the gingival margin in a
desirable arc of a small circle; also the gingivofacial and gingivo -
lingual line angles no longer extend to the marginal outline. If
such line angles are allowed to extend to the preparation outline,
early failure may follow because of an “open” margin, dissolution the line of draw, with only a small tilting mesially and facially,
and the direction of translation of the instrument is that which
results in 40-degree marginal metal (see Fig. 18.13E and J ). When
the adjacent proximal surface (mesial of the second premolar) is
not being prepared, care must be exercised to avoid abrading the
adjacent tooth and overextending the distofacial margin. To prevent
such abrasion or overextension, the instrument may be raised
occlusally (using the narrower portion at its tip end) to complete
the most facial portion of the wall and margin (see Fig. 18.13D ).
Also the more slender No. 169L carbide bur may be used, rather
than the lame-shaped diamond instrument (see Fig. 18.13H ).
he No. 169L bur produces an extremely smooth surface to the
secondary lare and a smooth, straight distofacial margin. When
access permits, a ine-grit sandpaper disk may be used on the facial
and lingual walls and on the margins of the proximal preparation,
especially when minimal extension of the facial margin is desired
(see Fig. 18.13I ). his produces smooth walls and helps create
respective margins that are straight (not ragged) and sound.
In the laring and beveling of the proximal margins, as described
in the previous paragraphs, the procedure began at the lingual
surface and proceeded to the facial surface. he direction may be
reversed, however, starting at the facial surface and moving toward
the lingual surface. On the mesiofacial surface of maxillary premolars
and irst molars where extension of the facial margi n should be
LPF
LSF
FPF
FSF169L
Gold
EA G
BD
CF
H JIX
40°
40°
• Fig. 18.13 A, Occlusal view of Fig. 18.12G . LSF, Lingual secondary lare; LPF, lingual primary lare.
B–E, Preparing the facial secondary lare. Large arrows in B, D, and E indicate the direction of the transla -
tion. F, Completed facial secondary lare. FSF, Facial secondary lare; FPF, facial primary lare. G, Distal
view of F. x, Plane of cross section shown in J. H and I, Preparing the secondary lare with the No. 169L
carbide bur (H) or with paper disk (I). J, The secondary lares are directed to result in 40-degree marginal
metal and -degree marginal enamel.
CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration e107
he lame-shaped, ine-grit diamond instrument also is used
for occlusal bevels. he width of the cavosurface bevel on the
occlusal margin should be approximately one fourth the depth of
the respective wall ( Fig. 18.14A and B ). he exception to the rule
is when a wider bevel is desired to include an enamel defect (see
Fig. 18.14G and H ). he resulting occlusal marginal metal of the
inlay should be 40-degree metal; the occlusal marginal enamel is
-degree enamel (see Fig. 18.14B and E ). Beveling the occlusal
margins in this manner increases the strength of the marginal
enamel and helps seal and protect the margins. While beveling
the occlusal margins, a guide to diamond positioning is to maintain
an approximate 40-degree angle between the side of the instrument
and the external enamel surface; this also indicates when an occlusal
bevel is necessary (see Fig. 18.14A ). If the cusp inclines are so
steep that the diamond instrument, when positioned at a 40-degree
angle to the external enamel surface, is parallel with the enamel
preparation wall, no bevel is indicated (see Fig. 18.14C ). By using
this technique, it can be seen that margins on the proximal marginal
ridges always require a cavosurface bevel (see Fig. 18.14D and I ). of exposed cement, and eventual leakage, all potentially resulting
in caries.
he secondary lare is necessary for several reasons: (1) he second -
ary flaring of the proximal walls extends the margins into the
embrasures, making these margins more self-cleaning and more
accessible to inishing procedures during the inlay insertion appoint -
ment, and does so with conservation of dentin. (2) he direction of
the lare results in 40-degree marginal metal (see Fig. 18.13J ). Metal
with this angular design is burnishable; however, metal shaped at a
larger angle is unsatisfactory for burnishing; metal with an angle less
than 30 degrees is too thin and weak, with a corresponding enamel
margin that is too indeinite and ragged. (3) A more blunted and
stronger enamel margin is produced because of the secondary lare.
In a later section, the secondary lare is omitted for esthetic
reasons on the mesiofacial proximal wall of preparations on pre -
molars and irst molars of the maxillary dentition. In this location,
the wall is completed with minimal extension by using either hand
instruments (straight or bin-angle chisel) followed by a ine-grit
sandpaper disk or very thin rotary instruments.
LL'
x/H1100540°
x'/H1100540°
Metal
40° ° °Metal
40°
Correct40° Metal
Incorrect70°
sMetaly
y
AC E
H
B DGF
I
• Fig. 18.14 A, The diamond instrument beveling the occlusal margin when it is indicated to result in
40-degree marginal metal, as shown in B. Angles x and x′ are equal because the opposite angles are
equal when two lines ( L and L′) intersect. The diamond instrument is always directed such that an angle
of 40 degrees is made by the side of the instrument and the external enamel surface. B, Occlusal marginal
metal is approximately 40 degrees in cross section, making the enamel angle degrees. C, When the
cuspal inclines are steep, no beveling is indicated considering that 40-degree metal would result without
beveling. D, Beveling the mesial margin and the axiopulpal line angle. E, The mesial bevel is directed
correctly to result in 40-degree marginal metal. F, An unbeveled mesial margin is incorrect because it
results in a weak enamel margin and unburnishable marginal metal. G, To conserve dentinal support (s),
occlusal defects on the marginal ridge are included in the outline form by applying a cavosurface bevel,
which may be wider than usual, when necessary. H, Occlusal view of G. Preparing a -degree cavo -
surface enamel angle at regions labeled y usually dictates that the occlusal bevel be extended over the
marginal ridges into the secondary lares. I, Distal view of H.
e108 CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration
Modiications in Inlay Tooth Preparations
Because the indications for small inlays are rare, the following
sections provide procedural information that may promote better
understanding of their applications in more complex and larger
inlay or onlay restorations.
Meiooccluodital Preparation
If a marginal ridge is severely weakened because of excessive exten -
sion, the preparation outline often should be altered to include
the proximal sur face. he distoocclusal preparation illustrated in
the previous section would be extended to a mesioocclusodistal
preparation ( Fig. 18.16 ; see also Fig. 18.15B–D ). he decision to
extend the preparation in this manner calls for clinical judgment
as to whether the remaining marginal ridge would withstand occlusal
forces without fracture. A fortunate factor in favor of not extending
the preparation is that such ridge enamel usually is composed of
gnarled enamel and is stronger than it appears. Caries lesions
present on both proximal surfaces would result in a mesioocclu -
sodistal preparation and restoration. he only diference in te chnique
as described previously is the inclusion of the other proximal surface.
Modiications of Class II Preparation for Esthetics
For esthetic reasons, minimal lare is desired for the mesiofacial
proximal wall in maxillary premolars and irst molars in Class II
cast-metal preparations (see Fig. 18.15D ). he mesiofacial margin
is minimally extended facially of the contact to such a position
that the margin is barely visible from a facial viewing position. To
accomplish this, the secondary lare is omitted, and the wall and
margin are developed with (1) a chisel or enamel hatchet and inal
smoothing with a ine-grit paper disk or (2) a narrow diamond
or bur when access permits.
Facial or Lingual Surface Groove Extension
Sometimes, a faulty facial groove (issure) on the occlusal surface
is continuous with a faulty facial surface groove (mandibular molars),
or a faulty distal oblique groove on the occlusal surface is continuous
with a faulty lingual surface groove (maxillary molar). his situation
requires extension of the preparation outline to include the issure
to its termination ( Fig. 18.17 ; see also Fig. 18.19C ). Occasionally
the operator may extend further gingivally than the issure length
to improve retention form. Such groove extensions, when suiciently
long, are efective for increasing retention. Likewi se, this extension
may be indicated to provide suicient retention form even though
the facial or lingual surface grooves are not issured.
For extension onto the facial surface, the dentist uses the No.
carbide bur held parallel to the line of draw and extends Failure to apply a bevel in these regions leaves the enamel margin
weak and subject to injury by fracture before the inlay insertion
appointment and during the try-in of the inlay when burnishing
the marginal metal. Also failure to bevel the margins on the marginal
ridges results in metal alloy that is diicult to burnish because it
is too bulky (see Fig. 18.14F ). Similarly, the importance of extending
the occlusal bevel to include the portions of the occlusal margin
that cross over the marginal ridge cannot be overemphasized (see
Fig. 18.14H and I ). hese margins are beveled to result in 40-degree
marginal metal. Otherwise fracture of the enamel margin in such
stress-vulnerable regions may occur in the interim between the
preparation and the cementation appointment.
he diamond instrument also is used to bevel the axiopulpal
line angle lightly (see Fig. 18.14D ). Such a bevel provides a thicker
and stronger wax pattern at this critical region. he desirable metal
angle at the margins of inlays is 40 degrees except at the gingival
margins, where the metal angle should be 30 degrees. he c ompleted
preparation is illustrated in Fig. 18.15A .
A B
C D
• Fig. 18.15 A, Completed distoocclusal preparation for the inlay. B,
Mesioocclusodistal pr eparation for the inlay on the maxillary right irst
premolar, distoocclusal view. C, Same preparation as in B, mesioocclusal
view. D, Same preparation as in B, occlusal view. Note the absence, for
esthetic reasons, of secondary lare on the mesiofacial aspect and minimal
extension of the mesiofacial margin.
A
B
C
• Fig. 18.16 Mandibular irst premolar prepared for the mesioocclusodistal inlay. Distal view (A), mesial
view (B), and occlusal view (C).
CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration e109
depth gauge for the axial wall, which is in dentin. he blade
portion of the No. bur is 0.8 mm in diameter at its tip end
and 1 mm at the neck; the axial wall depth should approximate
1 mm or slightly more. he bur should be tilted lingually as it is
drawn occlusally, to develop the uniform depth of the axial wall
(see Fig. 18.17D ). he same principles apply for the extension of
a lingual surface groove.through the facial ridge (see Fig. 18.17A and B ). he depth of the
cut should be 1.5 mm. he loor (pulpal wall) should be continuous
with the pulpal wall of the occlusal portion of the preparation (see
Fig. 18.17D ).
With the bur still aligned with the path of draw, the dentist
uses the side of the bur to cut the facial surface portion of this
extension (see Fig. 18.17C ). he diameter of the bur serves as a
1.5 mm
DA B C
E
F G
• Fig. 18.17 A–C, Extending to include the occlusal issure that is continuous with the facial issure on
the facial surface. D, Section of C. E and F, Beveling the gingival margin (E) and the mesial and distal
margins (F) of issure extension. G, Beveling completed.
e110 CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration
distolingual cusp from subsequent fractur e. he distoocclusolingual
preparation requires diligent application to develop satisfactory
retention and resistance forms. Retention form is attained by (1)
creating a maximum of 2-degree occlusal divergence of the vertical
walls, (2) accentuating some line angles, and (3) extending the
lingual surface groove to create an axial wall height in this extension
of at least 2.5 mm occlusogingivally. he proper resistance form
dictates (1) routine capping of the distolingual cusp and (2)
maintaining sound tooth structure between the lingual surface
groove extension and the distolingual wall of the proximal boxing.
To prepare the distoocclusolingual preparation, the operator
irst reduces the distolingual cusp with the side of the No.
carbide bur. he cusp should be reduced a uniform 1.5 mm. Next
the operator completes the remaining occlusal step of the preparation
with the No. carbide bur. he operator prepares the proximal
box portion of the preparation. he lingual groove extension is
prepared only after the position of the distolingual wall of the
proximal boxing is established. his permits the operator to judge
the best position of the lingual surface groove extension to maintain
a minimum of 3 mm of sound tooth structure between this exten -
sion and the distolingual wall; if this is not possible because of an
extensive caries lesion, a more extensive type of preparation may
be indicated (one that crosses the oblique ridge). One can use the
side of the No. carbide bur to produce the lingual surface
groove extension (see Fig. 18.19C ). he diameter of the bur is the
gauge for the depth (pulpally) of the axial wall in this extension,
and the occlusogingival dimension of this axial wall is a minimum
of 2.5 mm. With the end of this bur, the operator also establishes
a 2-mm depth to the portion of the pulpal loor that connects the
proximal boxing to the lingual surface groove extension. his
additional depth to the pulpal loor helps strengthen the wax
pattern and casting in later steps of fabrication. his should create
a deinite 0.5-mm step from the reduced distolingual cusp to the
pulpal loor. Using the No. 169L carbide bur, the operator increases
retention form in the distoocclusolingual preparation by (1) creating
mesioaxial and distoaxial grooves in the lingual surface groove
extension (see Fig. 18.19D ) and (2) preparing facial and lingual
retention grooves in the distal boxing (see Fig. 18.19E ).
he dentist uses the lame-shaped, ine-grit diamond instrument
to bevel the proximal gingival margin and to prepare the secondary
lares on the proximal enamel walls and to bevel the lingual margins.
A lingual counterbevel is prepared on the distolingual cusp that
is generous in width and results in 30-degree metal at the margin
(see Fig. 18.19F ). Occlusion should be checked at this point because
the counterbevel should be suiciently wide to extend beyond any
occlusal contacts, either in maximum intercuspation or during
mandibular movements. he bevel on the gingival margin of the
lingual extension should be 0.5 mm wide and should provide for
a 30-degree metal angle. he bevels on the mesial and distal margins
of the lingual extension also are approximately 0.5 mm wide and
result in 40-degree marginal metal.
Fiure in the Facial and Lingual Cup Ridge or
Marginal Ridge
In the preparation of Class II preparations for inlays, facial and
lingual occlusal issures may extend nearly to, or t hrough, the
respective facial and lingual cusp ridges but not onto the facial or
lingual surface. he proper outline form dictates that the preparation
margin should not cross such issures but should be extended to
include them. For the occlusal step portion of the preparation,
the dentist initially extends along the lingual issure with the No.
carbide bur until only 2 mm of tooth structure remains between When a facial or lingual groove is included, it also must be
beveled. With the lame-shaped, ine-grit diamond instrument,
the operator bevels the gingival margin (using no more than one
third the depth of the gingival loor) to provide for 30-degree
marginal metal (see Fig. 18.17D ). he operator applies a light
bevel on the mesial and distal margins that is continuous with the
occlusal and gingival bevels and results in 40-degree metal at these
margins (see Fig. 18.17F and G ). he bevel width around the
extended groove is approximately 0.5 mm.
Cla II Preparation for Abutment Teeth and Extenion
Gingivally to Include Root-Surface Leion
Extending the facial, lingual, and gingival margins may be indicated
on the proximal surfaces of abutments for removable partial dentures
to increase the surface area for the development of guiding planes.
In addition, the occlusal outline form must be wide enough facio -
lingually to accommodate any contemplated rest preparation without
involving the margins of the restoration. hese extensions may be
accomplished by simply increasing the width of the bevels.
he following modiied preparation is recommended when
further gingival extension is indicated to include a root lesion on
the proximal surface. he gingival extension should be accomplished
primarily by lengthening the gingival bevel, especially when prepar -
ing a tooth that has a longer clinical crown than normal as a result
of gingival recession. It is necessary to extend (gingivally) the gingival
loor only slightly, and although the axial wall consequently must
be moved pulpally, this should be minimal. If additional extension
of the gingival loor is necessary, it should not be as wide pulpally
as when the loor level is at a normal position ( Fig. 18.18A ). hese
considerations are necessary because of the draft requirement and
because the tooth is smaller apically. Extending the preparation
gingivally without these modiications would result in a dangerous
encroachment of the axial wall on the pulp (see Fig. 18.18B ).
Maxillary Firt Molar W ith Unafected, Strong Oblique Ridge
When a maxillary irst molar is to be restored, consideration should
be given to preserving the oblique ridge if it is strong and unafected,
especially if only one proximal surface is carious. A mesioocclusal
preparation for an inlay is illustrated in Fig. 18.19A and B . If a
distal surface lesion appears subsequent to the insertion of a
mesioocclusal restoration, the tooth may be prepared for a distooc -
clusolingual inlay (see Fig. 18.19H and I ). he distoocclusolingual
restoration that caps the distolingual cusp is preferable to the
distoocclusal restoration because it protects the miniature
Correct Incorrect
AB
• Fig. 18.18 Modiications of the preparation when extending to include
the proximal root-surface lesions after moderate gingival recession. A,
Correct. B, Incorrect. Note the decreased dentinal protection of the pulp
compared with the management depicted in A.
CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration e111
may be wider than conventional if the r emaining issure can be
eliminated by such a wider bevel (see Fig. 18.20C ). Enameloplasty
sometimes may eliminate the end portion of the issure and provide
a smooth enamel surface where previously a fault was present, thus
reducing the extent of the required extension (see Fig. 18.20D ). the bur and the lingual surface of the tooth. Additional lingual
extension at this time is incorrect because it may remove the
supporting dentin unnecessarily ( Fig. 18.20A and B ). If this
extension almost includes the length of the issure, additional
extension is achieved later by using the occlusal bevel; this bevel
A B C
D E F
G H I
• Fig. 18.19 A and B, Mesioocclusal preparation on the maxillary molar having an unaffected oblique
ridge. C, Preparing the lingual groove extension of the distoocclusolingual preparation. D and E, Cutting
retention grooves in the lingual surface extension (D) and the distal box (E). F and G, Completed distooc -
clusolingual preparation on the maxillary molar having an unaffected oblique ridge. H and I, Preparations
for treating both proximal surfaces of the maxillary molar having a strong, unaffected oblique ridge.
e112 CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration
carbide bur (see Fig. 18.20F and G ). he dentist bevels the
margins of the extension with the lame-shaped, ine-grit diamond
instrument to provide for the desired 40-degree marginal metal
on the occlusal, mesial, and distal margins and for 30-degree
marginal metal on the gingival margin (see Fig. 18.20C, D, I, and
J). In the same manner, the operator should manage the issures
that may extend into or through a proximal marginal ridge, assuming
that the proximal surface otherwise was not to be included in the
outline form and that such issure management does not extend
the preparation outline near the adjacent tooth contact. his
treatment particularly applies to a mesial issure of the maxillary If possible, the issure should be included in the preparation outline
without extending the margin to the height of the ridge. If the
occlusal bevel places the margin on the height of the ridge, however,
the marginal enamel likely is weak because of its sharpness and
because of the inclination of the enamel rods in this region. he
preparation outline should be extended just onto the facial or
lingual surface (see Fig. 18.20I and J ). Such extension onto the
facial or lingual surface also would be indicated if the issure still
remains through the ridge after enameloplasty (see Fig. 18.20E ).
When necessary, extension through a cusp ridge is accomplished
by cutting through the ridge at a depth of 1 mm with the No.
s
2 mm
Correct Incorrect
B
H
x yA D
C E F
G I J
• Fig. 18.20 A, Extending to include the lingual (occlusal) issure. B, Section of A. The dentinal support
(s) of the lingual cusp ridge should not be removed. A bevel can provide additional extension to include
the issure that does not extend to the crest of the ridge. C, Completed preparations with standard width
bevel (x) and with wider bevel to include a groove defect that nearly extends to the ridge height (y). D,
Completed preparation illustrating enameloplasty for the elimination of a shallow issure extending to or
through the lingual ridge height. (Compare the smooth, saucer-shaped lingual ridge contour with C, in
which no enameloplasty has been performed.) E, Fissure remaining through the lingual ridge after unsuc -
cessful enameloplasty. This indicates procedures subsequently illustrated. F and G, Extending the prepa -
ration if enameloplasty has not eliminated the issure in the lingual ridge (F) or the facial ridge (G). H,
Section of F. I and J, Completed preparations after beveling the margins of the extensions through the
lingual ridge (I) and the facial ridge (J).
CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration e113
If only one of the two lingual cusps of a molar is reduced for
capping, the reduction must extend to include just the lingual
groove between the reduced and unr educed cusps. his reduction
should terminate with a distinct vertical wall that has a height that
is the same as the prescribed cusp reduction. Applying the bur
vertically (see Fig. 18.22F ) should help establish a vertical wall of
proper depth and direction. Similar principles apply when only
one of the facial cusps is to be reduced (see Figs. 18.22L and
18.23B ).
A bevel of generous width is prepared on the facial (lingual)
margin of a reduced cusp with the lame-shaped, ine-grit diamond
instrument (with the exception of esthetically prominent areas).
his bevel is referred to as reverse bevel or counterbevel . he width
varies because it usually should extend beyond any occlusal contact
with opposing teeth, either in maximum intercuspation or during
mandibular movements (see Fig. 18.24C later in the chapter). It
should be at an angle that results in 30-degree marginal metal (see
Fig. 18.22G and H ). he exception is the facial margin on maxillary
premolars and the irst molar, where esthetic requirements dictate
only a blunting and smoothing of the enamel margin (a stub
margin) by the light application of a ine-grit sandpaper disk or
the ine-grit diamond instrument (lame-shaped) held at a right
angle to the facial surface (see Fig. 18.23C ). Any sharp external
corners should be rounded slightly to strengthen them and reduce
the problems they may generate in future steps (see Fig. 18.22J
and K ).
Cusp reduction appreciably decreases the retention f orm because
it decreases the height of the vertical walls. herefore proximal
retention grooves usually are recommended (see Fig. 18.22I ). It
may be necessary to increase the retention form by extending facial
and lingual groove regions of the respective surfaces or by collar
and skirt features (see later). hese additional retention features
also provide the desired resistance form against forces tending to
split the tooth (see Fig. 18.22K ; see also Fig. 18.28 later in the
chapter).
he principles stated in the preceding paragraphs may be applied
in the treatment of the distal cusp of the mandibular irst molar
when preparing a mesioocclusodistal preparation (see Fig. 18.23D ).
Proper extension of the distofacial margin usually places the occlusal
margin in a region subjected to heavy masticatory forces and wear.
Satisfactory treatment usually dictates either extending the distofacial
margin (and wall) slightly mesial of the distofacial groove (see Fig.
18.23E ) or capping the remaining portion of the distal cusp (see
Fig. 18.23F ).
After cusp reduction, the dentist visually veriies that the occlusal
clearances are suicient. A wax interocclusal record is helpful when
checking the occlusal clearances, especially in areas that are diicult
to visualize, for example, in the central groove and lingual cusp
regions. To make a wax “bite,” the dentist irst dries the preparation
free of any visible moisture; however, dentin should not be desiccated
(Fig. 18.24A ). Next the dentist lightly presses a portion of softened,
low-fusing inlay wax over the prepared tooth; the dentist imme -
diately requests the patient to close into the soft wax and slide the
teeth in all directions (see Fig. 18.24B–F ). During the mandibular
movements, the dentist observes to verify that (1) the patient
performs right lateral, left lateral, and protrusive movements; (2)
the adjacent unprepared teeth are in contact with the opposing
teeth; (3) the wax in the preparation is stable (not loose and rocking);
and (4) the wax is not in infraocclusion. he dentist cools the wax
and carefully removes it, holds it up to a light, and notes the degree
of light transmitted through it. With experience, this is a good
indicator of the thickness of the wax. An alternative method is to irst premolar ( Fig. 18.21 ). If this procedure extends the margin
near or into the contact, the outline form on the afected proximal
surface must be extended to include the contact, as for a conven -
tional proximal surface preparation.
Cup-Capping Partial Onlay
he term partial onlay is used when a cast-metal restoration covers
and restores at least one but not all of the cusp tips of a posterior
tooth ( Fig. 18.22 ). he facial and lingual margins on the occlusal
surface frequently must be extended toward the cusp tips to the
extent of the existing restorative materials and to uncover a caries
lesion (see Fig. 18.22B and C ). Undermined occlusal enamel should
be removed because it is weak; removing such enamel provides access
for the proper excavation of the lesion. When the occlusal outline
is extended up, the cusp slopes more than half the distance from
any primary occlusal groove (central, facial, or lingual) to the cusp
tip, covering (capping) the cusp should be considered. If the prepara -
tion outline is extended two thirds of this distance or more, capping
the cusp is usually necessary to (1) protect the weak, underlying
cuspal structure from fracture caused by masticatory force and (2)
remove the occlusal margin from a region subjected to heavy stress
and wear (see Fig. 18.22A and B ). At this point in the preparation
of the pulpal loor, depth can be increased from 1.5 mm to 2 mm.
his additional pulpal depth ensures suicient reduction in an area
that is often underreduced and results in imparting greater strength
and rigidity to the wax pattern and cast restoration.
Reduce the cusps for capping as soon as the indication for
such capping is determined because this improves access and
visibility for the subsequent steps in the preparation. If a cusp is
in infraocclusion of the desired occlusal plane before reduction,
the amount of cusp reduction is less and needs to be only that
which provides the required clearance with the desired occlusal
plane. Before reducing the surface, the operator prepares depth
gauge grooves (depth cuts) with the side of the No. carbide
bur (see Fig. 18.22D ). Such depth cuts should help to prevent thin
spots in the restoration. With the depth cuts serving as guides, the
operator completes the cusp reduction with the side of the carbide
bur (see Fig. 18.22E ). he reduction should provide for a uniform
1.5 mm of metal thickness over the reduced cusp. On maxillary
premolars and irst molars, the reduction should be minimal (i.e.,
0.75–1 mm) on the facial cusp ridge to decrease the display of metal.
his reduction should increase progressively to 1.5 mm toward the
center of the tooth to help impart rigidity to the capping metal
(Fig. 18.23A and C ).
A B
• Fig. 18.21 The issure that remains on the mesial marginal ridge after
unsuccessful enameloplasty (A) is treated (B) in the same manner as
lingual or facial ridge issures (see Fig. 18.20I and J ).
e114 CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration
interocclusal recor d will not ofer as much information as would
the softened inlay wax technique, since the lateral and protrusive
paths are not registered in the former.
Including Portion of the Facial and Lingual Smooth Surface
Afected by Caries or Other Injury
When portions of a facial (lingual) smooth surface and a proximal
surface are afected by caries or some other factor (e.g., fracture) use wax calipers or to section the wax to verify its thickness.
Insuicient thickness calls for more reduction in the indicated area
before proceeding. As an alternative to wax, an interocclusal record
can be made in maximum intercuspation with a quick-setting PVS
impression material. Once set, this interocclusal record can be
measured with wax calipers to evaluate the reduction. If wax calipers
are not available, the interocclusal record can be sectioned with a
knife to see the thickness in cross section. However, a PVS
30°f'fl l'
AB
H
C D
E F G
I J K L
• Fig. 18.22 A, When the extension of the occlusal margin is one half the distance from any point on
the primary grooves (cross) toward the cusp tip (dot), capping of the cusp should be considered; when
this distance is two thirds or more, capping of the cusp is usually indicated. B, l is midway between the
central groove and the lingual cusp tip; f is midway between the central groove and the facial cusp tip.
When enamel at l and f is undermined by a caries lesion, the respective walls must be extended to the
dotted lines l and f to uncover the lesion. Cusps should be reduced for capping. C, Extension to uncover
the caries lesion indicates that the mesiolingual cusp should be reduced for capping. D, Depth cuts.
E, Reduced mesiolingual cusp. The caries lesion has been removed, and the base has been placed.
F, Applying the bur vertically helps establish the vertical wall that barely includes the lingual groove. G,
Counterbeveling reduced cusp. H, Section of the counterbevel. I, Improving the retention form by cutting
the proximal retention grooves. J and K, The preparation is complete except for the rounding of the
axiopulpal line angle (J) and the r ounding of the junction of the counterbevel and the secondary lare (K).
Facial surface groove extension improves the retention and resistance forms. L, Preparation when reduc -
ing one of two facial cusps on the mandibular molar.
CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration e115
afected area (see Fig. 18.25D ). his instrument also is used to
terminate the facial surface reduction in a deinite facial margin
running gingivoocclusally and in a manner to provide for 40-degree
metal at this margin (see Fig. 18.25E ).
If the distofacial defect is more extensive and deeper into the
tooth (see Fig. 18.25I ), eliminating the opportunity for an efective
distal box or groove (no facial wall possible), the No. carbide
bur should be used to cut a gingival shoulder extending from the
distal gingival loor around to include the afected facial surface.
his shoulder partially provides the desired resistance form. (A
gingival loor, perpendicular to occlusal force, has been provided
in lieu of the missing pulpal wall in the distofacial cusp region.)
he No. bur is used to create a nearly vertical wall in the
remaining facial enamel (see Fig. 18.25J ). he width of the shoulder
should be the diameter of the end of the cutting instrument. he
vertical walls should have the appropriate degree of draft to
contribute to retention form. hen the faciogingival and facial
margins are beveled with the lame-shaped, ine-grit diamond
instrument to provide 30-degree metal at the gingival margin (see
Fig. 18.25K ) and 40-degree metal along the facial margin (see Fig.
18.25L ). hese two bevels should blend together (see x in Fig.
18.25M ), and the faciogingival bevel should be continuous with
the gingival bevel on the distal surface. Additional retention and (Fig. 18.25A and I ), the treatment may be a large inlay, an onlay,
a three-quarter crown, a full crown, or multiple amalgam or
composite restorations. Generally, if carious portions are extensive,
the choice between the previously listed cast-metal restorations is
determined by the degree of tooth circumference involved. A full
crown is indicated if the lingual and the facial smooth surfaces are
defective, especially if the tooth is a second or third molar. When
only a portion of the facial smooth surface is carious, and the
lingual surfaces of the teeth are conspicuously free of caries, a
mesioocclusal, distofacial, and distolingual inlay or onlay with a
lingual groove extension is chosen over the crown because the
former is more favorable to the health of the gingival tissues and
more conservative in the removal of tooth structure. Often this is
the treatment choice for the maxillary second molar, which may
exhibit a caries lesion on the distofacial surface as a result of poor
oral hygiene (owing to poor access) in this region.
In the preparation of the maxillary molar referred to in the
preceding paragraph, the mesiofacial and distolingual cusps and
the distofacial cusp are usually reduced for capping. If the distofacial
cusp defect is primarily shallow decalciication, the lame-shaped
diamond instrument is used to reduce the involved facial surface
and distofacial corner approximately to the depth of enamel and
to establish the gingival margin of this reduction apic al to the
C
A B
D E F
• Fig. 18.23 A and B, Capping one of two facial cusps on the maxillary molar. C, Blunting the margin
of the reduced cusp when esthetics is a major consideration. D–F, The margin shown crossing the distal
cusp in D indicates treatment illustrated in E or F.
e116 CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration
of the tooth’s status. Sometimes the diagnosis is deferred until the
extension of the occlusal step of an inlay preparation facially and
lingually to the limits of the caries lesion shows that cusp reduction
is mandatory . he mandibular irst molar is used to illustrate one
mesioocclusodistal preparation for a full cast-metal onlay.
Initial Preparation
Occlual Reduction
As soon as the decision is made to restore the tooth with a full
cast-metal onlay, the cusps should be reduced because this improves
the access and the visibility for subsequent steps in tooth preparation.
With the cusps reduced, the eiciency of the cutting instrument
and the air-water cooling spray is improved. Also when the cusps
are reduced, it is easier to assess the height of the remaining clinical
crown of the tooth, which determines the degree of occlusal divergence
necessary for adequate retention form. Using the No. carbide
bur held parallel to the long axis of the tooth crown, a 2-mm deep
pulpal loor is prepared along the central groove ( Fig. 18.26A ). To
verify the preoperative diagnosis for cusp reduction, this occlusal
preparation is extended facially and lingually just beyond the caries
to sound tooth structure (see Fig. 18.26B ). he groove should not
be extended farther, however, than two thirds the distance from the
central groove to the cusp tips because the need for cusp reduction
is veriied at this point. With the side of the No. carbide bur,
uniform 1.5-mm deep depth cuts are prepared on the remaining
occlusal surface (see Fig. 18.26C and D ). Depth cuts usually are
placed on the crest of the triangular ridges and in the facial and
lingual groove regions. hese depth cuts help prevent thin spots in resistance forms are indicated for this preparation and can be
developed by an arbitrary lingual groove extension (see Fig. 18.25N )
or a distolingual skirt extension (see Fig. 18.25O and P ). hese
preparation features resist forces normally opposed by the missing
distofacial wall and help protect the restored tooth from fracture
injury.
Tooth Preparation for Full Cat-Metal Onlay
he preceding sections have presented basic tooth preparation
principles and techniques for small, simple cast-metal inlays and
for partial onlays that cap less than all the cusps. his section
presents the tooth preparation principles and techniques for full
onlay restorations that cover the entire occlusal surface. Onlay
restorations have many clinical applications and may be desired
by many patients. hese restorations have a well-deserved reputation
for providing excellent service.
he cast-metal onlay restoration spans the gap between the
inlay, which is primarily an intracoronal restoration, and the full
crown, which is a totally extracoronal restoration. he full onlay
by deinition caps all of the cusps of a posterior tooth and can be
designed to help strengthen a tooth that has been w eakened by
caries or previous restorative experiences. It can be designed to
distribute occlusal loads over the tooth in a manner that greatly
decreases the chance of future fracture.4,6 It is more conservative
of the tooth structure than the full crown preparation, and its
supragingival margins, when possible, are less irritating to the
gingiva. Usually an onlay diagnosis is made preoperatively because
A
B
C
D
E
F
• Fig. 18.24 Verifying suf icient cusp reduction by forming a wax interocclusal record. A, The walls of
the preparations (distoocclusal for the second premolar, and mesioocclusodistal for the irst molar) are
air-dried of visible moisture. The low-fusing inlay wax that is the same length as the mesiodistal length of
the inlay preparations is softened and pressed over the prepared teeth. B–E, The patient moves the
mandible into all occlusal positions, left lateral (B), through maximum intercuspation (C), to right lateral
(D), and protrusive (E). F, Completed interocclusal record.
CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration e117
y
z
zy
xA B C D
E F G H
I J K L
M N O P
• Fig. 18.25 A, Maxillary molar with caries lesions on the distofacial corner and the mesial surface. B
and C, Completed mesioocclusal, distofacial, and distolingual inlay for treating lesions shown in A, facio -
occlusal view (B) and distolinguoocclusal view (C). D–H, Preparation for treating caries lesions illustrated
in A, distoocclusal view with diamond instrument being applied (D), occlusal view (E), distal view (F),
distolinguoocclusal view (G), and mesioocclusal view (H). I, Maxillary molar with a deeper caries lesion on
the distofacial corner and with a mesial caries lesion. J, Pr eparation (minus bevels and lares) for mesiooc -
clusal, distofacial, and distolingual inlay to restore the carious molar shown in I. A No. carbide bur is
used to prepare the gingival shoulder and the vertical wall. K and L, Beveling margins. M and N, Com -
pleted preparation for treating the caries lesion shown in I. Gingival and facial bevels blend at x, and y is
the cement base. O and P , When the lingual surface groove has not been prepared and when the facial
wall of the proximal box is mostly or totally missing, forces directed to displace the inlay facially can be
opposed by lingual skirt extension (z).
e118 CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration
mm
0.8 mm
Dj jA B C
E F
G
• Fig. 18.26 A, Cutting a 2-mm deep central groove. B, Extending the central groove cut facially and
lingually to verify any need for cusp capping. C, Depth cuts. D, Section of C. E, Completion of cusp
reduction. Small portions of the mesial and distal marginal ridges are left unreduced to avoid scarring the
adjacent teeth. F, The occlusal step is extended facially and lingually past any carious areas and is
extended to expose the proximal dentinoenamel junction (DEJ) (j) in anticipation of proximal boxing. G,
Preparation with proximal boxes prepared. Note the clearances with the adjacent teeth.
CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration e119
Final Preparation
Removal of Infected Cariou Dentin and Defective
Retorative Material and Pulp Protection
If the occlusal step and the proximal boxes have been extended
properly, any carious dentin or previous restorative materials
remaining on the pulpal and axial walls should be visible. hey
should be removed as described previously.
Preparation of Bevel and Flare
After the cement base (when indicated) is completed ( Fig. 18.27A ),
the slender, lame-shaped, ine-grit diamond instrument is used
to place counterbevels on the reduced cusps, to apply the gingival
bevels, and to create secondary lares on the facial and lingual walls
of the proximal boxes. First a gingival retraction cord is inserted,
as described in the previous inlay section. During the few minutes
required for the cord’s efect on the gingival tissues, the diamond
instrument is used to prepare the counterbevels on the facial and
lingual margins of the reduced cusps. he bevel should be of
generous width and should result in 30-degree marginal metal.
he best way to judge this is to always maintain a 30-degree angle
between the side of the instrument and the external enamel surface
beyond the counterbevel (see Fig. 18.27B and C ). he counterbevel
usually should be wide enough so that the cavosurface margin is
beyond (gingival to) any contact with the opposing dentition. If
a facial (lingual) surface issure extends slightly beyond the normal
position of the counterbevel, it may be included (removed) by
deepening the counterbevel in the region of the issure (see Fig.
18.27D ). If the issure extends gingivally more than 0.5 mm,
however, the issure is managed as described later.
A counterbevel is not placed on the facial cusps of maxillary
premolars and irst molars where esthetic considerations may dictate
using a stubbed margin by blunting and smoothing the enamel
margin by the light application of a ine-grit sandpaper disk or
the ine-grit diamond instrument (lame-shaped) held at a right
angle to the facial surface (see Fig. 18.23C ). he surface created
by this blunting should be approximately 0.5 mm in width. For
beveling the gingival margins and laring (secondary) the proximal
enamel walls, refer to the inlay section.
After beveling and laring, any sharp junctions between the
counterbevels and the secondary lares are rounded slightly (see
Fig. 18.27E ). he ine-grit diamond instrument also is used to
bevel the axiopulpal line angles lightly (see Fig. 18.27F ). Such a
bevel produces a stronger wax pattern at this critical region by
increasing its thickness. Any sharp projecting corners in the
preparation are rounded slightly because these projections are
diicult to reproduce without voids when developing the working
cast and often cause diiculties when seating the casting. he
desirable metal angle at the margins of onlays is 40 degrees except
at the gingivally directed margins, where the metal angle should
be 30 degrees.
When deemed necessary, shallow (0.3-mm deep) retention
grooves may be cut in the facioaxial and the linguoaxial line angles
with the No. 169L carbide bur (see Fig. 18.27G ). hese grooves
are especially important for retention when the prepared tooth is
short, which is often the case after reducing all the cusps. When
properly positioned, the grooves are entirely in dentin near the
DEJ and do not undermine enamel. he direction of cutting
(translation of the bur) is parallel to the DEJ. he long axis of the
No. 169L bur must be held parallel to the line of draw, and the
tip of the bur must be positioned in the gingival box internal point
angles. If the axial walls are deeper than ideal, however, the correct the inal restoration. If a cusp is in infraocclusion of the desired
occlusal plane before reduction, the amount of cusp reduction is
less and needs only that which provides the required clearance with
the desired occlusal plane. Carious dentin and old restorative material
that is deeper in the tooth than the desired clearance are not removed
at this step in preparation.
With the depth cuts serving as guides for the amount of reduc -
tion, the cusp reduction is completed with the side of the No.
bur. When completed, this reduction should relect the general
topography of the original occlusal surface (see Fig. 18.26E ). he
operator should not attempt to reduce the mesial and distal marginal
ridges completely at this time to avoid hitting an adjacent tooth.
he remainder of the ridges are reduced in a later step when the
proximal boxes are prepared.
hroughout the next steps in the initial preparation, the cutting
instruments used to develop the vertical walls are oriented continu -
ally to a single draw path, usually the long axis of the tooth crown,
so that the completed preparation has draft (i.e., no undercuts).
For mandibular molars and second premolars whose crowns tilt
slightly lingually, the bur should be tilted slightly (5–10 degrees)
lingually to help preserve the strength of the lingual cusps (see
Fig. 18.4D ). he gingival-to-occlusal divergence of these preparation
walls may range from 2 to 5 degrees from the line of draw, depending
on their heights. If the vertical walls are unusually short, a minimum
of 2 degrees occlusal divergence is desirable for retentive purposes.
Cusp reduction appreciably decreases the retention form because
it decreases the height of the vertical walls, so this minimal amount
of divergence is often indicated in the preparation of a tooth for
a cast-metal onlay. As the gingivoocclusal height of the vertical
walls increases, the occlusal divergence should increase, allowing
5 degrees in the preparation of the greatest gingivoocclusal length.
he latter preparations present diiculties during pattern withdrawal,
trial seating and withdrawal of the casting, and cementing, unless
this maximal divergence is provided.
Occlual Step
After cusp reduction, a 0.5-mm deep occlusal step should be present
in the central groove region between the reduced cuspal inclines
and the pulpal loor. Maintaining the pulpal depth (0.5 mm) of
the step, it is extended facially and lingually just beyond any carious
areas, to sound tooth structure (or to sound base or restorative
material if certain conditions, discussed subsequently, have been
met). Next the operator extends the step mesially and distally far
enough to expose the proximal DEJ (see Fig. 18.26F ). he step
is extended along any remaining facial (and lingual) occlusal issures
as far as they are faulty (issured). he facial and lingual walls of
the occlusal step should go around the cusps in graceful curves,
and the isthmus should be only as wide as necessary to be in sound
tooth structure or sound base or restorative material. Old restorative
material or caries that is deeper pulpally than this 0.5-mm step is
not removed at this stage of tooth preparation.
As the occlusal step approaches the mesial and distal surfaces,
it should widen faciolingually in anticipation of the proximal box
extensions (see Fig. 18.26F ). his 0.5-mm occlusal step contributes
to the retention of the restoration and provides the wax pattern
and cast-metal onlay with additional bulk for rigidity.7
Proximal Box
Continuing with the No. carbide bur held parallel to the long
axis of the tooth crown, the proximal boxes are prepared as described
in the inlay section. Fig. 18.26G illustrates the preparation after
the proximal boxes are prepared.
e120 CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration
30°30°
C
A B
D E F
G H I
• Fig. 18.27 A, The caries lesion has been removed, and the base has been inserted. B, Counterbevel -
ing facial and lingual margins of r educed cusps. C, Section of B. D, The issure that extends slightly
gingival to the normal position of the counterbevel may be included by slightly deepening the counterbevel
in the issured area. E, The junctions between the counterbevels and the secondary lares are slightly
rounded. F, The axiopulpal line angle is lightly beveled. G, Improving the retention form by cutting proximal
grooves. H, Completed mesioocclusodistal onlay preparation. I, Completed mesioocclusodistofacial onlay
preparation showing the extension to include the facial surface groove or issure.
CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration e121
grooves for additional retention with the No. 169L bur . he
linguogingival and lingual margins are beveled with the l ameshaped, ine-grit diamond instrument to provide 30-degree metal
at the gingival margin (see Fig. 18.28C ) and 40-degree metal along
the lingual margin (see Fig. 18.28D ).
hese two bevels should blend together (see x in Fig. 18.28E ),
and the linguogingival bevel is continuous with the gingival bevel
on the mesial surface. Additional features to improve the retention
and resistance forms are indicated and can be developed by a
mesiofacial skirt extension or by a facial groove extension. hese
preparation features (discussed in the following section) improve
the retention form, resist forces normally opposed by the missing
mesiolingual wall, and help protect the restored tooth from further
fracture injury.
Enhancement of Reitance and Retention Form
When the tooth crown is short (which is often the case when all
cusps are reduced), the operator must strive to maximize the
retention form in the preparation. Retention features that already
have been presented are as follows:
1. Minimal amount of taper (2 degrees per wall) on the vertical
walls of the preparation
2. Addition of proximal retention grooves
3. Preparation of facial (or lingual) surface groove extensions
In the preparation of a tooth that has been grossly weakened
by caries or previous illing material and is judged to be prone to
fracture under occlusal loads, the resistance form that cusp capping
provides should be augmented by the use of skirts, collars, or facial
(lingual) surface groove extensions. When properly placed, these
features result in onlays that distribute the occlusal forces over
most or all of the tooth and not just a portion of it, reducing the reference for placing retention grooves is just inside the DEJ to
minimize pulpal impacts but avoids undermining enamel. he
model showing the completed preparation is illustrated in Fig.
18.27H .
Modiications in Full Onlay Tooth Preparations
Facial or Lingual Surface Groove Extenion
A facial surface issure (mandibular molar) or a lin gual surface
issure (maxillary molar) is included in the outline in the same
manner as described in the section on inlays. his extension
sometimes is indicated to provide additional retention form, even
though the groove is not faulty. A completed mesioocclusodistofacial
onlay preparation on a mandibular irst molar is illustrated in Fig.
18.27I .
Incluion of Portion of the Facial and Lingual Smooth
Surface A fected by Caries, Fractured Cusps, or Other Injury
For inclusion of shallow to moderate lesions on the facial and
lingual smooth surfaces, refer to the section on inlays. A mandibular
molar with a fractured mesiolingual cusp is used to illustrate the
treatment of a fractured cusp of a molar ( Fig. 18.28 ). he dentist
uses a No. carbide bur to cut a shoulder perpendicular to
occlusal force by extending the proximal gingival loor (adjacent
to the fracture) to include the afected surface. his shoulder partially
provides the desired resistance form by being perpendicular to
gingivally directed occlusal force. his instrument also is used to
create a vertical wall in the remaining lingual enamel (see Fig.
18.28B ). he width of the gingival loor should be the diameter
of the end of the cutting instrument. he vertical walls should
have the degree of draft necessary for the retention form. If the
clinical crown of the tooth is short, it is advisable to cut proximal
xyA B C D
E F G H
• Fig. 18.28 A, Mandibular irst molar with large mesioocclusodistal amalgam and fractured mesiolingual
cusp. B, Preparation (minus bevels and lares) for mesioocclusal, distofacial, and distolingual onlay to
restore the fractured molar shown in A. A No. carbide bur is used to prepare the gingival shoulder
and the vertical lingual wall. Reducing cusps for capping and extending out the facial groove improve the
retention and resistance forms. C and D, Beveling of margins. E and F, Completed preparation. The
gingival and lingual bevels blend at x, and y is the base. G and H, Completed onlay.
e122 CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration
he addition of skirt extensions also is recommended when the
proximal surface contour and contact are to be extended more
than the normal dimension to develop a proximal contact. Extending
these proximal margins onto the respective facial and lingual surfaces
aids in recontouring the proximal surface to this i ncreased dimen -
sion. Also, when improving the occlusal plane of a mesially tilted
molar by a cusp-capping onlay, reshaping the mesial surface to a
satisfactory contour and contact is facilitated when the mesiofacial
and mesiolingual margins are extended generously.
Skirting also is recommended when splinting posterior teeth
together with onlays. he added retention and resistance forms
are desirable because of the increased stress on each unit. Because
the facial and lingual proximal margins are extended generously,
the ease of soldering the connector and inishing of the proximal
margins is increased.
A disadvantage of skirting is that it increases the display of
metal on the facial and lingual surfaces of the tooth. For this
reason, skirts are not placed on the mesiofacial margin of maxillary
premolars and irst molars. Skirting the remaining three line angles
of the tooth provides ample retention and resistance forms.
he preparation of a skirt is done entirely with the slender,
lame-shaped, ine-grit diamond instrument. Skirt preparations
follow the completion of the proximal gingival bevel and primary
lares. Experienced operators often prepare the skirt extensions at
the same time that the gingival bevel is placed, however, working
from the lingual toward the facial or vice versa. Maintaining the
long axis of the instrument parallel to the line of draw, the operator
translates the rotating instrument into the tooth to create a deinite
vertical margin, just beyond the line angle of the tooth, providing
at the same time a -degree cavosurface enamel angle (40-degree
metal angle) (see Fig. 18.30D–F ). he occlusogingival length of
this entrance cut varies, depending on the length of the clinical likelihood of fractures of teeth ( Fig. 18.29A and B ). he lingual
“skirt” extension (see Fig. 18.29C–E ), the lingual “collar” preparation
(see Fig. 18.29F ), or the lingual surface groove extension on a
maxillary molar protects the facial cusps from fracture. he facial
skirt extension, the facial collar preparation, or the facial surface
groove extension on a mandibular molar protects the lingual cusp
from fracture.
Skirt Preparation
Skirts are thin extensions of the facial or lingual proximal margins
of the cast-metal onlay that extend from the primary lare to a
termination just past the transitional line angle of the tooth. A
skirt extension is a conservative method of improving the retention
and resistance forms of the preparation. It is relatively atraumatic
to the tooth because it involves removing very little (if any) dentin.
Usually the skirt extensions are prepared entirely in enamel.
When the proximal portion of a Class II preparation for an
onlay is being prepared and the lingual wall is partially or totally
missing, the retention form normally provided by this wall can be
developed with a skirt extension of the facial margin ( Fig.
18.30A–C ). Similarly, if the facial wall is not retentive, a skirt
extension of the lingual margin supplies the desire d retention form
(see Fig. 18.25O and P ). When the lingual and facial walls of a
proximal box are inadequate, skirt extensions on the respective
lingual and facial margins can satisfy the retention and resistance
form requirements. he addition of properly prepared skirts to
three of four line angles of the tooth virtually eliminates the chance
of postrestorative fracture of the tooth because the skirting onlay
is primarily an extracoronal restoration that encompasses and braces
the tooth against forces that might otherwise split the tooth. he
skirting onlay is often used successfully for many teeth that exhibit
split-tooth syndrome.
xp
x
xxs
s sssA
C DB
E F
• Fig. 18.29 The large cement base x indicates severely weakened tooth crown. Occlusal force (thick
arrow) may fracture the facial cusp (A) or the lingual cusp (B), which may expose the pulp (p). C and D,
Skirt extensions (s) on the mesiolingual, distolingual, and distofacial transitional line angles prevent the
fractures shown in A and B. Esthetic consideration contraindicates skirting the mesiofacial line angle. E,
Distal view of the preparation shown in D. Skirt extensions are prepar ed with a ine-grit diamond instru -
ment. F, A collar preparation around the lingual cusp prevents the fracture shown in A.
CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration e123
H
xxI
J
x
x xx
K
L
D
E
F
G
Ax
By x
Cxy
• Fig. 18.30 A, When the lingual wall of the proximal box is inadequate or missing, the retention form can be improved by facial skirt extension (x).
B, Facioocclusal view of A. Maximal resistance form is developed by skirting the distofacial (y) and mesiofacial (x) transitional line angles. C, Occlusal
view of B. D–F, The initial cut for the skirt is placed just past the transitional line angle of the tooth. G and H, Blending the skirt into the primary lare. I,
Occlusal view showing the mesiolingual and distolingual skirts. Caution is exercised to prevent the overreduction of transitional line angles (x). Facial
surface groove extension also improves the retention and resistance forms. J, The junction of the skirt and the counterbevel is slightly rounded. K, Skirt -
ing all four transitional line angles of the tooth further enhances the retention and resistance forms. Caution is exercised to prevent the overreduction of
transitional line angles (x). L, Mesial and facial views of the preparation shown in K.
e124 CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration
thickness of metal, the occlusal 1 mm of this reduction should be
prepared to follow the original contour of the tooth (see Fig.
18.31C ), and any undesirable sharp line angle formed by t he union
of the prepared lingual and occlusal surfaces should be rounded.
his aspect of the preparation is completed by lightly beveling the
gingival margin of the shoulder with the lame-shaped, ine-grit
diamond instrument to achieve a 30-degree metal angle at the
margin (see Fig. 18.31D ).
Slot Preparation
Occasionally the use of a slot in dentin is helpful in creating the
necessary retention form. An example is the mandibular second
molar that has no molar posterior to it and requires a mesioocclusal
onlay restoration that caps all of the cusps ( Fig. 18.32A–C ). he
distal, facial, and lingual surfaces are free of caries or other injury,
and these surfaces also are judged not to be prone to caries. After
cusp reduction, the vertical walls of the occlusal step portion of
the preparation have been reduced so as to provide very little
retention form. he necessary retention can be achieved by cutting
a distal slot. Such a slot is preferred over preparing a box in the
distal surface because (1) the former is more conserving of the
tooth structure and of the strength of the tooth crown, and (2)
the linear extent of marginal outline is less.
To form this slot, the dentist uses a No. 169L carbide bur with
its long axis parallel to the line of draw (this must be reasonably
close to a line parallel with the long axis of the tooth) (see Fig.
18.32A ). he slot is cut in dentin so that it would pass midway
between the pulp and the DEJ if it were to be extended gingivally
(see Fig. 18.32C ). he position and direction of the slot thus avert
(1) the exposure of the pulp, (2) the removal of the dentin sup -
porting the distal enamel, and (3) the perforation of the distal
surface of the tooth at the gingival termination of the slot. he
slot should have the following approximate dimensions: (1) the
width (diameter) of the bur mesiodistally, (2) 2 mm faciolingually,
and (3) a depth of 2 mm gingival of the normally positioned crown and the amount of extracoronal retention and resistance
forms desired. Extending into the gingival third of the anatomic
crown is usually necessary for an efective resistance form. In most
instances the gingival margin of the skirt extension is occlusal to
the position of the gingival bevel of the proximal box (see Fig.
18.30H and L ).
he operator should use less than half the tip diameter of the
lame-shaped diamond instrument to avoid creating a ledge at the
gingival margin of the skirt extension. Using high speed and
maintaining the long axis of the diamond instrument parallel with
the line of draw, the operator translates the instrument from the
entrance cut toward the proximal box to blend the skirt into the
primary lare and the proximal gingival margin (see Fig. 18.30G
and H ). he operator must ensure that the line angle of the tooth
is not overreduced when preparing skirt extensions (see x in Fig.
18.30I and K ). If the line angle of the tooth is overreduced, the
bracing efect of the skirt is diminished. Holding the diamond
instrument at the same angle that was used for preparing the
counterbevel, the operator rounds the junction between the skirt
and the counterbevel (see Fig. 18.30J ). Any sharp angles that
remain after preparation of the skirt need to be rounded slightly
because these angles often lead to diiculties in the subsequent
steps of the restoration.
Collar Preparation
To increase the retention and resistance forms when preparing a
weakened tooth for a mesioocclusodistal onlay to cap all cusps, a
facial or lingual “collar” or both may be provided ( Fig. 18.31 ). To
reduce the display of metal, however, the facial surfaces of maxillary
premolars and irst molars usually are not prepared for a coll ar.
he operator uses a No. carbide bur at high speed parallel to
the line of draw to prepare a 0.8-mm–deep shoulder (equivalent
to the diameter of the tip end of the bur) around the lingual (or
facial) surface to provide for a collar about 2 to 3 mm high
occlusogingivally (see Fig. 18.31A and B ). To provide for a uniform
C2
A
D E FB
• Fig. 18.31 A, First position of the bur in preparing for the lingual collar on a weakened maxillary
premolar. B and C, Section drawings of the irst position of the bur (B) and the second and third positions
(C). D, Beveling the lingual margin. Note the distofacial skirt extension. E, Completed preparation. F,
Completed onlay.
CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration e125
secondar y lare is omitted, and the wall and margin are developed
with a chisel or enamel hatchet. Final smoothing with the ine-grit
paper disk is recommended when access permits. he cavosurface
margin should result in a gold angle of 40 to 50 degrees, if possible.
When more than ideal extension of the mesiofacial margin is
necessary because of a caries lesion or previous restoration, and as
dictated by the esthetic desires of the patient, the operator may
choose to place a composite insert at this margin. his is a more
conservative option than preparing the tooth to receive a porcelainveneered metal crown. When preparing the mesiofacial margin,
no attempt is made to develop a straight mesiofacial wall past the
point of ideal extension. After caries lesion excavation, a resin-modiied
glass ionomer base is inserted to temporarily form the missing
portion of the wall. he base is contoured to the ideal form, and
the preparation can continue, terminating the mesiofacial onlay
margin in the ideal position in the base. After placement, the
operator removes (with small round burs) the glass ionomer material
to a depth of 1 mm for a composite insert. Small undercuts should
be prepared in the wall formed by the cast-metal onlay (see Fig.
18.57A later in the chapter). (It is best to carve the undercut in
the wall formed by the onlay during the wax pattern stage.) After
beveling the enamel cavosurface margin and preparing a gingival
retention groove where, and if, enamel is thin or missing, the
composite veneer is inserted (see Fig. 18.62A later in the chapter).
Endodontically Treated Teeth
Routinely, teeth that have had endodontic treatment are weak and
subject to fracture from occlusal forces. hese teeth require restora -
tions designed to provide protection from this inju ry (see Fig.
18.30K and L ). his particularly applies to posterior teeth, which
are subjected to greater stress. he need for such protection is
accentuated when much of the strength of the tooth has been lost pulpal wall. To be efective, the mesial wall of the slot must be in
sound dentin; otherwise, the retention form obtained is
insuicient.
A comparable situation occurs occasionally: he maxillary irst
premolar requires a distoocclusal onlay restoration to cap the cusps,
and the mesial surface is noncarious and deemed not prone to
caries (see Fig. 18.32D–F ). To reduce the display of metal and to
conserve the tooth structure, a slot similar to that described in the
preceding paragraph (except that it is mesially positioned and
1.5 mm wide faciolingually) may be used for the production of
adequate retention. he mesioocclusal marginal outli ne in this
preparation should be distal of the height of the mesial marginal
ridge.
Modiications for Esthetics on Maxillary
Premolars and First Molars
To minimize the display of metal on maxillary premolars and irst
molars, several modiications for esthetics are made to the basic
onlay preparation. On the facial cusps of maxillary premolars and
on the mesiofacial cusp of the maxillary irst molar, the occlusal
reduction should be only 0.75 to 1 mm on the facial cusp ridge
to minimize the display of metal. his thickness should increase
progressively to 1.5 mm toward the center of the tooth to provide
rigidity to the capping metal. hese cusps do not receive a coun -
terbevel but are “stubbed” or blunted by the application of a
sandpaper disk or the ine-grit diamond instrument held at a right
angle to the facial surface (see Fig. 18.23C ). he surface created
by this blunting should be approximately 0.5 mm in width.
To further decrease the display of metal on maxillary premolars
and irst molars, the mesiofacial margin is minimally extended
facially of the contact to such a position that the margin is barely
visible from a facial viewing position. To accomplish this, the
x
x
x
xB C
D E Fxx
A
• Fig. 18.32 A and B, Cutting a distal slot for the retention for the mesioocclusal onlay to treat the
terminal molar having a large base (x) resulting from extensive occlusal and mesial caries. C, Section of
A. D and E, Preparing a mesial slot for the retention for the distoocclusal onlay to tr eat the maxillary irst
premolar that has a large base (x). F, Section of D.
e126 CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration
tooth structure by preparing facial and lingual skirt extensions on
the respective proximal margins, which improves retention and
resistance forms. In contrast, achieving extension by preparing the
mesiofacial and mesiolingual walls facially and lingually does not
improve retention or resistance forms and is less conservative of
the tooth structure. V eriication of appropriate cusp reduction is
the same as presented for the inlay tooth preparation, as illustrated
in Fig. 18.24 .
Retorative Technique for CatMetal Retoration
Interocclual Record
Before preparation of the tooth, the occlusal contacts in maximum
intercuspation and in all lateral and protrusive movements should
have been carefully evaluated. I f the patient has suicient canine
guidance to provide disocclusion of posterior teeth, the necessary
registration of the opposing teeth can be obtained by (1) making
a maximum intercuspation interocclusal record with commercially
available bite registration pastes or (2) making full-a rch impressions
and mounting the casts made from these impressions on a simple
hinge articulator . he interocclusal record works well when preparing
one tooth; the full-arch casts are preferred when two or more
prepared teeth are involved.
he maximum intercuspation interocclusal record can be made
from one of several commercially available bite registration pastes.
he most commonly used bite registration pastes are composed
of heavily illed PVS impression materials. Several materials are
available in cartridge systems that automatically mix the base and
accelerator pastes together as they are expressed through a special
disposable mixing tip ( Fig. 18.34A ). he mixed impression material
is dispensed directly onto the prepared teeth and their opponents,
then the patient closes completely (see Fig. 18.34B and C ). he
dentist observes teeth not covered by the bite registration paste to
verify that teeth are in maximum intercuspation. When the material
has set, the dentist removes the interocclusal record and inspects
it for completeness. When held up to a light, areas where the because of extensive caries or previous restorations. When the facial
and lingual surfaces of an endodontically treated tooth are sound,
it is more conservative, for the health of the facial and lingual
gingival tissue, to prepare the tooth not for a full crown, but for
a full occlusal coverage onlay that has been designed with adequate
resistance form to prevent future tooth fracture. Such features
include skirt extensions and collar preparations. hese features
make the onlay more of an extracoronal restoration that encompasses
the tooth such that the tooth is better able to resist lateral forces
that otherwise might fracture the tooth.
Before starting the preparation of an endodontically treated
posterior tooth, the pulp chamber should be excavated to the
chamber loor and usually into the canals (1–2 mm), and an
amalgam or composite foundation should be placed; this gives the
onlay a irm base on which to rest. In the preparation of an
endodontically treated premolar that has had extensive damage,
the root canal may be prepared for a cast-metal or iber-reinforced
composite post, which is cemented before the onlay preparation
is completed. his post helps the tooth resist forces that otherwise
might cause a horizontal fracture of the entire tooth crown from
the root. he post should extend roughly two thirds the length of
the root and should terminate, leaving at least 5 mm of the root
canal illing material at the apical portion of the root.
Retoring the Occlual Plane of a Tilted Molar
An onlay is excellent for restoring the occlusal plane of a mesially
tilted molar ( Fig. 18.33 ). When the unprepared occlusal surface
(mesial portion) is less than the desired occlusal plane, a correspond -
ing decrease in occlusal surface reduction is indicated. To facilitate
increasing the height of the tooth, while maintaining the desirable
faciolingual dimension of the restored occlusal surface and good
contour of the facial and lingual surfaces, the cou nterbevels on
the latter surfaces often should be extended gingivally more than
usual (see Fig. 18.33B ).
Often the mesiofacial and mesiolingual margins (on the
“submerged” proximal surface) should be well extended onto the
respective facial and lingual surfaces to help in recontouring
the mesial surface to desirable proximal surface contour and contact.
his extension can be accomplished with a minimal loss of the
A
B
C
• Fig. 18.33 A, The mandibular second and third molars being tilted mesially often is the result of failure
to replace a lost irst molar by bridgework. Note the poor contact relationship between the molars and
between the molar and the second premolar. B, The second premolar is prepared for an inlay, and the
molars are prepared for onlays. The margins of the preparations are well extended on the facial and lingual
surfaces to aid in recontouring teeth to improve the occlusal relationship and to improve the proximal
contours and contacts. C, Completed restorations. Note the improvement in the occlusal plane and in
the proximal contacts.
CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration e127
much more information about the general occlusal scheme, pathways
of cusps, opposing cusp steepness and groove direction, and the
anatomy of other teeth in the mouth. he technique uses a full-arch
tray when making the inal impression, which requires mixing
more material, especially when using stock trays. he opposing
arch is impressed with impression material, and the appropriate
mandibular movement and face-bow transfer records are made.
he reader is referred to Chapter 1 for principles regarding the
use of the semiadjustable articulator in developing proper occlusal
relationships for cast-metal restorations.
Temporary Restoration
Between the time the tooth is prepared and the cast-metal restoration
is delivered, it is important that the patient be comfortable and
the tooth be protected and stabilized with an adequate temporary
restoration. he temporary restoration should satisfy the following
requirements:
1. It should be nonirritating and protect the prepared tooth from
injury.
2. It should protect and maintain the health of the
periodontium.
3. It should maintain the position of the prepared, adjacent, and
opposing teeth.adjacent unprepared teeth have penetrated through the material
should be seen (see Fig. 18.34D ). he interocclusal record is set
aside for later use in the laboratory.
he maximum intercuspation interocclusal records described
in the previous paragraph provide information on the shape and
position of the opposing teeth in maximum intercuspation. Such
records give the laboratory technician some information about
how to form the occlusal surface and position the occlusal contacts
on the restoration, but they supply no data on how these structures
and contacts might function during mandibular movements. his
is also true when full-arch casts are mounted on a simple hinge
articulator. Cast-metal restorations made with thes e simple bite
registration techniques often require adjustments in the mouth to
alleviate interferences during mandibular movements.
If information is desired in the laboratory about the pathways
of cusps during mandibular movements (such as when the tooth
is to be restored in group function), an excellent technique involves
making full-arch impressions and mounting casts from these
impressions on a properly adjusted semiadjustable articulator ( Fig.
18.35 ). he use of full-arch casts mounted on a semiadjustable
articulator is recommended when restoring a large portion of the
patient’s posterior occlusion with cast-metal restorations. It involves
only a little extra chair time and gives the laboratory technician
A
B
C
D
• Fig. 18.34 Maximum intercuspation interocclusal record made with PVS bite registration paste.
A, One of many commercially available bite registration materials used in this technique. B, Using a car -
tridge dispenser and a disposable automixing tip, the base and accelerator pastes are automatically mixed
and applied to the prepared teeth, their neighbors, and the opposing teeth. C, Have the patient close
into maximum intercuspation position. Be sure that the adjacent unprepared teeth are touching in their
normal relationships. D, Remove the maximum intercuspation interocclusal record carefully after it has
set, and inspect it for completeness. Areas where the adjacent, unprepared teeth have penetrated through
paste should be seen.
e128 CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration
postoperative cast of the prepared teeth (indir ect technique). he
indirect technique is not as popular as the direct technique because
of the increased number of steps and complexity in the former;
however, it is useful when making temporaries that might become
“locked on” (e.g., intracoronal inlays) when using the direct
technique.
Technique for Indirect Temporary Restoration
he indirect temporary technique has the following advantages:
1. he indirect technique avoids the possibility of “locking on”
the set temporary material into undercuts on the prep ared tooth
or the adjacent teeth.
2. he indirect technique avoids placing polymerizing temporary
material directly on freshly prepared dentin and investing soft
tissue, reducing potential irritation to these tissues.8-10
3. he postoperative cast made in the indirect technique afords
an opportunity to evaluate the preparation (before the inal
impression) and serves as an excellent guide when t rimming
and contouring the temporary restoration.
4. Fabrication of the temporary restoration can be delegated to a
well-trained dental auxiliary.
To form the indirect temporary, irst an impression of t he
prepared tooth is made with fast-setting impression material. A
stock, plastic impression tray that has been painted with tray adhesive
is used ( Fig. 18.36A ). If using alginate, it is ensured that teeth are
slightly moistened by saliva, then some alginate is applied over
and into the preparation with a ingertip to avoid or to minimize
trapping air (see Fig. 18.36B ); then the tray is seated over the
region (see Fig. 18.36C ). After the material has become elastic,
the impression is removed with a quick pull in the direction of
the draw of the preparation and is inspected for completeness (see
Fig. 18.36D ). he impression is poured with fast-setting plaster
or stone (see Fig. 18.36E ).
As soon as the postoperative cast has been recovered from the
impression, the dentist inspects the cast for any negative or positive
defects (see Fig. 18.36F ). Small voids on the cast may be illed in 4. It should provide for esthetic, phonetic, and masticatory function,
as indicated.
5. It should have adequate strength and retention to withstand
the forces to which it will be subjected.
When properly made, the custom temporary restoration can
satisfy these requirements and is the preferred temporary restoration.
Temporaries can be fabricated intraorally directly on the prepared
teeth (direct technique) or outside of the mouth using a
• Fig. 18.35 Full-arch casts mounted via a facebow transfer on a semi -
adjustable articulator provide maximal information in the laboratory on how
to position cusps to prevent undesirable contacts.
A
B
C
D
E
F
• Fig. 18.36 Making a postoperative plaster cast for indirectly forming a temporary restoration. A, The
interior of the tray is coated with alginate tray adhesive. B, Some alginate is applied over and into the
preparations with the ingertip to avoid trapping air. C, Alginate-illed tray in place. D, Alginate impression.
E, The alginate impression is poured with fast-setting plaster. F, Plaster cast of the preparations shown
in Fig. 18.24A .
CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration e129
the preoperative impression in the area of the prepared teeth (see
Fig. 18.37G ). When adjacent teeth are prepared, the temporary
material may be continuous fr om one tooth to the next. he cast
is seated into the preoperative impression (see Fig. 18.37H ). he
formed temporary restoration is shown in Fig. 18.37I .
With suitable burs the excess temporary material along the
facial and lingual margins is trimmed away. he red line previously
placed helps in the trimming, especially if it is performed by an
auxiliary ( Fig. 18.38A ). On multiple-unit temporary restorations,
a thin diamond instrument or the slender No. 169L bur or diamond
can be used to reine the interproximal embrasures (see Fig. 18.38B ).
After the excess temporary material has been removed from the
facial and lingual embrasures, a cut is made through the adjacent
unprepared tooth 1 mm away from the proximal contact (see Fig.
18.38C ). A knife is inserted into the cut and the temporary r estora -
tion is pried of from the cast. Access to improve the contour of
the proximal surface that will contact the adjacent unprepared with utility wax. Large voids indicate repouring the impression.
Positives (blebs) on the cast should be removed carefully with a
suitable instrument.
he postoperative cast is seated into the preoperative impression
(Fig. 18.37A–D ). he thin edges of the postoperative impression
material that record the gingival sulcus can be cut away for more
thickness of the temporary in this area (see Fig. 18.37A ). he
postoperative cast is trial-seated into the preoperative impression
to verify that it seats completely. Soft tissue around the perimeter
of the impression or the cast, or in both areas, may have to be
relieved to allow full seating (see Fig. 18.37B and C ).
When satisied that the gypsum cast seats completely in the
preoperative impression (see Fig. 18.37D ), the dentist removes
the cast and marks the margins of the preparations on the cast
with a red pencil to facilitate trimming (see Fig. 18.37E ). A release
agent is brushed on the preparations and adjacent teeth (see Fig.
18.37F ). Tooth-colored temporary resin is mixed and inserted into
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
• Fig. 18.37 Forming indirect temporary restorations for the preparations initially shown in Fig. 18.24A .
A, Thin edges of the preoperative impression material that record the gingival sulcus should be cut away
because these are apt to tear when seating the postoperative cast in the impression. B and C, Trimming
away much of the soft tissue areas recorded by the impression and the cast also facilitates seating. D,
Trial seating the postoperative cast into the preoperative impression. E, Marking the margins with red
pencil. F, Applying the release agent to the cast. G, Filling the preoperative impression with temporary
material in the area of the tooth preparation. H, Seating the cast into impression, taking care not to
overseat or tilt the cast. I, Formed temporary restoration.
e130 CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration
in the preparation should be “blocked out” using a
resin-modiied glass ionomer base (see Fig. 18.39B ). A light ilm
of a water-based lubricant over any exposed base prevents adherence
and facilitates removal.
When using the direct technique with inlay and onlay prepara -
tions (preparations that gain their retention primarily through
internal retention features), it is helpful to select temporary material
systems that become elastic before the inal set, allowing removal
from undercuts without permanent distor tion. he temporary
material is mixed, following the manufacturer’s instructions.
Temporary materials that use automixing tips are especially con -
venient (see Fig. 18.39C ). he dentist places the material into the
preoperative impression in the area of the prepared tooth, taking
care not to entrap any air (see Fig. 18.39D ). he impression is
placed on teeth, and the dentist ensures that it seats completely
(see Fig. 18.39E ). he manufacturer’s instructions for gauging the
setting time should be followed. Most temporary systems recom -
mend monitoring the setting by rolling some excess material into
a small ball and holding it between two ingers. When the temporary
material has set to a irm stage, the impression is removed. When
the material is suiciently strong, the operator removes it from
the tooth (see Fig. 18.39F ). Excess material is trimmed away (see
Fig. 18.39G ). he cavosurface margins of the preparation can be
seen inside the temporary restoration and are used as a guide for
trimming the critical external areas near the margins (see Fig.
18.39H ). he techniques for try-in, adjustment, and inishing the
direct temporary restoration are identical to those described in the
previous section (see Fig. 18.39I ).
Final Impreion
Fabrication of cast-metal restorations occurs in dental laboratories
using replicas of the prepared and adjacent unprepared teeth. Classic tooth is now available (see Fig. 18.38D ). he contact area on the
temporary restoration that was accurately formed should not be
disturbed.
T rial-it the temporary restoration on the patient’s teeth (see
Fig. 18.38E ). It should it well, make desirable contact with the
adjacent teeth, and meet occlusal requirements with minimal
adjustments (see Fig. 18.38F ). If occlusal adjustments are indicated,
the prematurities are marked with articulating paper and reduced
with an appropriate rotary instrument. After correcting the occlu -
sion, any roughness or undesirable sharp edges are smoothed with
a rubber point or wheel. he temporary restoration is removed
from the mouth and set aside for cementation with temporary
cement after the inal impression has been made.
Technique for Direct Temporary Restoration
he direct temporary technique involves forming the temporary
restoration directly on the prepared tooth and has the following
advantages ( Fig. 18.39 ): (1) he direct technique involves fewer
steps and materials because no postoperative impression and gypsum
cast are required, and (2) it is much faster than the indirect
technique. he main disadvantages of the direct temporary technique
include the following: (1) here is a chance of locking hardened
temporary materials into small undercuts on the prepared tooth
and the adjacent teeth, (2) the marginal it may be slightly inferior
to the indirect technique, and (3) it is more diicult to contour
the temporary restoration without the guidelines ofered by the
postoperative cast.11
Forming the temporary restoration directly on the prepared
tooth requires the preoperative impression (see Fig. 18.2C ). T rialitting seats the preoperative impression onto teeth to verify that
it seats completely. Because a potential for locking the temporary
restoration on the tooth exists, it is necessary to eliminate undercuts
in the preparation and occasionally in the proximal areas. Undercuts
A
B
C
D
E
F
• Fig. 18.38 Trimming and adjusting the indirect temporary restorations. A, Trimming the excess material
back to the accessible facial and lingual margins (marked by red line on the plaster cast). B, On multipleunit temporaries, a slender bur or diamond instrument can be used to r eine the interproximal embrasure
form. C, On the cast, any tooth adjacent to the temporary restoration is cut away. D, Trimming the proximal
surface of the temporary restoration to the proper contour. Care should be taken to avoid removing the
proximal contact (arrow). E and F, After the inal impression is made, the temporary restoration is cemented
with temporary cement. Note the anatomic contour and it (E) and the functional occlusion of the tem -
porary restoration (F).
CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration e131
I
H
G
Fc
C
D
A
Bfg i
E
• Fig. 18.39 Forming the direct temporary restoration with preoperative impression. Mesioocclusodisto -
facial onlay pr eparation for the mandibular irst molar is used for illustration. A, Preoperatively, this patient
had symptoms indicating an incomplete fracture of a vital tooth. B, After preparation for an onlay, an
incomplete fracture (f) of dentin is seen extending mesiodistally along the pulpal loor. To maximize the
retention and resistance forms, all the cusps are reduced for capping, a facial surface groove extension
is prepared, and all four transitional line angles have skirt extensions. Resin-modiied glass ionomer bases
are inserted into excavations on axial walls (gi). Bases should have a light coat of water-soluble lubricant
to prevent adhesion. C, Automixing the temporary resin material. D, The mixed temporary material is
poured into the preoperative impression of the prepared tooth. E, The preoperative impression is seated
with the temporary material onto the prepared tooth. F, The formed temporary restoration is removed
from the preparation (note the contact area c, which must not be removed during trimming). G, Thin
excess can be removed by using scissors. H, The internal surface of the temporary restoration has record
of the cavosurface margin that is used as guide for inal trimming. I, After the inal impression is made,
the temporary restoration is cemented with temporary cement. The temporary material over the skirt
extensions is left slightly overcontoured for additional strength.
e132 CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration
severe cardiovascular disease, uncontrolled hyperthyroidism, or
diabetes and patients taking drugs such as β-blockers, monoamine
oxidase inhibitors, or tricyclic antidepressants.12
All sensory nerves to the region should be anesthetized, cotton
rolls applied, and the saliva ejector inserted. Profound local
anesthesia substantially reduces salivation to facilitate a dr y ield
and allows tissue retraction without causing discomfort to the
patient. he dentist selects and cuts a retraction cord of suitable
diameter that is slightly longer than the length of the gingival
margin. he cord may be cut long enough to extend fr om one
gingival margin to another if they are on the same tooth or on
adjacent teeth. In Fig. 18.41A and B , the cord is inserted into the
gingival sulcus only in areas where the cavosurface margin is prepared
subgingivally. Using the edge of a paddle-tipped instrument or
the side of an explorer, one end of the cord is gently placed into
the sulcus, about 2 mm facial to the point where the facial margin
passes under the free gingiva. hen the cord is inserted progressively
into the remainder of the sulcus, with the end of the cord left
exposed, to be grasped with tweezers later in the technique (see
Fig. 18.41A–C, H ). he cord is placed to widen the sulcus and
not to depress soft tissue gingivally (although some temporary
retraction does occur apically).
Occasionally when the gingival margin is deep, it is helpful to
insert a second cord of the same or larger diameter over the irst.
When the free gingiva is thin and the sulcus is narrow (e.g., facial
surface of the maxillary or mandibular canine), a cord of very
small diameter must be selected to prevent undue trauma to the
tissue. In instances when a small diameter cord is used, layering
a second cord on top of the irst may be necessary to keep the
sulcus from narrowing at the gingival crest.
In Fig. 18.41D , the cord is incorrectly placed because it is
tucked too deeply into the sulcus, as its depth permitted such
positioning. When the cord is withdrawn before the injection of
the impression material, the sulcus is wide at the bottom but
narrow at the top. If the impression material is injected successfully
into such a sulcus, the material is likely to tear in the region of x
during the removal of the impression from the mouth. Correct
application of the retraction cord is shown in Fig. 18.41C .
Occasionally the retraction cord becomes displaced from the
sulcus during its insertion in the presence of slight hemorrhage
or seepage, but this can be controlled if an assistant repeatedly
touches the cord with dry cotton pellets or dries the area with
a gentle stream of air. When excessive hemorrhage from the
interproximal tissue occurs, irst a cotton pellet is moistened with
aqueous aluminum chloride solution, and the pellet is wedged
between teeth so that it presses on the bleeding tissue. his pellet
is left in for several minutes before it is removed and the cord is
inserted. he widening or opening of the gingival sulcus by the
earlier insertion of the retraction cord before the beveling of the
gingival margin also should minimize or eliminate hemorrhage of
the gingiva. For retracting a large mass of tissue, irst a suitably
shaped, large diameter cotton pack is made by rolling cotton
ibers between ingertips, and the pack is then moistened with
a drop or two of aqueous aluminum chloride and inserted into
the sulcus.
he cords remain in place for several minutes. When hemorrhage
or excessive tissue is present, more time is recommended. he
region must remain free of saliva during this interval, and the
patient should be cautioned not to close or allow the tongue to
wet the teeth. Placing cotton rolls over teeth and having the patient
close lightly to relax while the teeth remain isolated is sometimes
helpful.techniques involving impressions and gypsum casts are described
in this chapter. he reader is referred to Chapter 12 for alternative
methods in digital dentistry.
he material used for the inal impression should have the
following qualities:
1. It must become elastic after placement in the mouth because
it must be withdrawn from undercut regions that usually exist
on the prepared and adjacent teeth. Note the shaded portions
in Fig. 18.40 , which are undercut areas with regard to the line
of draw of the preparation. A satisfactory impression must
register some of this undercut surface to delineate the margin
sharply and to signify the desirable contour of the restoration
in regions near the margin.
2. It must have adequate strength to resist breaking or tearing on
removal from the mouth.
3. It must have adequate dimensional accuracy, stability, and
reproduction of detail so that it is an exact negative imprint of
the prepared and adjacent unprepared teeth.
4. It must have handling and setting characteristics that meet
clinical requirements.
5. It must be free of toxic or irritating components.
6. It must be possible to disinfect it without distorting it.
In addition to the absolute requirements listed, the choice of
impression material is usually made by comparisons of cost; ease
of use; working time; shelf life; and pleasantness of odor, taste,
and color. he most common impression material used for the
indirect casting technique is PVS. he technique for the use of
this material is discussed in detail in the following sections.
Tissue Retraction
Final impression materials make accurate impressions only of tooth
surfaces that are visible, clean, and dry. When margins are sub -
gingival, retraction cords can be used to displace the free gingiva
temporarily away from the tooth and to control the low of any
gingival hemorrhage and sulcular luids. he objective of gingival
retraction is to widen the gingival sulcus to provide access for the
impression material to reach the subgingival margins in adequate
bulk to resist tearing during impression withdrawal (see Fig. 18.40 ).
he objective of control of hemorrhage and moisture is met by
the use of retraction cord impregnated with appropriate styptics
(e.g., aluminum chloride), vasoconstrictors (e.g., epinephrine), or
both. he use of vasoconstrictors in retraction cord is contraindicated
in some patients, especially those who have cardiac arrhythmias,
h
u
x
• Fig. 18.40 The shaded area on the prepared tooth is undercut in
relation to the line of withdrawal of the impression. The impression material
that is in the position of greatest undercut (u) must be withdrawn in the
direction of the vertical arr ow and lexed over the greatest heights of
contour (h). The position of the gingival attachment is indicated by x.
CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration e133
C
DCorrectCord
Incorrect
Cordx
A B
E
H
F G
• Fig. 18.41 A and B, Inserting the retraction cord to widen the gingival sulcus to expose the gingival
margin. Separate lengths of cord can be inserted (one for each gingival margin) (A), or a cord long enough
to run from one gingival margin to another can be inserted (B). Where the margin is not subgingival, as
on the lingual surface of the molar, the cord should not be in the sulcus. C, Correct application of the
retraction cord. D, Incorrect application of the retraction cord causing the impression material to tear at
x. E, Maxillary quadrant before preparing teeth for onlays. Note the fracture of the mesiofacial cusp of
the molar. F, Facial view of E. G, Bitewing radiograph of E. H, Teeth prepared for onlays and ready for
making the inal impression. The lingual and distofacial transitional line angles of premolars are prepared
for skirting.
e134 CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration
disposable automixing tip its onto the end of each cartridge (see
Fig. 18.43C ). he light-bodied mixing tip has an accessory curved
tip that is small enough to gain access to the smalles t, most remote
areas of the preparation (see Fig. 18.43D ).
he irst dispenser is used to mix and ill the impression tray
with the heavy-bodied impression material (see Fig. 18.43E ). he
dispensing tip should be kept embedded in the impression material
as it is expressed into the tray so that the chance of trapping air
is decreased. he second dispenser is then used to mix and inject
the light-bodied impression material on the prepared teeth (see
Fig. 18.43F ). Teeth should be examined to ensure that the ield
is still clean and dry. Any visible moisture on teeth is removed
with compressed air. he retraction cord is gently removed with
operative pliers. All preparation surfaces should b e clean, dry, and
exposed to view. Next the opened gingival sulci and preparations
are deliberately and progressively (moving from distal to mesial)
illed over and beyond the margins with material from the syringe.
To avoid trapping air, the tip is kept directly on the gingival and
pulpal walls, illing the preparations from the gingival to the occlusal
aspect, and the low is regulated so that the material is not extruded
too fast ahead of the tip. Light-bodied material also is injected on
the occlusal surfaces of the unprepared adjacent teeth to eliminate
the trapping of air on the occlusal grooves.
After illing and covering teeth with material from the syringe,
the cotton rolls are immediately removed and the loaded tray
seated over the region. he manufacturer’s product instructions
should be followed with regard to how long the material should
be allowed to set before removal. As an additional safeguard, the
operator should test the set of the impression material wherever
it is accessible at the periphery of the tray. When it recovers elastically
from an indentation made by the tips of the operative pliers, it is
ready for removal (see Fig. 18.43G ).
Removing and Inpecting the Impreion
After the PVS impression has properly polymerized, it is removed
from the mouth by a quick, irm pull that is directed as much as
possible in line with the draw of the preparation. Removal is aided
by inserting a ingertip at the junction of the facial border of the
impression and the vestibule fornix, disrupting the vacuum that
occasionally occurs during withdrawal, especially with full-arch
impressions. he impression should be inspected carefully with
good lighting and magniication. It should register every detail of
the teeth and the preparation ( Fig. 18.44 ).Fig. 18.41 E-H illustrates correct use of gingival retraction on
the maxillary quadrant.
Polyvinyl Siloxane Impression
he PVS impression is discussed in detail here because it is widely
used, and the technique for its use can be readily applied to most
other impression materials. PVS impression materials have many
advantages over other impression materials used for inal impressions.
hey have excellent reproduction of detail and dimensional stability
over time. hey are user friendly because they are easy to mix and
have no unpleasant odor or taste. PVS impressions can withstand
disinfection routines without signiicant distortion. hese impression
materials come in the form of two pastes (base and catalyst) that
are mixed in disposable, automix, cartridge-dispensing systems.
hese automix systems provide excellent mixing of the accelerator
and base pastes ( Fig. 18.42A ).
Tray Selection and Preparation
he impression tray must be suiciently rigid to avoid deformation
during the impression technique. If the tray bends or lexes at any
time, the accuracy of the impression may be afected. T wo types
of trays, commercial stock and custom made, are suitable. Use of
stock plastic trays is convenient and saves time. he custom resin
tray made over a 2to 3-mm wax spacer on the study cast is an
excellent tray. A thickness of impression material greater than 3 mm
increases shrinkage and the chance of voids; a thickness less than
2 mm may lead to distortion or tear of the impression material
or to breakage of narrow or isolated teeth on the cast during
withdrawal from the impression. Adequate bonding of impression
material to the tray is accomplished with the application of a
special adhesive to the tray (see Fig. 18.42B ).
Impreion Technique
Most dental manufacturers ofer their PVS impression materials
in automix dispensing systems. he automixing systems have many
advantages, including (1) speed, (2) consistent and complete mixing
of accelerator and base pastes, and (3) incorporation of very few
air voids during mixing and delivery to teeth. he technique
demonstrated illustrates the use of two viscosities of impression
material, a light-bodied material to inject around the preparation
and a heavy-bodied material to ill the tray. T wo dispensing guns
are needed ( Fig. 18.43A ). he dispensers are loaded with cartridges
that contain the accelerator and base pastes (see Fig. 18.43B ). A
B
A
• Fig. 18.42 A, Light-bodied (low viscosity), heavy-bodied (high-viscosity) polyvinyl siloxane impression
materials; dispensers, automixing tips. B, Painting adhesive on stock tray.
CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration e135
D
E
F
G
A B
C
• Fig. 18.43 A, One dispenser is loaded with light-bodied
impression material and the other dispenser is loaded with heavybodied impression material. B, The disposable automixing tip its
onto the end of the cartridge. C, An accessory curved tip is added
to the end of the automixing tip for the light-bodied material. D,
The impression tray is illed with heavy-bodied material. E, The
retraction cord is removed, and the opened sulci and preparations
are progressively illed over and beyond the cavosurface margins
without trapping air. The occlusal surfaces of the adjacent unpre -
pared teeth are covered with light-bodied impression material. F,
The cotton rolls are removed, and the impression tray is seated.
G, Completed automixed polyvinyl siloxane impression.
e136 CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration
of the die segment is lat, the sides closer to the facial and lingual
aspects of teeth should be trimmed (see Fig. 18.46B ). Deep scratches
left by the model trimmer are removed by wet sanding the base
of the die segment with -grit wet or dry sandpaper.
General rule : Teeth that will be removable are the prepared teeth
with proximal gingival margins and any unprepared teeth adjacent
to the prepared proximal surfaces. he two main advantages to
making removable dies of unprepared teeth adjacent to prepared
proximal surfaces are as follows: (1) he adjacent tooth will not
interfere with removing the die that has the preparation, as occasion -
ally may happen otherwise; and (2) adjusting the conta cts is easier
and more accurate when waxing and inishing the castings.
One dowel pin usually is placed in each prepared tooth and
each adjacent tooth. When long sections of teeth are to be remov -
able, the operator may wish to place more than one pin to increase
stability and prevent rotation of the die. he cast is placed on the
Pindex drilling machine, and one hole is drilled into the die base
precisely in the middle of each tooth that is to be removable (see
Fig. 18.46C and D ). A small light beam helps position the cast
correctly. When all the holes are drilled, a small drop of cyanoacrylate
glue is placed in each hole, and a dowel pin is inserted (see Fig.
18.46E and F ). he cast must be dry before cementing the pins,
or the cement may not adhere. Any excess glue should be removed,
and the operator should ensure that the dowel pins are parallel to
one another (see Fig. 18.46G ). To prevent rotation of the dies on
the model base, small dimples may be placed just facial and lingual
to each dowel pin with one third the diameter of a No. 6 round
bur (see Fig. 18.46H ). A bead of rope wax is placed around the
die segment level with the base of the dies (see Fig. 18.46I ). hen
boxing wax is added around this to form a container for the base
pour (see Fig. 18.46J ). A separating medium is applied on the die
segment, and a mix of dental stone is vibrated into the boxing
wax container (see Fig. 18.46K ). At least 1 mm of the ends of the
dowel pins should be allowed to protrude. To provide adequate
strength, the base of the cast should not be less than 10 mm thick.
After the stone has hardened, the boxing and rope wax are
removed. hen the cast is removed from the impression (see Fig.
18.46L ). he operator taps the end of each dowel pin lightly with
the end of an instrument handle until a diferent sound is heard;
this indicates that the die segment has moved slightly from its
seating (see Fig. 18.46M ). Next the ends of the pins are carefully
pushed conjointly, causing the die segment to move equally away
from its seating (see Fig. 18.46N ). After the die segment is removed
in this manner, the teeth that are to be individually removable Working Cat and Die
he working cast is an accurate replica of the prepared and adjacent
unprepared teeth that allows the cast-metal restoration to be
fabricated in the laboratory. During this fabrication procedure, it
is most helpful if the replicas of the prepared tee th and of the
adjacent unprepared teeth, called dies, are individually removable.
he most used methods for creating a working cast with removable
dies from an elastic impression require two pours. he irst pour
is made to produce the removable dies and the secon d pour is
made to establish intraarch relationships. Working casts made in
this manner are called split casts . Several satisfactory methods are
available for making a split cast with removable dies. he Pindex
system (Coltene/Whaledent Inc., Cuyahoga Falls, OH) is illustrated
because it ofers many advantages, as follows:
1. he irst pour becomes the die segment and can be made quickly
and easily.
2. Dowel pins can be positioned precisely, where needed.
3. Dowel pins are automatically positioned parallel, which facilitates
die removal.
Pouring the Final Impression
A mix of high-strength die stone is made using a vacuum mechanical
mixer, and the dies are poured with the aid of a vibrator and a
No. 7 spatula. he irst increments are applied in small amounts,
allowing the material to low into the remote corners and angles
of the preparation without trapping air. Surface tension–reducing
agents that allow the stone to low more readily into the deep,
internal corners of the impression are available. he impression
should be suiciently illed so that the dies are approximately 15
to 20 mm tall occlusogingivally after trimming. his may require
surrounding the impression with boxing wax before pouring. After
the die stone has set, the cast is removed from the impression and
inspected for completeness ( Fig. 18.45 ). his irst pour (die segment)
becomes the removable dies.
Completing the Working Cast
he base of the die segment is trimmed lat on a model trimmer
(Fig. 18.46A ). his trimming is approximately parallel to the occlusal
surfaces of teeth. he operator must take care while doing this so
that no grinding slurry is allowed to splash onto the dies. he dies
should be approximately 15 mm occlusogingivally. Wh en the base
gfts
gb
gm
• Fig. 18.44 Close-up view of the impression shows sharp details of
recor d of the gingival loor (gf), gingival bevel (gb), and margin (gm) and
a small amount of unprepared tooth surface (ts) beyond the margin.
• Fig. 18.45 Cast poured from the die stone is inspected for
completeness.
I
J
G
H
E
F
C
D
A
B
• Fig. 18.46 A, The base of the die segment is trimmed lat and approximately parallel to the occlusal
surfaces with a model trimmer. Dies should be approximately 15 mm high occlusogingivally. B, The die
segment is trimmed on the facial and lingual surfaces to reduce the need for trimming in later steps. C,
The die segment on the Pindex machine, ready to drill hole for irst molar die. A small red dot of light
helps position the cast. D, Holes drilled for removable dies. E, A drop of cyanoacrylate glue is poured
into each hole. The cast must be dry for the glue to adhere. F, Immediately insert a dowel pin into the
hole, being sure it is fully seated. G, The dowel pins must be parallel to one another and fully seated, and
no excess glue must be present. H, To aid in indexing, small dimples are cut in the base of the dies,
using one third the diameter of a large (No. 6) round bur. Typically these are positioned facial and lingual
to the dowel pin. I, Rope wax is placed around the cast, lush with the die bases. J, Boxing wax is placed
around the rope wax to create a container for the base pour. A separating agent must be painted on the
die bases to prevent adherence to the base pour.
e138 CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration
S
T
R
Q
P
O
M
N
K
L
K, Base pour is completed. At least 1 mm of the dowel pin should be left protrud -
ing. L, Cast after removing boxing and rope wax. M, Tapping on the end of each dowel pin until the die
segment moves. N, Removing the die segment from base. O, The dies are carefully cut apart by using
a saw, bur, or thin diamond abrasive disk. Eye protection and dust collection are essential. P , Excess die
stone around the gingival margins usually prevents good access for later steps in fabrication. Q, Removing
the excess die stone with a large crosscut carbide bur in a slow-speed handpiece. Trimming across
slightly gingival of the recorded gingival contour of the tooth weakens the excess, causing it to fall away.
R, Final trimming is completed with a sharp scalpel. S, Cast completed, lingual view. Note how each
prepared tooth and the adjacent unprepared teeth are removable now. T, Cast completed, facial view.
Note the full seating of the dies. • Fig. 18.46, cont’d
CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration e139
the risk of proximal drifting of teeth, shifting occlusion, food
impaction, and damage to the supporting tissues. Total lack of a
proximal contact is often referred to as an open contact and is to
be avoided.
Drawings of two maxillary premolars (see Fig. 18.50 ) are used
to illustrate forms of contact and mesiodistal widths of interproximal
spaces. Fig. 18.50A–C shows normal conditions. In Fig. 18.50A ,
the position of the contact is marked with an x, the area of nearapproach of the two surfaces is indicated with a broken line, and
the position of the crest of the gingiva is indicated with a continuous
line. Fig. 18.50B is a mesiodistal section through teeth at the point
of contact, and Fig. 18.50C is an occlusal view.
A broad contact faciolingually is illustrated in Fig. 18.50D–F .
In the proximal view (see Fig. 18.50D ), the position of a normal
contact is marked x, the contact of this tooth is the outlined oblong
area, and the area of near approach is the br oken line. he crest
of the gingiva is less arched, being almost horizontal along the
area of near-approach. Viewed from the facial in the mesiodistal
section (see Fig. 18.50E ), the contact appears to be the same as
in Fig. 18.50B , but a comparison of the occlusal views (see Fig.
18.50F and C ) shows the extra breadth of this contact at the
expense of the lingual embrasure. Fig. 18.50H shows a contact
that is too far to the gingival. Its position in comparison with
normal is shown by the relation of the circle to the x in Fig.
18.50G . he problem with such a contact is in the inclinations
of the proximal surfaces from the occlusal marginal ridges to the
contact. Stringy food is likely to become packed into this space,
and the contact may impinge on the interproximal tissue.
See Fig. 18.50I and J for an illustration of a contact too close
to the occlusal. his form is frequently observed in restorations
(especially amalgams), seldom in virgin teeth. Such a contact allows
food to ill the gingival embrasure and invites proximal caries.
A contact that is too broad in the occlusogingival d irection,
but narrow faciolingually, is illustrated in Fig. 18.50K and L . he
principal objections to this form of contact are that stringy foods
are likely to be caught and held; also, if proximal recurrent caries
occurs, it is farther to the gingival, requiring a tooth preparation
close to the cementoenamel junction (CEJ). In cases of excessive
proximal wear of teeth, the condition of the contact areas is similar
to the combination of the areas illustrated in Fig. 18.50D and K ,
resulting in a facet of considerable dimensions.
Forming the Occlusal Surface
Payne developed the fundamental principles in the following method
of waxing.7 he technique is particularly applicable when capping
cusps. With practice, it has proven to be faster than the old method
of building up wax, cutting away, building up again, and so on.
he amount of wax desired is added in steps until the occlusal
surface of the pattern is completed ( Fig. 18.51 ).
To obtain the faciolingual position of the cusp tips, the facio -
lingual width of the tooth is divided in quarters. Facial cusps are
located on the irst facial quarter line. Lingual cusps fall on the
irst lingual quarter line (see Fig. 18.51B ). To obtain the mesiodistal
position of the cusp tips, one notes the regions in the opposing
tooth that should receive the cusp tips. he operator waxes small
cones of inlay wax to the pattern to establish the cusp tips one at
a time (see Fig. 18.51C and D ). Next the operator waxes the inner
and outer aspects of each cusp, being careful not to generate
premature occlusal contacts (see Fig. 18.51D–F ). It is suggested
that only one aspect of each cusp be waxed into occlusion at a
time. On the maxillary molar (illustrated in Fig. 18.51D ), where
all of the cusps are being restored, each of the nine aspects present must be cut apart from one another (see Fig. 18.46O ). his requires
the use of a saw, bur, or disk. To aid in carving the wax pattern
and polishing the casting, the gingival aspect of the dies is carefully
trimmed to expose the gingival margins properly (see Fig. 18.46P–R ).
he trimmed dies should have a positive and complete seating in
the base portion of the cast (see Fig. 18.46S and T ).
Caution : Do not allow any debris between the die portion and
the base, or the accuracy will be compromised. his is especially
true for the walls of the dowel pin holes. A small bit of wax or
gypsum can be carelessly pressed onto the wall and prevent complete
seating of the pin. Such debris is diicult to detect and remove to
regain accuracy.
Use of Interocclusal Records
A maximum intercuspation interocclusal record is made before
making the inal impression. From this interocclusal record, a
gypsum cast of the opposing teeth is made; this cast can be related
accurately to the working cast, when forming the occlusal surface
of the wax pattern. his step can be omitted if full-arch casts are
to be used in waxing. See Chapter 1 for the principles of developing
occlusion when using full-arch casts.
When using this type of interocclusal record, the working cast
is mounted on a simple hinge articulator. he working cast is
attached to one member of the articulator with fast-setting plaster.
he interocclusal record is carefully itted on the dies of the working
cast ( Fig. 18.47A and B ). he interocclusal record should seat
completely without rocking. Interocclusal bite records must never
touch the registrations of soft tissue areas on the cast because these
contacts usually interfere with complete seating. Such areas of
contact on the interocclusal record can be trimmed away easily
with a sharp knife. After ensuring that the interocclusal record is
completely seated, lute the record adjacent to the unprepared teeth
with sticky wax to prevent dislodgment when dental stone is poured
into the record. Dental stone is then poured into the record (see
Fig. 18.47C ). his gypsum is attached to the opposite arm of the
hinge articulator (see Fig. 18.47D ), it is allowed to set, and then
the interocclusal record is removed (see Fig. 18.47E–G ).
Wax Pattern
Forming the Pattern Base
he operator lubricates the die and incrementally adds liquid wax
from a No. 7 wax spatula by the “low and press” method to form
the proximal, facial, and lingual surface aspects of the pattern. A
thin layer of wax should be added on the occlusal surface ( Fig.
18.48A ). Wax shrinks as it cools and hardens and tends to pull
away from the die. his efect can be minimized and pattern
adaptation improved by applying inger pressure for at least several
seconds on each increment of wax soon after surface solidiication
and before any subsequent wax additions (see Fig. 18.48B ). In
this incremental technique, the wax that is lowed on the previously
applied wax must be hot enough, as otherwise voids are formed.
Forming the Proximal Contour and Contact
he proximal contour and contact of the pattern are now formed
on the pattern base ( Figs. 18.49 and 18.50 ). he normal proximal
contact relationship between teeth is that of two curved surfaces
touching one another. he contact on each curved proximal surface
is a point inside a small area of near-approach. Soon after eruption
and the establishment of proximal contact, wear of the contact
point from physiologic movements of teeth creates a contact surface.
Lack of a proximal contact is usually undesirable because it creates
e140 CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration
E
F
G
A
B
C
D
• Fig. 18.47 Pouring the interocclusal record made with bite registration paste. A, Trimming away some
of the interocclusal record (on the preparation side) with a sharp knife is often necessary to allow complete
seating on the working cast. B, Fastening the seated interocclusal record to the working cast of prepara -
tions irst shown in Fig. 18.33A with small amounts of sticky wax. C, Pouring stone into the interocclusal
record. D, Attaching gypsum to the upper member of the hinge articulator. E–G, Three views of the
completed mounting.
CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration e141
proper occlusion before adding another , which simpliies the
procedure. Building the occlusal aspect by such small increments
should help develop a pattern with minimal stress and distortion.
Whenever a large portion of wax is added, it creates a potential
for pattern distortion caused by the large shrinkage of such an
addition.
For establishing stable occlusal relationships, the operator should
take car e to place the cusp tips against lat plateaus or into fossae
on the stone cast of the opposing teeth. In other areas, the wax is
shaped to simulate normal tooth contours, using adjacent teeth
as references. Some relief between the opposing cus p inclines should
be provided because these incline contacts often interfere during
mandibular movements. he maximum intercuspation record
provides only information regarding the position of the opposing
teeth in maximum intercuspation. Some adjustment to the casting
may be necessary in the mouth to eliminate interferences during
mandibular movements. See Chapter 1 for the principles of cusp
and fossa placement when using full-arch casts mounted on a
semiadjustable articulator.
Finishing the Wax Pattern
Careful attention to good technique is required for waxing the
margins of the wax pattern. here must be a continuous adaptation
of wax to the margins, with no voids, folds, or faults. If adaptation
is questionable, the marginal wax should be remelted to a distance
into the pattern of approximately 2 mm. Finger pressure is applied
immediately after surface solidiication and before subsequent
cooling of the wax, with pressure maintained for at least 4 seconds.
his inger pressure helps develop close adaptation to the die by
ofsetting the cooling shrinkage of the wax. Additional wax should
be added during the remelting procedure to ensure a slight excess
of contour and extension beyond the margin.
Wax that is along the margins is now carved back to the
cavosurface outline with a warmed No. 7 wax spatula ( Fig.
18.52A–E ). his warming of the spatula permits carving of the
marginal wax with light pressure so that the stone margins are not
damaged. A little practice helps the operator determine how much
to heat the instrument for easy and efective carving. he No. 7
spatula should not have sharp edges; when it touches the die lightly,
it should not abrade or injure the die surface. he operator uses
the die surface just beyond the cavosurface margin to guide the
position and direction of the carving instrument. he direction
of the instrument movement is not dictated by the margin but by
the contour of the unprepared tooth (die) surface just beyond the
margin. he instrument blade is held parallel to this surface and
used as a guide for the contour of the pattern near the margin;
this should result in a continuity of contour across the margin.
his principle of carving is too often neglected, resulting in the
contour errors (see x in Fig. 18.52B–D ); correct application of are waxed one at a time. he operator should follow the proper
angle on the inner and outer aspects (see Fig. 18.51E ).
Next the distal slopes of the cusps are waxed (one at a time)
into occlusal relation with the opposing teeth. he mesial slopes of
the cusps are waxed next (one at a time) (see Fig. 18.51G ). After
the cusps are formed, the operator waxes in the proximal marginal
ridge areas (see Fig. 18.51H ). he same level to adjacent proximal
marginal ridges should be developed, even though occasionally
this may sacriice a contact on one of the two ridges. Restor -
ing marginal ridges to the same level avoids a “food trap” that
otherwise would be created. he mesial and distal pit regions
also should be carved enough to have them deeper than the
respective marginal ridges. his provides appropriate spillways
for the removal of food from the occlusal table and helps prevent
food impaction in the occlusal embrasure area of the proximal
surface.
To complete the occlusal wax-up, wax is added (wher e appropri -
ate) to the fossae until they contact the opposing centric-holding
cusps (see Fig. 18.51I ). Spillways for the movement of food are
established by carving appropriately placed grooves. Flat-plane
occlusal relationships are not desired.
his technique is a systematic and practical method of waxing
the occlusal aspect of the pattern into proper occlusion. Forming
one small portion at a time results in waxing each p ortion into
A
B
• Fig. 18.48 To ensure optimal wax adaptation to the pr eparation walls, a thin layer of wax is irst poured
(A), and then inger pressure is applied for several seconds while the wax cools (B).
og
fi
• Fig. 18.49 Measuring the diameters of the proximal contact faciolin -
gually (l) and occlusogingivally (og) with dental loss. Two parallel strands
should not be more than 1 to 2 mm apart. (Modiied from Black GV:
Operative dentistry , vol 2, ed 8, Woodstock, IL, , Medico-Dental.)
e142 CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration
Spruing, Inveting, and Cating
If a delay of several hours or more occurs between the forming of
the wax pattern and the investing procedure, the pattern should
remain on the die and the margins should be inspected carefully
again before spruing and investing. When such a delay is contem -
plated, it is suggested that the sprue be added to the pattern before
the delay period. If the addition of the sprue caused the induction
of enough stress to produce pattern distortion, such a condition
is more evident after the rest period, and corrective waxing can
be instituted before inv esting. he reader is referred to textbooks
on dental materials for the principles and techniques of spruing,
investing, casting, and cleaning the casting.
Seating, Adjuting, and Polihing the Cating
It is crucial to examine the casting closely, preferably under
magniication, before testing the it on the die. he internal and
external surfaces should be examined with good lighting to identify
any traces of investment, positive defects (blebs), or negative defects
(voids). Voids in critical areas indicate rejection of the casting,
unless they can be corrected by soldering. Any small positive defects
on the internal surface should be carefully removed with an
appropriately sized round bur in the high-speed handpiece.
he casting is then trial-itted on the die before removing the
sprue and sprue button, which serve as a handle to remove the the carving instrument results in correct contours (exempliied by
y). he completed patterns are shown in Fig. 18.52F–I .
On accessible surfaces of the carved pattern, satisfactory smooth -
ness can be imparted by a few strokes with the end of a inger if
surfaces have been carefully carved with the No. 7 spatula. Rubbing
with cotton that has been twisted onto a round toothpick may
smooth less accessible surfaces such as grooves.
Initial Withdrawal and Reseating of the Wax Pattern
Care must be exercised when initially withdrawing the wax pattern
from the die. he wax can be dislodged by holding the die and
pattern as shown in Fig. 18.53 . When the pattern has been dis -
lodged, it should be removed gently from the preparation. he
operator should inspect the preparation side of the pattern to see
if any wrinkles or holes are present. Such voids indicate poor wax
adaptation and should be corrected if they are (1) in critical regions
of the preparation designed to provide the retention form, (2)
numerous, or (3) closer than 1 mm to the margin. To eliminate
these voids, the operator irst relubricates the die and reseats the
pattern on the die. hen a hot instrument is passed through the
wax to the unadapted area. his usually results in the air (void)
rising through the liquid wax to the pattern’s surface as the wax
takes the place of the air. A consequence of this correcting procedure
on the occlusal surface is the obliteration of the occlusal carving
in the afected region, requiring the addition of wax, recarving,
and rechecking the occlusion.
A BC D
E F G H
IJ K Lx
x
xx
• Fig. 18.50 A–C, Correct contact. Note the position and form of the contact and the form of the
embrasures around the contact. The mesial and distal pits are below (gingival of) the proximal marginal
ridges. D–F, Contact too broad faciolingually. G and H, Contact positioned too far gingivally. I and J,
Contact too close to the occlusal surface. K and L, Contact too broad occlusogingivally . (Modiied from
Black GV: Operative dentistry , vol 2, ed 8, Woodstock, IL, , Medico-Dental.)
CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration e143
should be left) (see Fig. 18.54B ). If the cut is made completely
through, control of the disk is sometimes lost, often resulting in
damage to the casting or to the operator’ s ingers. he uncut portion
should be so small that bending with the ingers breaks it with
very little efort (see Fig. 18.54C ).
Having seated the casting on the die, the technician hand
burnishes the marginal metal using a ball or beaver-tail burnisher
(see Fig. 18.54D ). An area approximately 1 mm in width is
burnished, using strokes that increasingly approach the marginal
metal and are directed parallel to the margin. Burnishing improves
marginal adaptation and begins the smoothing process, almost
imparting a polish to this rubbed surface. While burnishing, the
adaptation of the casting along the margin is continually assessed
by using magniication, as needed, to see any marginal opening
0.05 mm in size. Moderate pressure during burnishing is indicated casting, if removal is necessary. he casting should seat with little
or no pressure ( Fig. 18.54A ). Ideally when being placed on the
die, it should have the same feel as that of the wax pattern when
it was seated on the die. If the casting fails to seat completely, it
should be removed and the die surface should be ins pected for
small scratches to see where it is binding. Usually failure to seat
is caused by small positive defects not seen on the irst inspection.
Attempts at forcing the casting into place cause irreparable damage
to the die and diiculties when trial-seating the casting in the
mouth.
After the accuracy of the casting is found to be satisfactory, the
casting is separated from the sprue as close to the inlay as possible
using a carborundum separating disk. he cut should be made
twice as wide as the thickness of the disk to prevent binding and
should not cut completely through the sprue (a small uncut portion
BAC
DEF
G HICone tip
Outer
aspectOuter
aspectCone tipInner
aspect
Distal viewOcclusal viewInner aspect
Outer aspect
Distal slopeMesial slope
• Fig. 18.51 A, The pattern base is completed and ready for waxing two reduced cusps (distolingual
and distal) into occlusion by using Payne’s waxing technique. B, The facial cusps ar e located on the irst
facial quarter line, and the lingual cusps fall on the irst lingual quarter line. C, The distolingual and distal
cusp tips are waxed into occlusion in the form of small cones. D, Cone tips and inner and outer aspects.
E, Cone tips and inner and outer aspects of the cusps of teeth. F, The inner and outer aspects of the
distolingual and distal cusps have been added to the pattern base. G, The mesial and distal slopes of
the cusps of teeth. H, Marginal ridges of teeth. I, After the marginal ridge is added to the pattern base,
fossae are waxed in and grooves are carved to complete the wax pattern. (Modiied from Payne E:
Reproduction of tooth form, Ney Tech Bull 1, .)
e144 CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration
B C
Dx
No. 7y
y
xNo. 7No. 7x y
A
E
F
H
I
G
• Fig. 18.52 A, Wax is carved to margins with a warm No. 7 spatula. B–D, Incorrect application of No.
7 spatula to carve the contour of the marginal wax is shown by x; the correct manner is labeled y. E,
Carving the occlusal groove and pit anatomy. F, The adjacent marginal ridges should be on the same
level as much as possible. G, Occlusal view of completed patterns. Note the shape of the facial and
lingual embrasures and the position of the contact. H and I, Facial view of the completed patterns. Note
the gingival and occlusal embrasures and the position of the contact.
CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration e145
he technician brushes the occlusal surface of the casting with
a soft bristle disk and tripoli (or buing bar compound [BBC])
(Buing Bar Compound; Heraeus Kulzer Inc., Armonk, NY)
polishing compound, running the disk parallel with the grooves
(see Fig. 18.55D ). A small felt wheel with polishing compound
should be used on the proximal and other accessible surfaces (see
Fig. 18.55E ). he metal should be so smooth before this application
of polishing compound that a beautiful luster should develop in
a few seconds. A high sheen may be imparted, if desired, with a
felt or chamois wheel and rouge (see Fig. 18.55F and G ). As in
the application of tripoli/BBC, only a few seconds of rouge applica -
tion should be required. If more time were expended in the
application of these polishing compounds, overpolishing (polishing
away) of the margins and die would result. Also such overuse of
polishing compounds is often an unsuccessful attempt to mask
the fact that the preliminary stages of polishing were not thoroughly
completed.
he technician cleans the polished casting of polishing com -
pounds by immersing the die with its inlay in a suitable solvent
for 1 or 2 minutes or by scrubbing with a soft brush and soap
and water. he technician rinses and removes the casting from the
die. No polishing compounds should be found on the preparation
side of the casting or on the preparation walls of the die. he
presence of such materials on these surfaces indicates that marginal
adaptation on the die is not as good as it should be.
Trying-in the Cating
Preparing the Mouth
Local anesthesia of the tooth may be necessary before removal of
the temporary restoration and the try-in of the casting on the
tooth. Anesthesia blocks stimuli from inducing pain and salivation,
neither of which is conducive to the best results, particularly in
cementation. When teeth are not particularly sensitive, however,
an option is to delay or eliminate administering the anesthetic
because the patient can tell better if the proximal contacts are tight
or if the occlusion is high. he temporary restoration is removed,
ensuring that all the temporary cement has been dislodged from
the preparation walls and cleared away. To improve visualization,
the region is isolated with cotton rolls. Saliva is removed from the
tooth operated on and from the adjacent teeth with the air syringe.
Seating the Cating and Adjuting the
Proximal Contact
he operator conirms the it of the casting on the tooth. A 7.5
× 7.5 cm gauge sponge should be placed as a “throat screen” to
catch the casting if it is accidentally dropped (see Fig. 18.60A later
in the chapter). he dentist tries the casting on the tooth, using
light pressure. Do not force the casting on the tooth . If the casting
does not seat completely, the most likely cause is an overcontoured
proximal surface. Using the mouth mirror, where needed, one
views into the embrasures from the facial, lingual, and occlusal
aspects. he dentist judges where the proximal contour needs
adjustment to allow inal seating of the casting, producing at the
same time the correct position and form to the contact. Passing
dental loss through the contact indicates tightness and position,
helping the trained operator identify the degree of excess contact
and its location. he dentist applies the loss at an angle and with
secure inger-bracing to pass it gently through the contact and not
with a snap that is likely to injure interproximal soft tissue. If the
loss cannot enter or if it tears on entering, the contact is excessive. during closure of small marginal gaps. When the casting is well
adapted, pressure is reduced to a gentle rubbing for continued
smoothing of the metal surface. At this stage, marginal openings
and irregularities should not be detectable even under (1.5 × or
2×) magniication (see Fig. 18.54E and F ). Care must be taken
not to overburnish the metal because this can crush and destroy
the underlying die surface. Overburnished metal prevents complete
seating of the casting on the prepared tooth. Proper burnishing
usually improves the retention of the casting on the die so that
the casting does not come loose during subsequent polishing steps.
A casting must not be loose on the die if the inlay is to be polished
properly.
he remaining sprue metal is carefully removed with a heat -
less stone or a carborundum disk (see Fig. 18.54G and H ). he
grooves are accentuated by lightly applying a dull No. 1 round
bur (see Fig. 18.54I ) or other appropriate rotary instrument. Next
a knife-edge rubber polishing wheel is used on accessible surfaces
(see Fig. 18.54J ) (Flexie rubber disk, Dedico International Inc.,
Long Eddy, NY). he operator should guard against the polish -
ing wheel touching the margins and the die because both can
be unknowingly and quickly polished away, resulting in “short”
margins on the tooth. Also at this time, the proximal contacts are
adjusted one at a time. If the distal surface of a mesioocclusodistal
casting on the irst molar is being adjusted, only the irst and
second molar dies are on the cast. Proximal contacts are deemed
correct when they are the correct size, correctly positioned, and
passive. If a temporary restoration was made properly, these contact
relationships would be the same in the mouth as on the cast.
Chair time can be reduced by carefully inishing the contacts on
the cast.
he occlusion of the castings is checked by marking the occ lusal
contacts with articulating paper. Any premature contacts are cor -
rected, and their locations are reined by selective grinding. Often
prematurities occur where the sprue was attached and insuicient
sprue metal was removed. he operator applies a smaller rubber,
knife-edge wheel, which should reach some of the remaining areas
not accessible to the larger disk ( Fig. 18.55A and B ). he grooves,
fossae, and other most inaccessible regions are smoothed by rubber,
abrasive points (Browne and Greenie rubber points; Shofu Dental
Corp., San Marcos, CA) (see Fig. 18.55C ). Care should be exercised
when using the rubber disks and points so that the die surface is
not touched and anatomic contours are not destroyed by overpolish -
ing. When inished with the rubber abrasives, the surface of the
casting should have a smooth, satin inish. It should be ensured
that the contact relationships with the adjacent and opposing teeth
have the correct size, position, and intensity.
• Fig. 18.53 Removing the wax pattern by using indir ect inger pressure.
Arrows indicate the direction of the pressure. Care must be exercised not
to squeeze and distort the wax pattern as it is initially withdrawn.
e146 CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
• Fig. 18.54 A, Cleaned casting should be tried on the die to determine if it has a satisfactory it. B
and C, To remove sprue, a cut that is not quite complete and twice the width of the disk is irst made
(B), and then the slim, uncut portion is bent and broken (C). D, The inlay is burnished with a No. 2 bur -
nisher along a 1-mm path that is parallel with and adjacent to the margin. E, Magniied view of the casting
before burnishing. F, Magniied view of the same marginal region shown in E after burnishing. G and H,
Removing the remaining sprue metal with heatless stone (G) or with a carborundum disk (H). I, Accentuat -
ing the grooves with a dull No. 1 round bur. J, Smoothing the surfaces accessible to the rubber polishing
wheel.
CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration e147
patient should not be aware of any pressure between teeth after
the inal adjustment of contacts.
Proper proximal contact occurs when a visual inspection
conirms that the adjacent proximal surfaces are touching and
that the position and form of the contact relationship are correct.
he correct “tightness” of the contacts is best judged with dental
loss. his contact should be passive because any pressure between
teeth would resolve soon and disappear in unwanted tooth
movement.
If the contact is open (short of touching the adjacent tooth),
a new contact area must be soldered to the casting. An open
contact is best detected by visual inspection with the aid of the
mouth mirror. he region must be isolated with cotton rolls and
dried with the air syringe. Selection of the proper horizontal viewing
angle usually discloses the spaces between teeth. Such an open
contact permits the passage of food, which afects and irritates the
interproximal gingiva.
When satisied that the proximal contacts are correct when
hand pressure irst positions the casting to within 0.2 mm of seating
(Fig. 18.56A ), the dentist removes the 7.5 × 7.5 cm gauze sponge
and ensures that the casting completely seats on the tooth by the Caution : When adjusting a mesioocclusodistal restoration, only
one excess contact should be adjusted at a time (the stronger one)
before trying again on the tooth and evaluating, unless both contacts
feel equally strong. his is done because one excess ively strong
contact can cause the other to feel strong, when in actuality the
latter contact may be correct or even found to be weak (short of
contact) after the excessively strong contact is adjusted properly.
A rubber wheel abrasive is used to adjust the proximal contour
and to correct the contact relationship; this often requires several
trials on the tooth, but it is best not to remove too much at a
time. After each trial and removal, the position of contact is visible
in the form of a bright spot on the satiny surface left on the casting
from previous surfacing by the rubber wheel. By noting the position
of this bright spot in conjunction with observation in the mouth
of the contact relationship, the contact position and form can be
judged, and the operator can determine whether additional adjust -
ment should be made to alter this position and form. (For retrieval
of the casting after each trial on the tooth, see the section on
Removing the Casting .)
Often the patient is able to indicate whether the contact is
strong, particularly when an anesthetic has not been given. he
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
• Fig. 18.55 A and B, Using a small knife-edge rubber disk on the areas of the occlusal surface that
are accessible to this wheel (A) and on proximal surfaces (B). C, Polishing the grooves and other relatively
inaccessible areas with a rubber point. D, Applying tripoli/BBC to the occlusal surface using a bristle disk.
E, Applying tripoli/BBC to the proximal surfaces using a felt wheel. F, Imparting luster by using a chamois
wheel and rouge. G, Polished castings.
e148 CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration
the metal, and vice versa, with barely a catch or a bump ( Fig.
18.57 ; see also Fig. 18.56C ). Some operators recommend the use
of a cotton roll or a piece of wood for the patient to bite on for
seating pressure (see Fig. 18.56D and E ). he cotton roll may be
too large and too soft to be efective for seating inlays, however,
and the piece of wood may not distribute the pressure properly,
resulting in less efective seating or tooth fracture. Fig. 18.57 shows
the castings tried on the teeth that were irst shown in Fig. 18.41H .
Occluding the Casting
When the proximal contacts have been adjusted and the casting
is satisfactorily seated on the tooth, the patient is asked to close application of masticatory pressure. his use of mas ticatory pressure
should be a routine procedure. It is accomplished by positioning
a small rubber polishing disk (unmounted) on the occlusal of the
restoration and requesting the patient to bite irmly; the patient
also is asked to move the jaw slightly from side to side while
maintaining this irm pressure (see Fig. 18.56B ). At this time, the
operator must judge whether the restoration is satisfactory or should
be rejected and another casting made. When evaluating the it
(seating) of the casting, the operator should view particularly the
margins that are horizontally directed (i.e., margins that are per -
pendicular to the line of draw). Along at least half the marginal
outline, the tip of the explorer tine should move from tooth onto
C
A
B
IncorrectD
IncorrectE
• Fig. 18.56 A, Hand pressure is used initially to seat the casting on the tooth by applying a ball bur -
nisher in the pit anatomy . B, If the casting its to within 0.2 mm of the seating, complete seating is ensured
by using masticatory pressure when the patient closes on the rubber polishing wheel interposed between
the casting and the opposing tooth. C, The marginal it of the tried-in inlay is inspected. D and E, A cotton
roll (D) or piece of wood (E) should not be used in lieu of the rubber polishing wheel method (B).
A BC
• Fig. 18.57 A–C, Castings tried on teeth. These photographs were taken immediately after the restora -
tions were irst seated on teeth before any dressing down or burnishing of margins. Neither occlusal
adjustment nor contact adjustment was required. Extension of the mesiofacial margin of the second
premolar was necessary because of extension of a previous amalgam restoration; extension of the disto -
facial margins of premolars is caused by skirting (or bracing), which provides maximal resistance form to
these weak teeth. Note the area on the mesiofacial margin of the irst molar that is to have a composite
insert placed after cementation.
CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration e149
intercuspation should be composed of supporting cusp tips placed
against lat or smoothly concave surfaces (or into fossae) for stability.
he force vector of occlusal contacts should be one that parallels
the long axis of the tooth (see Fig. 18.58C ). Contacts on inclines
tend to delect the tooth and are less stable (see Fig. 18.58D ). he
use of articulating paper and the stone is continued until (1) the
heavy markings are no longer produced, (2) the contacts on the
restoration have optimal position and form, and (3) an even distribu -
tion of contacts exists on the casting and the adjacent teeth. Visual
inspection should verify that the adjacent unprepared teeth are
absolutely touching.
Care must be exercised not to overreduce the occlusal contacts.
In the inal phase of equilibration, the strength of the occlusal
contacts can be tested by using thin plastic shim stock (0. mm
thick) (Artus Corp., Englewood, NJ) as a “feeler gauge.” he dentist
tests the intensity of the occlusal contacts of the casting and the
adjacent unprepared teeth to see if they hold the shim stock equally
(see Fig. 18.58E ). It may be helpful to test the occlusal contacts
of the adjacent unprepared teeth with the casting out of the mouth
for comparison.
When the occlusal contacts have been adjusted in maximum
intercuspation, the casting is checked for contacts that occur during into maximum intercuspation, and the dentist inspects the unpre -
pared adjacent teeth to see if any space exists between the opposing
wear facets. Usually the patient can indicate correctly if the casting
needs occlusal adjustment; however, the dentist should verify the
occlusal relationship objectively. After drying the teeth of saliva,
the dentist inserts a strip of articulating paper and requests the
patient to close and tap the teeth together (in maximum intercuspa -
tion) several times. he dentist removes the paper and examines
it by holding it up toward the light for evidence of any areas of
penetration caused by the restoration. Any holes can be matched
with heavy markings on the casting, and shiny, metal-colored spots
may be present in the center of the marks ( Fig. 18.58A ). Such
heavy contacts should be reduced with suitable abrasive stones,
while carefully observing the following fundamental concepts for
equilibration of occlusion. he space observed between the opposing
wear facets of the adjacent unprepared teeth (when the teeth are
“closed”) is an indication of the maximal amount of vertical reduc -
tion of the casting required. Often the “high” occlusal contacts
are very broad and extend onto the cusp or ridge slopes. When
this occurs, the dentist should grind away the most incorrect portion
of the incline contact (a delective contact), leavi ng the most correct
portion intact (see Fig. 18.58B ). Occlusal contacts in maximum
C DA B
• Fig. 18.58 Occluding the casting. A, The initial occlusal contact is high and produces a heavy mark
with a metal-colored center. Note the corresponding perforation in the articulating paper. B, When adjust -
ing occlusal contacts, the most incorrect portion of the contact is removed, leaving the most correct
portion intact. C, The proper occlusal contacts in maximum intercuspation are composed of cusp tips
placed against lat or smoothly concave surfaces (or fossae) for stability. D, Incline contacts are less stable
and tend to delect the tooth.
e150 CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration
F
G
E
E, Testing the intensity of the occlusal contacts with a thin (0. -mm thick) shim
stock used as a feeler gauge. F, Removing the undesirable contact (Zone 1, see Chapter 1 ) that may
occur on the working side during lateral mandibular movement. G, Removing the undesirable contact
(Zone 3) that may occur on the nonworking side during lateral mandibular movement. • Fig. 18.58, cont’d
lateral mandibular movements. Lateral working (functional) contacts
on the casting are marked by (1) inserting a strip of articulator
paper over the quadrant with the casting, (2) having the patient
close into maximum intercuspation, and (3) “sliding” the teeth
toward the side of the mouth where the casting is located. Contacts
between the lingual inclines of the maxillary lingual cusps and
facial inclines of the mandibular lingual cusps are considered
unusually stressful and should be eliminated (see Fig. 18.58F ).
Contacts between the lingual inclines of the maxillary facial cusps
and the facial inclines of the mandibular facial cusps should remain
only if they are passive and a group function pattern of occlusion
is desired (see Chapter 1 for further discussion on the implications
of various occlusal relationships).
he dentist inserts a strip of articulating paper over the teeth
with the castings and has the patient close into maximum intercuspa -
tion and slide the teeth laterally toward the opposite side. his
action marks any lateral nonworking (nonfunctional) contacts on
the restoration. In a normal arrangement of teeth, contacts that
might occur during the nonworking pathway are positioned on
the facial inclines of the maxillary lingual cusps and the lingual
inclines of the mandibular facial cusps. hese nonworking contacts
must be removed with a suitable stone (see Fig. 18.58G ). Complete
elimination of nonworking contacts can be veriied by using the
plastic shim stock. A strip of shim stock is inserted over the casting,
and the patient bites together irmly. As soon as the patient begins
sliding the mandible toward the opposite side, the shim stock
should slip out from between teeth. he dentist examines the
casting for interferences in protrusive mandibular m ovements using the shim stock and articulating paper. he areas that may have to
be adjusted to prevent contact are the distal inclines of maxillary
teeth and the mesial inclines of mandibular teeth.
Finally, interferences that occur on the casting between
centric occlusion and maximum intercuspation are identiied
and removed. Most patients have a small discrepancy between
centric occlusion and maximum intercuspation. Such a “skid”
is considered normal for most patients, but the operator should
ensure that the casting does not have premature contact at any
point between centric occlusion and maximum intercuspation. he
preferred technique for manipulating the mandible into centric
relation and making teeth touch in centric occlusion is credited
to Dawson.13 When teeth have been marked in centric occlusion,
the dentist observes them to ensure that the casting does not
have premature contacts in centric occlusion and that it does not
exacerbate any centric occlusion–maximum intercuspation skid. If
it does, the mesial inclines of maxillary restorations and the distal
inclines of mandibular restorations are the areas that may need
adjustment.
Improving Marginal Adaptation
he next step is to “dress down” the margins, that is, to adapt the
metal as closely as possible to the margins of the tooth. Regardless
of how accurately a casting may seat in the prepara tion, the it
usually can be improved by using the following procedures. With
a ball or beaver-tail burnisher, the operator improves marginal
adaptation by burnishing the marginal metal with strokes that
parallel the margin except for the gingival margin ( Fig. 18.59A ).
CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration e151
other portions of accessible margins where a slight excess of metal
is present. When burnishing the casting on the tooth, the dentist
should ensure that the casting is fully seated. Otherwise burnishing
may bend the marginal metal, keep the casting from seating, and
result in the rejection of the casting.
If necessary, the marginal adaptation and continuity can be
improved further b y the application of a pointed, ine-grit carbo -
rundum stone, especially where the marginal enamel is slightly If the margin is inaccessible to the ball or beaver -tail burnisher (as
sometimes occurs at the termination of the casting in groove regions
where possibly more enameloplasty or extension could have been
employed), the edge of the discoid-type hand instrument serves
well as a burnisher . he discoid instrument is held perpendicular
to the margin and is moved parallel with the margin (see Fig.
18.59B ). he sharp edges of the instrument also trim away any
slight excess of metal at the margin. he operator continues on
A B C
D E F
G• Fig. 18.59 A, Burnishing the margins with a No. 27 ball burnisher. The burnisher is
moved parallel with the margin. B, Using a discoid instrument on the margins that are
inaccessible to the ball burnisher. It is moved parallel with the margins. (Note the small
metal scrapings made by this instrument.) C, Dressing down the margins with a small
carborundum stone, which is rotating fr om the metal to the tooth. D, Applying a ine-grit
sandpaper disk to the accessible supragingival proximal margins. The disk rotates, wher -
ever possible, from the metal to the tooth. E, On the facial or lingual margins on the
proximal surface that are inaccessible to the paper disk, a gingival margin trimmer is used
to remove any slight excess of metal. F, Using a rubber point to smooth the metal and
the tooth of any scratches left by the carborundum stone. G, Completed inlays ready for
cementation.
e152 CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration
occlusal embrasure if the casting is a mesioocclusodistal restoration.
his should initiate the displacement of the casting, making
complete removal thereafter easy.
Cementation
Cement Selection
he selection of cement for permanent cementation is crucial to
the success of the inal restoration. A discussion of the advantages
and disadvantages of each cement can be found in Chapter 13 .
No cement is without shortcomings. Each product has speciic
requirements with regard to tooth surface conditioning, casting
surface conditioning, and manipulation techniques. To obtain
optimal performance from the cement, the dentist should carefully
follow the manufacturer’s instructions for dispensing, mixing, and
application.
Cementation Technique
Before cementing the casting, the tooth is isolated from saliva with
the aid of cotton rolls (and saliva ejector, if necessary) ( Fig. 18.61A ).
With the air syringe, the dentist dries the preparation but does
not desiccate it. he cement is mixed according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. With the cement mix applied generously to the
preparation side of the casting (see Fig. 18.61B ), the dentist starts
to place the casting with the ingers or with operative pliers. Next
the dentist places the ball burnisher in the pit areas (irst one and
then another), exerting irm pressure to seat the casting (see Fig.
18.61C ). he dentist places a small lexible rubber polishing disk
over the casting, removes the saliva ejector, and requests the patient
to close and exert biting force (see Fig. 18.61D and E ). he patient
also is asked to move the mandible slightly from side to side, while
continuing to exert pressure. A few seconds of this pressure is
suicient. When the disk is removed, much of the occlusal area
should be clean of the cement mix and easier to inspect and to
verify complete seating of the casting. When the cusps are capped,
complete seating of the casting is veriied by inspection of the
facial and lingual margins after wiping the excess cement away
(see Fig. 18.61F ). While the cement is still soft, all accessible
margins are burnished. he saliva ejector is replaced in the mouth
and the region kept dry during the setting of the cement. Excess
moisture during this setting reaction can weaken many types of
cement.
After the cement has hardened, any excess is cleaned of with
an explorer and air-water spray. Dental loss should be passed “high” and should be reduced or where more than just a slight
amount of excess metal should be removed (see Fig. 18.59C ). his
stone should be used at low speed with light pressure and should
rotate either parallel with the margin or from metal to tooth across
the margin (never from tooth to metal). After this procedure, the
margins are burnished again to enhance marginal adaptation and
to smooth the marginal metal.
Another instrument that can be used to improve marginal it
in accessible areas (e.g., the occlusal two thirds of the proximal
margins) is a ine-grit paper disk. Wherever possible, the disk
should be revolved in a direction from the metal toward the tooth
(see Fig. 18.59D ). Sometimes these margins are inaccessible to
the disk, and a gingival margin trimmer, a gold ile, or a cleoid
instrument may be helpful to remove a slight excess of metal (see
Fig. 18.59E ). It is moved in a scraping motion parallel to the
margin and burnishes and trims the metal.
he experienced operator, with proper use of the elastic impres -
sion material, can produce restoration margins that require little
or no burnishing or dressing down. One of the signiicant advantages
of the indirect procedure, when correctly applied, is the high degree
of accuracy of the gingival margin adaptation.
he margins should now be such that the explorer tip can pass
across the margins smoothly without jumping or catc hing. he
operator should use rubber polishing points of increasing ineness
at low speed to smooth and polish the accessible areas of roughness
left from adjusting procedures (see Fig. 18.59F and G ). An attempt
should be made to preserve the anatomic contour and detail. he
operator should take care to use light, intermittent pressure when
using rubber points to avoid overheating the tooth. he casting
surface should be cleaned and dried to verify that it is smooth and
free of scratches.
Removing the Casting
When preparing to remove a casting from a tooth, the dentist irst
places a 7.5 cm × 7.5 cm gauze sponge throat screen to prevent
the patient from swallowing or aspirating the casting in the event
that it is accidentally mishandled ( Fig. 18.60A ). If the casting is
highly retentive, the dentist irst initiates removal with the aid of
a sharp Black spoon (15-8-14). he tip of the spoon is inserted
as deep as possible in the occlusal embrasure with the back of the
spoon resting against the marginal ridge of the adjacent tooth (see
Fig. 18.60B ). With the tip of the spoon irmly seated against the
metal casting, the spoon is pivoted using the adjacent tooth as a
fulcrum (see Fig. 18.60C ). his procedure is repeated on the other
A
B
C
• Fig. 18.60 Initiating the removal of the inlay before cementation. A, Place 7.5 × 7.5 cm gauze throat
screen to prevent swallowing or aspiration of casting should it be accidentally mishandled. B, The tip of
a sharp Black spoon (15-8-14) is inserted irst as deep as possible in the occlusal embrasure with the
back of the spoon against the adjacent marginal ridge. C, The spoon is pivoted in the direction of the
curved arrow by using the adjacent tooth as a fulcrum. The casting has lifted from its seating. After only
slight unseating, a similar procedure is applied to the distal aspect.
E F
G
H
A B
C D
• Fig. 18.61 Cementing the cast-metal onlay on the preparation initially shown in Fig. 18.39B . A, Isolating the tooth from saliva with cotton rolls. B,
Applying cement with No. 2 beaver-tail burnisher to preparation side of onlay. C, Seating the onlay by using a ball burnisher and hand pressure. D,
Placing a rubber polishing disk over the onlay and cementing the cast-metal onlay on the preparation initially shown in Fig. 18.39B . E, The patient is
instructed to apply masticatory pressure while slightly moving the jaw from side to side. F, When the disk is lifted from the casting, much of the occlusal
aspect is free of cement. With a sweeping, rolling motion of the for einger, any accessible facial surface margin is cleaned of excess cement to permit
visual inspection for veriication of proper seating of the onlay. Similarly, any accessible lingual margin is cleaned of excess cement. Full seating also
should be veriied tactilely with the explorer tine. G, Excess set cement is removed by using the explorer and air-water spray. Dental tape with a small
knot is used to dislodge small pieces of interproximal cement. H, Onlay after cementation.
e154 CHAPTER 18 Cla II Cat-Metal Retoration
through the contact, carried into the interproximal gingival
embrasures and sulci, and pulled facially and lingually to help in
the removal of cement in this region (see Fig. 18.61G ). Tying a
small knot in the loss helps dislodge small bits of interproximal
cement. Finally, directing a stream of air into the gingival sulcus
opens it and reveals any remaining small pieces of cement, which
should be removed. When cementing has been properly accom -
plished, a cement line should not be visible at the margins (see
Fig. 18.61H ). A quadrant of inlays after cementation is illustrated
in Fig. 18.62 .
B
A
• Fig. 18.62 A, Cemented castings on teeth irst shown in Fig. 18.41E . This photo was taken imme -
diately after cementation and insertion of the composite insert on the molar. B, Bitewing radiograph of
the restored quadrant shown in A. Note the it of inlays at the gingival margins and the contour of the
proximal surfaces.
Repair
he weak link of most cast-metal inlays and onlays is the cement
seal. At times, the operator may ind discrepancies at margins that
require replacement or repair. If the restoration is intact and retentive
and if the defective margin area is small and accessible, small
repairs can be attempted with amalgam or composite. If cement
loss is found in one area of the restoration, however, other areas
are usually suspect. When defects are found, the most common
procedure is to remove the defective restoration and replace it.
Summary
Cast-metal inlays and onlays ofer excellent restorations that may
be underused in dentistry. he technique requires multiple patient
visits and excellent laboratory support, but the resulting restorations
have the potential to last for decades. High noble alloys are desirable
for patients concerned with allergy or sensitivity to other restorative
materials. Cast-metal onlays, in particular, can be designed to strengthen the restored tooth while conserving more tooth structure
than does a full crown. Disadvantages such as high cost and esthetics
limit their use, but when indicated, cast-metal inlays and onlays
provide a restorative option that is less damaging to pulpal and
periodontal tissues compared with a full crown.
Reference
1. Donovan T, Simonsen RJ, Guertin G, et al: Retrospective clinical
evaluation of 1, cast gold restorations in service from 1 to 52
years. J Esthet Restor Dent 16(3): – , .
2. Wataha JC: Biocompatibility of dental casting alloys: a review. J
Prosthet Dent 83: – , .
3. Stanley HR: Efects of dental restorative materials: local and systemic
responses reviewed. J Am Dent Assoc :76–80, .
4. Hood JA: Biomechanics of the intact, prepared and restored tooth:
some clinical implications. Int Dent J 41:25–32, .
5. Carson J, Rider T, Nash D: A thermographic study of heat distribution
during ultra-speed cavity preparation. J Dent Res 58(7): – ,
.
6. Fisher DW, Caputo AA, Shillingburg H, et al: Photoelastic analysis
of inlay and onlay preparations. J Prosthet Dent 33:47–53, .
7. Payne E: Reproduction of tooth form. Ney T ech Bull 1: .8. Grajower R, Shaharbani S, Kaufman E: Temperature rise in pulp
chamber during fabrication of temporary self-curing resin crowns. J
Prosthet Dent 41: – , .
9. Hume WR: A new technique for screening chemical toxicity to the
pulp from dental restorative materials and procedures. J Dent Res
64: – , .
10. Moulding MB, Loney RW: he efect of cooling techniques on
intrapulpal temperature during direct fabrication o f provisional restora -
tions. Int J Prosthodont 4: – , .
11. Crispin BL, Watson JF , Caputo AA: he marginal accuracy of
treatment restorations: a comparative analysis. J Prosthet Dent
44: – , .
12. Malamed SF: Handbook of local anesthesia , ed 5, St. Louis, ,
Mosby.
13. Dawson PE: A classiication system for occlusions that relates maximal
intercuspation to the position and condition of the temporomandibular
joints. J Prosthet Dent 75:60–66, .
511Index
A
Abfraction , f,
treatment of ,
Abrasion , f,
treatment of ,
Abutment, removable, cast metal restoration
and, e95
Access, operative dentistry and , e26
Acellular cementum , 10–11
Achromatopsia ,
Acid-etching
dentin , f, –
enamel , , f– f
resin-bonded splint and , e52
Acidic agents, erosion due to , – , f
ACP . see Amorphous calcium-phosphate
Actinobolin, for dental caries , 84t
ADA. see American Dental Association
AdheSE One F ,
Adhesion , –
adsorption ,
basic concepts of ,
biocompatibility and , –
clinical performance and , –
combination ,
deined ,
dentin , –
development of , –
difusion ,
electrostatic ,
enamel ,
mechanical ,
of resin to dentin , t
to root canal dentin , –
in vitro studies in, relevance of ,
Adhesion bridges , e60
Adhesive amalgam restorations, for tooth
preparation ,
Adhesive bonding , –
Adhesive ceramics ,
Adhesive dentistry
bases and cavity liners in , –
clinical recommendations for ,
dentin, bonding to , – , f, t
new developments in ,
enamel, bonding to , – , f– f
Adhesives
acetone-based , –
categorized, by adhesion strategy , tdentin, indications for , –
etch-and-rinse , –
ethanol-based , –
indirect, restorations with , –
light-cured ,
amalgam restoration and , , f
moist versus dry, –
placement of
in Class I composite restoration ,
in Class II composite restoration ,
in Class III composite restoration ,
in Class IV composite restoration ,
in Class V composite restoration ,
self-etch
one-step , t,
role of water in ,
two-step , t, –
three-step etch-and-rinse , – , t
for tooth preparation ,
two-step etch-and-rinse , – , t
universal , – , –
Admixed alloys ,
Adolescents, all-porcelain pontics for , e66
Adper Single Bond , f
Adper Single Bond Plus , f
Adsorption adhesion ,
Aerosols, cutting as cause of , e21
Agglutinin, in saliva , 58
Aging
caries risk and , 77t
tooth color afected by ,
Alcohol, consumption of, caries risk and , 71,
77t
Alexidine, for dental caries , 84t
Alginate
impression material , e128, e128f
impression with ,
All-Bond 2 , –
All-Bond 3 , –
All-Bond SE , –
All-ceramic crowns, evolution of , – ,
502f
Alloys, dental casting, strength of , e95
Alpha-receptor antagonists, xerostomia from ,
59t
Altered passive eruption, gingivectomy for ,
, f
Aluminum chloride, to widen gingival sulcus ,
e132
Aluminum oxide, hardness value of , e17–e18
Alveolar bone ,
Alveolar bone proper , 15
Alveolar mucosa , 15Page numbers followed by b indicate boxes;
f, igures; t, tables; and e, online only materials.Alveolar process , 15
Alveolus, tooth attachment to , 15
Amalgam ,
admixed ,
advantages of ,
alloys for ,
bases and cavity liners in ,
bonded , – , f,
burnishing of , –
postcarve ,
precarve ,
butt-joint form for ,
carving of ,
in Class I amalgam restoration ,
in Class II amalgam restoration ,
–
in Class V amalgam restoration ,
–
condensation of ,
in Class II amalgam restoration ,
–
in Class III amalgam restoration ,
considerations for , –
contouring of , , , –
contraindications to ,
conventional , , f, , f
dental, hardness value of , e17–e18
disadvantages of ,
enamel butt-joint relationship to ,
inishing of , –
in Class I amalgam restoration ,
– ,
in Class II amalgam restoration ,
in Class V amalgam restoration ,
–
in complex amalgam restoration ,
–
foundation , f, –
fracture ,
general concepts guiding restoration with ,
–
high-copper , – ,
for complex amalgam restoration ,
creep and low of ,
insertion of , –
in Class I amalgam restoration ,
in Class V amalgam restoration ,
–
low-copper ,
mercury-free ,
mercury in ,
mixed, class I amalgam restoration and ,
333f
mixing of , 316Adhesives (Continued)
Index
overcarved ,
pin-retained , –
polishing of , – , f
in Class I amalgam restoration , –
in Class II amalgam restoration ,
in Class V amalgam restoration ,
–
precarve burnishing of ,
properties of ,
removal of excess , f– f
repair of ,
restoration with. see Amalgam restorations
silver , –
advantages of , –
composition of , – , t– t,
463f
evaluation of , –
manipulation of ,
mercury and , –
removal of, unwarranted, impact of ,
–
spherical ,
in complex amalgam restoration ,
success rate of ,
triturating of ,
tunnel tooth preparations for ,
types of , –
undercarved , – , f
uses of , –
Amalgam blues ,
Amalgam pins, for tooth preparation ,
Amalgam restorations , – , , f
adjoining , – , f
advantages of ,
cavosurface margin in , , f
cervical , , f
Class I , f, –
carving in , , f
clinical procedures for ,
condensation of amalgam in ,
contouring of ,
desensitizer placement in , , f,
example of , f
extensive , f
inishing of , – , f,
insertion of amalgam in , ,
matrix placement in , , –
preparations for , – , f– f
restorative technique for , –
tooth preparation for , – ,
324f– f, –
tooth preparation outline forms in ,
323f, f
Class I occlusofacial , – , f
Class I occlusolingual , – ,
334f– f
Class II , f, –
abutment teeth and , , f
adjoining , – , f
burnishing in , – , f
carving in , , –
clinical procedures for ,
condensation of amalgam in , –
desensitizer placement in ,
diagram of , f
entry for , f
example of , finishing of ,
for mandibular irst molar , , f
for mandibular irst premolar , – ,
349f– f,
for mandibular second premolar , ,
352f
matrix placement in ,
for maxillary irst molar , – , f,
, f
for maxillary irst premolar , – ,
351f
for maxillary second molar , – ,
353f
occlusal outline form of , – ,
340f– f
occlusal step for , f
outline form of , f
partial denture and ,
polishing of ,
proximal outline form of , – ,
342f– f
quadrant dentistry in , –
restorative technique in , –
for rotated teeth , –
slot preparation in ,
tooth preparation for , , – ,
345f– f
two-surface ,
Class III , –
carving in , , f
condensation in , , f
desensitizer placement in ,
matrix placement in , , f
procedures of ,
restorative technique for ,
tooth preparation for , – ,
369f– f
Class V , –
carving in , – , f
contouring in , f
desensitizer placement in , –
inishing in , – , f
insertion of amalgam in , – , f
line angles in , – , f– f
matrix placement in , , f– f
polishing in , – , f– f
procedures of , – , f– f
restorative technique for , –
tooth preparation for , – ,
379f– f
Class VI , –
preparation of , f
clinical examination of , –
clinical technique for , –
commitment factors and ,
complex. see Complex amalgam restoration
considerations for , –
contraindications to ,
convenience form for ,
debridement in , –
defective restorative material and/or soft
dentin, removal of ,
disadvantages of ,
example of , f
facial area and , , f
inishing of , – , f
foundation of , ffracture in ,
general concepts guiding preparation for ,
–
improper occlusal contacts in ,
indications for , , f– f
inspection in , –
isolation factors for ,
isolation of operating site of ,
lingual area and , , f
local anesthesia for ,
long-term , f
margins in , f– f, f
matrix placement in ,
occlusal areas in , – , f– f
evaluation of , , f
occlusion factors and ,
operator ability and ,
pin-retained , –
polishing of , – , f– f
preoperative considerations in , , f
preparation designs for , , f
procedures for , –
proximal embrasure areas and , – ,
318f– f
pulp protection in , , f
repairing ,
resistance form for ,
secondary ,
retention form for , – , f
secondary ,
slot-retained , – , f– f
tooth preparation
inal, –
initial , – , f
outline form in , – , f
principles for ,
treatment with ,
Ameloblasts , 2–3
Amelogenesis , 2
Amelogenesis imperfecta ,
American Dental Association (ADA) ,
radiographic examination guidelines from ,
, t– t
speciication from, for casting gold alloys ,
e94
American Dental Association Caries
Classiication System (ADA CCS) ,
97–99, 98 f
Amorphous calcium-phosphate (ACP) , 85
Anatomic crown , –
Anesthesia
for cast metal restorations , e95
local, e26
for amalgam restorations ,
for composite restoration ,
Angle ,
amalgam ,
axial line, in Class III amalgam restoration ,
–
axiogingival, in Class III amalgam
restoration , –
axiopulpal, in Class I amalgam restoration ,
, f
axiopulpal line , , f
cavosurface
in Class I amalgam restoration ,
– , f, , fAmalgam (Continued) Amalgam restorations (Continued) Amalgam restorations (Continued)
Index
in Class II amalgam restoration ,
in Class III amalgam restoration ,
facial, reduction of ,
line, Class V amalgam restoration and ,
– , f– f
Angle classiication , 16, 17 f
Annealing , e69
Anteroposterior interarch relationship , 16–18
Antidepressants, xerostomia from , 59t
Antihistamines, xerostomia from , 59t
Anti-HIV drugs, xerostomia from , 59t
Antihypertensive agents, xerostomia from , 59t
Antimicrobial agents , 84, 84 t
Antimigraine agents, xerostomia from , 59t
Antipsychotics, xerostomia from , 59t
Apatite crystallites , 4, 5 f
Appetite suppressants, xerostomia from , 59t
Arch form
of-center, rubber dam and , e44, e46f
smile afected by ,
Arginine, in saliva , 59
Argon-ion lasers , – , f– f
Articular disc , 22
Articular eminence, slope of , 32
Articulating paper, diastema treatment and ,
Articulator
hinge , e139
semiadjustable , e127
Assessment, patient. see Patient, assessment of
Assimilation, chromatic induction of ,
Assistant
instrument exchange with operator by , e24
position of , e26f
seated work position for , e24
At-home bleaching ,
Atropine, salivation controlled with , e49
Attached gingiva , 15, , f
Attrition, treatment of ,
Auditory threshold , e21
Augmentation
composite, diastema treatment with ,
linguoversion treated with ,
Auto-deceleration ,
AutoMatrix, for complex amalgam
restoration , , f
Automix dispensing system , e134
Axial wall ,
B
Bacteria
in bioilm, caries and , 40
clearance of , 58
infection from, dentin adhesive systems
and,
oral habitats for , 50t
plaque formation and , 44f–46f
pulpal reaction to restoration and ,
Balance, hand instrument and , e1
Barriers, for light curing , , f
Base,
glass ionomer , e103f–e104f, e125
Base materials, in adhesive dentistry , ,
482f
Base metal alloys , –
Batteries, dental curing lights and ,
Beer-Lambert law , –176Bennett shift , 25f, 28–30
Betel nut juice, teeth stained by , – ,
275f
Bevel
of hand instrument , e2–e4
preparations of, in cast metal restoration ,
e104– e108
reversed , e113
Beveling
cavosurface , f
in Class III composite restoration , f
Binocular loupes ,
Biocompatibility
adhesion and , –
cast metal restoration and , e95
of porcelain bonding alloys ,
Bioilm
bacterial, analysis of , 75
caries and , 40
role in , 43–48
cariogenic, tooth habitats for , 48–50
composition of , 43–44
control of , 80
diet and , 42f
mixed-species , 47f
plaque
caries treatment and , 78t
ilamentous bacteria in , 47f
formation of , 44f–47f
photomicrograph of , 44f–46f
Biologic width , – , f, , f,
417t
violation of , ,
Biomaterials , –
in adhesive dentistry , –
all-ceramic crowns , – , f
biologic properties of , –
composite resins , –
contemporary ceramic , – ,
505f– f
direct restorative , –
glass ionomer restorative materials ,
– , f– f
gold alloys , – , f
implant , – , f– f
indirect restorative , –
physical, mechanical, and optical properties
of, –
porcelain bonding alloys , –
Biotypes, gingival , , f– f
Bis-acryl material, veneer and ,
Bisphenol A ethoxylated dimethacrylate , ,
143t
Bisphenol A-glycidyl methacrylate , , t
Bite collapse, diastema associated with ,
Bite registration paste , e126, e140f
Black, G.V. , , f
Black’s classiication system , e2
Black’s spoon , f– f,
Blade
bur design and , e15
cleoid, example of , e5f
discoid, example of , e5f
example of , e2f
of hand instrument , e1
surgical, composite restoration inishing
with, 259Bleaching , –
at-home ,
luorosis treated with ,
home-applied , –
in-oice nonvital ,
in-oice vital , –
intrinsic discoloration treated with ,
nightguard vital , , , f
nonvital , –
power ,
of tetracycline-stained teeth , ,
281f
thermocatalytic efect in ,
vital, –
life expectancy of ,
walking , –
“Bleaching mishap,” curious case of , ,
217f
Bleeding, overcontoured veneer and ,
Blending efect, of color ,
Blocks , –
Blue light ,
blocking protection , – , f
hazard , – , f
Bolton discrepancy ,
Bond strength
enamel , ,
microtensile testing of , , f
shear ,
testing, of dental material ,
Bonded amalgam ,
Bonding
adhesive , –
chemical ,
dentin
challenges in , –
matrix metalloproteinases and ,
role of proteins in , –
metallic , e69
micromechanical ,
microtensile testing of , , f
resin-dentin, options for , – ,
144f
to sclerotic dentin ,
of veneer to tooth ,
Bonding agent, splinting and , e52–e54
Bonding system
agents
etch-and-rinse , – , f
initial , , f
dentin , – , f, t
enamel , – , f– f
total-etch , – , f
Bondlite ,
Box
distal, in maxillary molar, cast metal
restoration for , e111f
proximal
in cast metal onlay , e117f
for cast metal restoration , e99–e101
Bridges
all-metal , e66f
conservative , e56–e68
ixed
procedure for , e43f
rubber dam and , e41–e42Angle (Continued)
Index
mandibular anterior porcelain-fused-tometal , e63f
mandibular posterior , e64–e66, e64f
bonding steps for , e65, e65f
laboratory phase of , e64–e65
preparation for , e64
try-in stage of , e65
Maryland , e60, e60f–e61f, e64–e66,
e65f–e66f
maxillary , e65–e66, e65f
maxillary anterior , e60–e62
bonding steps for , e61–e62
inishing procedure for , e62, e63f
laboratory phase of , e61
porcelain-fused-to-metal , e62f
preparation for , e61
try-in stage of , e61
metal, resin-bonded , e60f
resin-bonded , e52–e68
Rochette , e60, e60f–e63f, e62–66
types of , e56
veneer , e66
Brilliant Crios (Coltene) ,
Brinell hardness value , e18t
Brittle fracture , e18
Bronchodilators, xerostomia from , 59t
Bruxism ,
Buccal crossbite , 20
Budget curing lights , , f
Bulk-ill composite resin materials ,
“Bulk-ill composites” ,
Burs
blade of , e15, e15f
carbide , e10
blade of , e15
head size of , e13t
carbide inishing ,
carbide issure , e13
classiication system for , e10
concentricity of , e14–e15
crosscut , e12–13
description of , e10–e15
design modiication of , e12–e13
example of , e11f
lutes of , e14
head of, design features of , e12f
head size of , e12t
historical development of , e10
inverted cone , e10, e11f
names and key dimensions of , e14t
neck diameter of , e14
pear-shaped , e10–e11
round , e10, e11f
rounded corners for , e13
runout of , e14–e15
shapes of , e10–e11
sizes of , e11–e12
spiral angle of , e14
steel, head size of , e13t
straight issure , e11, e11f
tapered issure , e11, e11f
C
CAD/CAM. see Computer-assisted design,
computer-assisted machining
Calcium hydroxide , 89
bleaching with , 278Calcium hydroxide liners ,
in cast metal restoration , e101, e103f
in Class III composite restoration ,
–
Calcium ions, saliva saturated with , 59–60,
63–64
Calcium-sulfate dihydrate , , f
Calcium-sulfate hemihydrate. ,
Camphorquinone (CQ), spectral absorption
proile of , , f
CamX Spectra Caries Detection Aid ,
Canaliculi , 8
Canine guidance , 28
Canines , 1, 2 f
cervical retainer placement on , e41
maxillary, Class III tooth preparation and
restoration for , e85
rubber dam hole size for , e35
Carbamide peroxide ,
Carbohydrates
caries and , 40, 60
intake of, caries risk assessment and , 71
Carbopol, bleaching materials and ,
Carborundum disk , e17
Carestream system , –
Caries
active , 41f
balance of , 42f
in cervical areas ,
Class V composite restoration and , ,
254f
clinical , 49f
clinical characteristics of , 40–94
clinical examination for , 97– , 98 f
deined , 40–60
deinitive diagnosis of , –
demineralization and , 40
dentin , 43b
bacteria in , 50t
detection technologies for , –
diagnostic test for, accuracy of , b
diet and , 60
enamel , 43b
bacteria in , 50t
etiology of , 40–94
extensive , 55f
formation of
clinical sites for , 60–61
saliva and , 58–60, 58 t
high rate, cast metal restoration and , e95
incipient ,
management of , 40–94
calcium and phosphate compounds for ,
85
luoride exposure and , 80–83, 82 t
immunization for , 83–84
medical model for , 42t, 78t
oral hygiene and , 79–80
probiotics for , 85
restorations for , 85–87
sealants for , 85, 86 f
silver diamine luoride for , 83, 83 f
surgical model for , 70
multiple , 41f
occlusal surface , 43b, 56f, 66f, 99– ,
100f
radiographic examination of ,
in older adults , 117oral hygiene and , 50, 58
pit-and-issure , 43b, 51f–52f, 60
progression of , 52f–54f
prevention of
chlorhexidine for , 84
protocols or strategies for , 75–89, 76 b
primary , 43b
progression of, longitudinal section of ,
57f
proximal surface , 43b, – , f
radiographic examination of ,
rampant , 41f, 43b, 67f–68f
diet and , 77–79
recurrent ,
radiographic examination of ,
remineralization and , 40
removal of, clinical considerations for ,
87–89
residual , 43b
risk assessment of , 40–94
for children , 75
dental clinical analysis for , 75
form for , 72f–74f
risk categories in , 70
risk categories of, interventions and , 75t
risk of
examination indings associated with ,
77t
health history factors associated with ,
77t
root-surface , 43b, 50,
bacteria in , 50t
management of , 89–90
treatment of ,
secondary , 43b
smooth-surface , 43b, –
subgingival, gingivectomy for , f
sugar use and , 49f
tooth brushing and , 79f–80f
treatment strategies for , 78t
white spot
formation in , 49f, 61, 81 f
sealants for , 85
Caries around restorations and sealants
(CARS) , 85–87
Caries-control restoration , 87, 89, 89 t
schematic representation of , 88f
Caries lesion , 43b
active , 43b, 68f
advanced (deep) , 43b
arrested , 65f
cavitated , 43b
preventive protocol for , 76b
characteristics of , 99t
clinical characteristics of , 60–69
dentin , 64–69
change associated with , 51f
cross section of , 67f
zones of , 69
detection of , 99
diagnosis of , 71
enamel , 61–64, 62 f–63f
cavitated , 64
change associated with , 51f
clinical signiicance of , 64t
cross section of , 61f–62f
noncavitated , 61–63Bridges (Continued) Caries (Continued)
Index
inactive , 43b, 71
initial , 43b
on maxillary lateral incisor , f
moderate , 43b
at pits and issures , 60
progression of , 61
restoration of ,
at root surfaces , 61
at smooth enamel surfaces , 60, 60 f
Caries Management by Risk Assessment
(CAMBRA)
movement , 97–99
risk assessment with , 70
CarieScan PRO ,
Carolina bridge , , f
Casein phosphopeptide (CPP) , 85
Cast
adjusting of , e142– e145
burnishing of , e151f
gypsum , e139
occluding of , e148– e150, e149f–e150f
occlusion of , e145, e147f
polishing of , e142– e145
removing , e152, e152f
seating of , e145– e152, e146f, e148f
split, e136
trying-in , e145
working
in cast metal restoration , e136– e139
completing , e136– e139, e137f
Cast-metal alloys
dental rehabilitation with , e94
strength of , e95
Cast-metal restorations , – , f,
e94–e154
abutment teeth in , e110
advantages of , e95
anesthesia for , e95
cementation in , e152– e154, e153f–e154f
considerations for temporary restorations
before , e96, e96f
contraindications to , e95
cost of , e95
direct temporary restoration and , e130
disadvantages of , e95
for endodontically treated teeth , e94,
e125– e126
inal impression in , e130– e134
indications for , e94–e95
indirect , –
indirect temporary restoration and ,
e128– e130, e128f–e130f
initial procedures for , e95–e96
large, e94
material qualities for , e94
modiications for esthetics in , e125
occlusal step , e97–e99
occlusion, evaluation for , e95, e96f
onlay , e116– e126
polyvinyl siloxane impression and , e134,
e134f
repair in , e154
restorative techniques for , e126– e154
temporary restoration for , e127– e128
tooth preparations for , e96–e126
Casting investments , – , f– f
Cavit , 278Cavitated caries lesion , 43b
Cavity ,
Cavity liners , – , , f
Cavity sealer ,
Cavity varnish ,
Cavosurface angle ,
Cavosurface margin , , f
Cellular cementum , 10–11
Cellulose wafer, isolation with , e45
Celtra Duo (Dentsply Sirona) , , f
Cement
conventional glass ionomer , –
dental , –
glass ionomer, in cast metal restorations ,
e101, e125
resin
light-cured ,
self-adhesive , f
shade of , –
veneer application and , f– f
resin-modiied glass ionomer , – ,
475f
nonvital bleaching and ,
silicate ,
Cemental tear, periodontal health and , ,
421f
Cementoblasts , 10
Cementodentinal junction , 11
Cementoenamel junction, enamel formation
and, 2
Cementum , 10–11, 11 f, , f
Central fossa occlusal line , 16
Central groove , 16
Central pattern generator , 38
Centric cusps , 26
Centric occlusion , 26
Centric relation , 26
Centric relation occlusion , 26
Ceramic based commercial shade guides ,
– , f
Ceramics
adhesive ,
high-strength ,
leucite-reinforced glass ,
polycrystalline , –
pressed, veneer with , , f
resilient , –
resin-matrix ,
veneer with ,
zirconia and ,
Cerasmart (GC America) ,
CEREC system , – , f, f– f
CEREC zirconia , –
Cervical caries lesion, Geristore for , , f
Cervical enamel projections (CEPs),
periodontal health and , , f
Cervical resorption , , f
Cervident ,
C-factor. see Coniguration factor
Chair, dental, position of , e23
Chairside CAD/CAM systems , – ,
434f, t
clinical wor klow , – , f– f
restorative
clinical longevity of , –
materials , – , t, f– f
Charge couple detector (CCD) ,
Cheeks, precautions for, cutting and , e20Chemical bonding, of porcelain , , f
Chemical cure composite resin , , f
Chemotherapy, caries risk and , 77
Chewing
condyle point during , 27
cycle of , 38
at incisor point , 30
Children
caries risk assessment for , 75
rubber dam used for , e43, e44f
Chisels
application of , e4–e5
bin-angle , e4
example of , e3f
blade design for , e3f
examples of , e3f
straight , e4
example of , e3f
Wedelstaedt , e4
in direct gold restorations , e79, e82f,
e86, e87f
example of , e3f
Chlorhexidine
for dental caries , 84, 84 t
as dentin bonding agent ,
as protease inhibitor ,
Chroma
as color dimension , –
as element of color , –
Chromatic assimilation ,
Chromatic induction ,
Chromium-cobalt alloys ,
Class I amalgam restorations , f, –
carving in , , f
clinical procedures for ,
condensation of amalgam in ,
contouring of ,
desensitizer placement in , , f,
example of , f
extensive , f
inishing of , – , f,
insertion of amalgam in , ,
matrix placement in , , –
preparations for , – , f– f
restorative technique for , –
tooth preparation for , – , f–
329f, –
tooth preparation outline forms in , f,
328f
Class II amalgam restorations , f, –
abutment teeth and , , f
adjoining , – , f
burnishing in , – , f
carving in , , – , f
clinical procedures for ,
condensation of amalgam in , – ,
366f
desensitizer placement in ,
diagram of , f
entry for , f
example of , f
inishing of , , f
for mandibular irst molar , , f
for mandibular irst premolar , – ,
349f– f,
for mandibular second premolar , ,
352f
matrix placement in , 355Caries lesion (Continued)
Index
for maxillar y irst molar , – , f,
, f
for maxillary irst premolar , – , f
for maxillary second molar , – , f
occlusal outline form of , – ,
340f– f
occlusal step for , f
open proximal contact in , , f
outline form of , f
unusual , , f
partial denture and ,
polishing of , , f
precontoured sectional matrix strips , ,
365f
proximal outline form of , – ,
342f– f
quadrant dentistry in , –
restorative technique in , –
rigid-material supported sectional matrix
for, – , f– f
for rotated teeth , – , f
slot preparation in , , f
tooth preparation for , , –
two-surface ,
universal matrix for , – , f– f
Class III amalgam restorations , –
carving in , , f
condensation in , , f
desensitizer placement in ,
matrix placement in , , f
procedures of ,
restorative technique for ,
tooth preparation for , – , f– f
Class V amalgam restorations , – ,
377f– f
carving in , – , f
contouring in , f
desensitizer placement in , –
inishing in , – , f
insertion of amalgam in , – , f
line angles in , – , f– f
matrix placement in , , f– f
polishing in , – , f– f
procedures of , – , f– f
restorative technique for , –
tooth preparation for , – ,
379f– f
Class VI amalgam restorations , –
preparation of , f
Clearance angle, bur design and , e15
Clearil Bond System Fc,
Clearil New Bond ,
Clearil S3 Bond Plus ,
Clearil SE Bond ,
Clearil Universal Bond , –
Clenching, muscle involved in , 22–26
Clinical crown , –
Clinical examination
of amalgam restorations , –
for caries , 97– , 98 f
of composite restorations ,
diagnostic study models for ,
esthetic appearance , 96–97
of implant-supported restorations ,
of implants ,
of indirect metal restorations ,
preparation for , 97Collagen
acid etching of , f
efect of phosphoric acid on ,
type I, in enamel , –
Collagenase, in dentin ,
Collar, preparation of , e124
Color
elements of , , –
modiiers of , , f
surround efects and blending of ,
tooth , – , f
value of , –
Color corrected lighting, use of , – ,
211f
Color deiciency ,
Color dimensions , –
Color Education and T raining Programs ,
216t
Color Matching Curriculum (CMC) ,
Color matching instruments , – ,
208f– f
Color rendering index (CRI) ,
Color triplet (observer situation) , , f
Color vision , , f
checking of ,
Commercial shade guides , –
Community water system, luoridated , 80–81
Compatibility, of restorative materials ,
Complementary afterimage, of color ,
Complex amalgam restoration , –
advantages of ,
age and health in ,
contouring in , –
contraindications to ,
desensitizer placement in ,
disadvantages of ,
economics and , , f
inishing in , –
foundations of , – , f
indications for , – , f
insertion in , –
matrix placement in , –
occlusion and ,
pin-retained , –
considerations in ,
factors afecting ,
placement factors and technique in ,
– , f– f, t
problems with , – , f– f
types of , – , f– f, t
resistance form for , – , f
restorative technique for , –
retention form for , –
role of tooth , – , f
slot-retained , – , f– f
tooth preparation for , –
cusp coverage , – , f
mandibular irst molar , – , f
mandibular irst premolar , f
maxillary irst molar , , f
tooth status and prognosis and ,
Complex motion, mandibular , 24f, 27
Composite
advantages of ,
clinical procedures for , –
contraindications to , –
diastema closure with , f
diastema treatment with , 272direct, clinical technique for , –
disadvantages of ,
inishing of , f
in Class I direct composite restorations ,
–
in Class II composite restoration ,
– , f
in Class IV direct composite
restorations ,
in Class V direct composite restorations ,
–
hardness value of , e18t
indications for , –
insertion of
in Class I composite restoration ,
– , f– f
in Class II composite restoration , ,
235f
in Class III composite restoration ,
– , f
in Class IV composite restoration ,
in Class V composite restoration ,
light activation of
in Class II composite restoration , ,
235f
in Class III composite restoration ,
– , f
in Class IV composite restoration ,
in Class V composite restoration ,
light-cured
bleaching and , , f
for bonding all-porcelain pontics , e68
for bonding natural tooth pontics ,
e57–e58
for denture tooth pontic , e58
for diastema closure , –
for direct veneer , f
microill ,
modulus of elasticity of , –
nanoill ,
for open embrasure ,
operating site
isolation of ,
preparation of ,
polishing of
in Class I direct composite restorations ,
–
in Class II composite restoration ,
– , f
in Class III composite restoration ,
–
in Class IV composite restoration ,
in Class V direct composite restorations ,
–
polymerization shrinkage stress of ,
problems in , –
processed, indirect veneer and ,
resin-based, factors afecting
polymerization of , –
shade selection of ,
inaccurate ,
tooth preparation for, Class I , – ,
224f– f
veneer with , –
Composite resin block materials , ,
446Class II amalgam restorations (Continued) Composite (Continued)
Index
Composite resin materials , –
bulk-ill ,
classiication of , –
according to iller particle size , –
according to polymerization reaction
initiation ,
composition of , – , f
low shrinkage , –
restorative, manipulative variables with ,
–
summary and conclusion about ,
Composite resins , –
bases and cavity liners in ,
history of ,
tunnel tooth preparations for ,
Composite restoration. see also Composite
adhesive in ,
advantages of ,
Class I direct
clinical technique for , , – ,
223f
contouring and polishing in ,
229f– f
initial clinical procedures of , –
restorative technique of , –
tooth preparation for , – ,
224f– f
Class II direct
clinical technique for , f, –
extensive and foundations of , – ,
238f
initial clinical procedures of ,
matrix application in , –
restorative technique , –
tooth preparation of , f, – ,
231f– f
Class III direct
clinical technique for , , –
initial clinical procedures of , –
restorative technique of , –
tooth preparation of , – ,
241f– f, f
Class IV direct ,
clinical technique for , , f,
–
example of , f
initial clinical procedures of ,
restorative technique of , –
tooth preparation for , – ,
249f– f
Class V direct
clinical technique for , , – ,
253f
initial clinical procedures of ,
restorative , –
tooth preparation for , – , f,
256f– f
Class VI direct, clinical technique for , ,
clinical examination of ,
conservative, clinical technique for
preventive resin and , – ,
222f– f
contouring problems in ,
contraindications to , –
disadvantages of ,
inishing problems in ,
general considerations for , –220glass ionomer, clinical techniques for ,
–
initial clinical procedures for , –
missing proximal contact in , –
operator factors in ,
repairing ,
shade selection inaccuracy in ,
treatment with ,
voids in ,
white line adjacent to enamel margin in ,
–
Compression bonding, of porcelain ,
Compressive strength
of amalgam , , t
of dental materials , – , f
Computer-assisted design, computer-assisted
machining (CAD/CAM) ,
chairside , – , f, t
clinical wor klow , – , f– f
restorative materials , – , t,
444f– f
research relative to , –
restorations, tooth preparation principles
for,
three sequences in ,
Condensation, of amalgam ,
Condensers , e70, e71f
in Class V tooth preparation and
restoration , e79
in gold foil, compaction of , e72
hand , e91f
line of force , e72f
monangle , e86, e91f
oblique-faced , e72f
ofset , e86, e90f
Condylar guidance
horizontal , 32, 34 f
lateral , 35f
Condyle point , 27
Cones, in color vision ,
Coniguration factor (C-factor) , ,
–
Conservative composite restoration, clinical
technique for preventive resin and ,
– , f– f
Conservative esthetic procedures , –
artistic elements , –
clinical considerations for ,
examples of , f
for tooth contours and contacts , –
Conservative intraenamel preparation ,
–
Contemporary ceramic materials , – ,
505f– f
indications for ,
Contouring, cosmetic , , f, f
Contrast, chromatic induction of ,
Convenience form
for Class III composite restoration , f
for Class III tooth preparation and
restoration , e84
for Class V tooth preparation and
restoration , e76
for direct gold restorations , e73
Conventional amalgam , , f
Conventional glass ionomer cements ,
–475Conventional impression ,
Coolants, for instruments , e19–e20
Corn cobs, plaque formation and , 44f–46f
Coronal pulp , 6
Correlated color temperature (CCT) ,
Corrosion , , f
Cosmetic contouring , , f, f
Cotton roll
composite restoration and use of ,
examples of , e46f
isolation with , e45
placement of , e45, e46f–e47f
Counterbevel , e113, e116f, e120f
Coves
for Class III composite restoration ,
retention, for tooth preparation ,
CPP . see Casein phosphopeptide
Craze lines , 8
enamel ,
Creep, as material property ,
Cross-linking ,
Crown , – , f– f, f– f
caries development at , 51f
fracture of, example of , f
full
onlay and , e116
tooth preparations for , e116
lengthening , – , f
for lingual smooth surfaces afected by
caries , e114– e115
porcelain , –
success rates of ,
CS , –
Cusps , 16
capping of , f
in cast metal restoration , e113– e114,
e114f–e115f
fracture of , – , f
functional , 16, 20–22, 21 f
holding , 20
incline of , 20
nonfunctional , 16, 22, 23 f
posterior , 19f, 20
reduction of , f
in cast metal onlays , e116– , e118f
in cast metal restoration , e113, e116f
tooth preparation and , – , f
ridges, issures in, cast metal restoration
and, e110– e113
shape of , 20
Custom lingual matrix , f
Custom shade guides , – , f– f
Cutting
abrasive , e19, e19f
bladed , e18, e18f
diamond instrument for , e16f
ear precautions during , e20–e21
equipment for , e7–e8
evaluation of , e18
eye precautions and , e20
hand instruments for , e1–e22
high-speed , e7–e8
inhalation precautions during , e21
instrument velocity and , e7
low-speed , e7
pulpal precautions and , e19–e20
recommendations for , e19
rotary speed ranges for , e7–e8Composite restoration (Continued)
Index
soft tissue precautions and , e20, e20f
watts of power for , e7
Cuttlebone
abrasion with , e17–e18
hardness value of , e17–e18
Cycle of re-restoration ,
Cytotoxic drugs, xerostomia from , 59t
D
Dead tracts , 51f
Decongestants, xerostomia from , 59t
Degassing , e69–e70
DEJ. see Dentinoenamel junction
Demineralization
caries and , 40
remineralization and, balance in , 40, 42 f
Densite or improved dental stone , t,
Dental anatomy , clinical signiicance of , 1–39
Dental arch, tooth alignment and , 16, 17 f
Dental caries. see Caries
Dental curing lights
argon-ion lasers as , – , f– f
batteries and ,
budget , , f
development of , –
electromagnetic risk from ,
emission from, radiometric terminology
for, t
general recommendations for ,
irradiance of, distribution of , – ,
187f
light emitting diode technology and ,
– , f
output from, monitoring of , – ,
187f
plasma-arc lights as , f, – , f,
184f
quartz-tungsten-halogen lights as ,
– , f– f
soft-start exposures and ,
stress development during polymerization
and,
“turbo” light guides in ,
tip design for , , f
Dental disease , –
Dental loss
retainer tied with , e29f
rubber dam anchored with , e30
rubber dam application and , e33–34,
e34f
surgeon’s knot and , e45f
Dental history. see also Medical history
of patient , 96
Dental photography , – , t
Dental plaque. see Plaque
Dental shade guides ,
Dental stone , t, , e139
Dental tape, rubber dam anchored with ,
e30
Dentin
acid etching of , f, –
adhesion to , –
clinical factors in ,
adhesives for
indications for , –
in vitro studies on, relevance of ,
air-dried , – , fbonding to , – , f, t
challenges in , –
chlorhexidine and ,
matrix metalloproteinases and ,
new developments in ,
role of proteins in , –
caries lesion in , 43b, 64–69
bacteria in , 50t
cross section of , 67f
zones of , 69
caries progression in, longitudinal section
of, 57f
carious ,
inner , 69
cavitation of , 52f
collagen ibrils in ,
composition of , 8, f
coronal , 9–10
cutting of , e1
demineralized , 40
pH of , 89
enamel and , 5, 5 f, 8–9
etched
collapse of , f
micrograph of , f
irm, 69,
formation of , 6–7
hard, 69
hardness of , 8, e18t
hypersensitivity of ,
infected , 69,
removal of , e101– e104
intrinsic discoloration of ,
leathery , 43b, 69, 89
matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) in ,
moist , f
necrotic , 69
peritubular , –
demineralization of ,
permeability of , 9–10, 9 f–10f, –
pH of , 40
acid afected by ,
primary , 6–7, 7 f, 43b
proximal box in, for cast metal restoration ,
e99–e100, e100f
reactionary , 10
remineralization of , 66–69
reparative , 10, 11 f, 66f
resin adhesion to , t
resin bonding to , – , f
resin interface with , f– f
stresses at , –
rewetting of , –
rinsing after etching, example of , f
root canal, adhesion to , –
sclerotic , 43b, 66–69,
bonding to ,
secondary , 8, 9 f, 43b
sensitivity of , 9, 9 f
slot in , e124– e125
soft,
surface area of , 7
tertiary , 10, 43 b
of tooth color , , f
translucent , 69
transparent , 10, 10 f
Dentin bonding agents (DBAs) , 479Dentin phosphoprotein (DPP) ,
Dentin sclerosis , 8
Dentinal crystallites , 8
Dentinal luid , 9–10
Dentinal hypersensitivity ,
Dentinal tubules , 7, 7 f–9f, , f
cutting precautions and , e20
dentinal luid in , 9–10
Dentinal wall ,
Dentinoenamel junction (DEJ) , 5, 5 f
caries at , 60
enamel demineralization in , 64
Dentinogenesis , 6, 7 f
Dentinogenesis imperfecta ,
Dentistry
development of polymerization strategies
for, –
evidence-based , 95
operative. see Operative dentistry
restorative, trends in , –
Dentitions , 1
Depth cut, for cast metal onlay , e116– e119,
e118f
Depth of focus ,
Desensitization
dentin adhesives and ,
for tooth preparation , –
Deuteranomaly ,
DIAGNOdent device ,
Diametral tensile strength, of dental
materials , –
Diamond abrasive instrument. see
Instruments, diamond abrasive
Diamonds
hardness value of , e17–e18
particle factors of , e17
types of, in diamond abrasive instrument ,
e15
Diastema
cast metal restoration for , e94
closure of , , f, f
cosmetic contouring and , f
conservative alteration for ,
correction of , –
full veneer and , –
illusion of tooth dimension and , –
large,
midline , f
multiple, treatment of , , f
Dicor, ceramic restoration by , , f
Die stone , e136, e136f
Dies
removable , e136
working, in cast metal restoration ,
e136– e139
Diet, dental caries and , 60
risk assessment of , 71
treatment of , 77–79
Dietary counseling , 77–79
Diferential acid attack ,
Difusion adhesion ,
Digital dentistry, in operative dentistry ,
–
CAD/CAM systems
chairside , – , f, t
research relative to , –
restorations, tooth preparation principles
for, 435Cutting (Continued) Dentin (Continued)
Index
clinical application of ,
crowns , – , f– f
digital impressions, accuracy of , –
inlays and onlays , – , f– f
Digital impression systems ,
accuracy of , –
Dimensional change, of dental material ,
Diopter single-lens loupes ,
Dipentaerythritol penta-acrylate
monophosphate , t,
Direct gold. see also Gold
cohesion of , e69–e70
compaction of, diagrammatic order of ,
e72f
degassing of , e69–e70
materials and manufacture of , e69
micrographs of , e71f
principles of compaction of , e70–e72
restorations of , e69–e93
tooth preparation for , e73
types of , e69
Direct rear position , e24, e25f
Disc-condyle complex , 22
Discoloration
extrinsic , – , f
etiology , –
treatment of , , f
intrinsic , – , f
etiology of , –
treatment of , , f
root canal therapy and ,
Disinfectant sprays, light curing and ,
Disk, abrasiv e, inishing composites with ,
, f
Disocclusion , 37
Dispersalloy , , f, t
Distal wedge , , f
Ditch cut, proximal, in cast metal restoration ,
e99–e100
Ditching , , f
Diuretics, xerostomia from , 59t
Do no harm ,
Dovetail, for cast metal restorations , e98
Drugs, salivation controlled with , e49
Dry mouth. see also Xerostomia
medications causing , 59t, 89
salivary analysis and , 71–75
Dual-cure composite , – , , f
Ductile fracture , e18
Dynamic occlusal relationship , 16
“Dynamic seating” technique , –
Dysmineralization, microabrasion and ,
E
E4D Dentist System ,
Ear, precautions for, cutting procedures and ,
e20–e21
Economic status, caries risk assessment and ,
71
Ectoderm, enamel and , 2
Edge angle, bur design and , e15
Education status, caries risk assessment and ,
71
Eight-chamber chewing simulator , f
Elastic modulus , , f
Electrical properties, in dentistry , , fElectrical shock ,
Electro-Mallet , e70, e72–e73
Electromagnetic energy , –
Electromagnetic radiation, materials
interaction with , f
Electromagnetic spectrum , – , f
Electrostatic adhesion ,
Elevator muscles , 22–26
E.max ,
Embrasure , 12–14
alterations of , –
correct anatomic form of , 14, 14 f
correct relationships of , 13–14, 13 f
facial , 12f
gingival , 12–13, 13 f
incisal ,
closing of , f
loss of , , f
lingual , 12f, 13–14
reshaping of ,
treatment of , –
Embrasure form
gingival ,
incisal ,
Enamel , 2–5
acid etching of , , f– f
adaptation reaction of , 64f
adhesion to , –
bond strength in ,
bonding to , – , – ,
477f– f
caries lesion in , 43b, 61–64, 62 f–63f
bacteria in , 50t
clinical signiicance of , 64t
cross section of , 61f–62f
caries progression in, longitudinal section
of, 57f
cavitation of , 64
clinical characteristics of , 63t
composition of , f
cutting of , e1
demineralization of , 40, 49 f
discolored, veneer and ,
fault in, cast metal restoration for , e99f
gnarled , 3, 3 f
hardness of , 5, 5 f, e18t
hypoplasia of
direct full veneer and , –
example of , f
intrinsic discoloration of ,
marginal, white line adjacent to , –
maturation of , 4
mottled , 80–81
permeability of , 4, 5 f
pH of , 40
plaque bioilm and , 44f–46f
posteruptive changes in , 81f
prismless , 3
proximal box in, cast metal restoration
and, e99–e100, e100f
smooth surfaces of
bioilm on , 49–50, 51 f
caries initiation on , 60, 60 f
solubility of , 4–5
structure of , 3
thickness of , 2–3
of tooth color , – , f
tooth preparation for , , fEnamel cuticle , 3–4
Enamel hatchets , e3f, e4
Enamel hypocalciication, nonhereditary , ,
104f
Enamel lamellae , 4
Enamel margins, beveled, for tooth
preparation ,
Enamel pearls, periodontal health and ,
Enamel projections, cervical , , f
Enamel rods , 3, 4 f
plaque bioilm and , 44f–46f
in tooth preparation , – , f
Enamel spindles , 6, 7 f
Enamel tufts , 4, 5 f
Enamel wall ,
Enameloplasty , , f, b
for cast metal restorations , e97–e98,
e110– e112, e112f–e113f
Enamelysin, in dentin ,
Enamic (Vita) ,
Endodontics ,
Endogenous luids, erosion due to , – ,
105f
Energy, electromagnetic , –
Equipment. see also Instruments
air abrasion , e8, e8f–e9f
laser, e8
eye precautions and , e20
powered cutting , e7–e8
rotary-powered cutting , e7–e8
for tooth preparation , e1–e22
Erosion , – , f
treatment of ,
Erosive tooth wear , –
Eruption, altered passive, gingivectomy for ,
, f
Esthetics
cast metal restoration and , e95
Class II preparation for , e108
Class V composite restoration and ,
clinical examination of , 96–97
concerns, treatment of , –
modiications to, cast metal restoration for ,
e125
Etch-and-rinse adhesives , –
Etch-and-rinse technique , – , f
Ethyl acetate, denture tooth pontic and , e58
Ethyl-silicate investments , –
Ethylenediamine tetra-acetic acid , , t
Eutectic mixture ,
Evacuators
high-volume , e46–e48
position of , e46–e47, e48f
retraction with , e48, e49f
Evidence-based dentistry , 95, , f
Examination. see Patient, examination of
Excavators
angle former , e4
application of , e4
examples of , e3f
hoe, e4
spoon , e3f, e4
ExciTE , –
Excursion, mandibular, muscles involved in ,
26
Exposures, soft-start ,
Extension for prevention ,
External line angle , 123Digital dentistry, in operative dentistry
(Continued)
Index
External wall , , f
Eye, precautions for, cutting procedures and ,
e20
Eye protection, for blue light hazard ,
E-Z Gold , e69–e70, e74
in Class V tooth preparation and
restoration , e79
compaction of , e72
technique for , e73
F
Face, of hand instrument , e1
Facial crossbite , 20
Facial cusp ridges , 20
Facial occlusal line , 16
Facial surface groove extension , e108– e110
False negative, patient diagnosis and ,
False positive, patient diagnosis and ,
Farnsworth-Munsell test ,
Fatigue testing , – , f
Feldspathic porcelain, indirect veneer and ,
Ferrier separator , e85–e86
Files
application of , e5
example of , e5f
Filler, refractive indices of ,
Filler particles
in composite resin , , f– f
wavelength of light and, interaction
between , – , f
Finishing strip
in composite restoration ,
diastema treatment and , f,
Fissures , 2–3, 3 f
in cusp ridges, cast metal restoration and ,
e110– e113
lingual occlusal, cast metal restoration and ,
e110– e112
Fixed prosthodontics ,
Flare
facial secondary , e105– e106
lingual primary , e104– e105, e106f
lingual secondary , e104– e105, e106f
preparation of, in cast metal restoration ,
e104– e108
secondary, in cast metal restoration , e107
Flexural strength, of dental materials , ,
458f
Flossing, caries and
development of , 50, 57 f
prevention of , 79
Flowable base bulk-ill composites , ,
Flowable composite resin materials ,
Fluorescence, optical properties and ,
Fluoride
enamel and , 4–5
exposure to
caries management and , 80–83, 82 t, 84t
caries risk and , 77t
release of, from glass ionomer , –
rinses with, self-administered , 82
stannous , 82
teeth stained by ,
topical application of , 82
varnishes , 82
Fluoride ion
anticaries efect of , 81
in saliva , 63–64Fluorosis , 80–81
bleaching for ,
generalized, veneer for ,
microabrasion for , , f
severe, example of , f– f
teeth discoloration from ,
Forceps
rubber dam , e30f
rubber dam retainer , e29
Fossae, occlusions and , 16
Fracture
amalgam restorations and , , f,
brittle , e18
crown lengthening for , , f
ductile , e18
endodontically treated teeth and ,
e125– e126
gingivectomy for ,
Fracture lines, in amalgam restoration , ,
103f
Fracture toughness, dental materials and ,
– , f
Frame, for rubber dam , e27, e27f, e32, e32f
Free gingiva , 15, , f
Free radical
generation of , –
polymerization of, methacrylate-based ,
, f
activation and initiation of ,
propagation of ,
termination of ,
Fuji IX ,
Full-arch impression, cast metal restoration
and, e126, e128f
Full-body bulk-ill composites , ,
Functional shift , 26
Furcation, periodontal health and , – ,
419f– f
G
Galvanism ,
Garnet
abrasion with , e17–e18
hardness value of , e17–e18
Gastroesophageal r elux disease (GERD),
erosion and , –
Gauze sponges, example of , e46f
Gelatinase, in dentin ,
Geristore , , f
Gingiva , , f– f
embrasure form of ,
sensitive, bleaching as cause of ,
Gingival areas, light-curing of ,
Gingival biotypes , , f– f
Gingival crevice, bacteria in , 50t
Gingival display , – , f
excessive , f
Gingival loor
in cast metal restorations , e99–e100
extension of, in cast metal restoration ,
e110
Gingival health, Class V composite
restoration and ,
Gingival margin trimmer , e3f, e4–e5
Gingival sulcus , 15
open, in cast metal restoration , e105f
tissue retraction and , e132
Gingival unit , 15Gingivectomy , –
Gingivitis ,
periodontics for , –
plaque and , 79
Ginglymoarthrodial joint , 22
Glass ionomer
clinical techniques for , – , f
conventional , f
dental cements/luting agents , –
conventional , –
light-cured, in cast metal restorations , e101
materials, types of , –
resin-modiied. see Resin-modiied glass
ionomer
restorative , –
cavity liners , –
materials , , – , f– f
polyacid modiied composites
(compomers) ,
reinforced ,
tunnel tooth preparations for ,
Glass-matrix ceramics , –
Glasses, blue light iltering ,
Glenoid fossa , 22
Gliding contacts , 16
Gloss, optical properties and ,
Glucosyltransferase, luoride ion and , 81
GLUMA desensitizer ,
Gluma system ,
Glutaraldehyde, desensitization and ,
Glycerophosphoric acid dimethacrylate ,
– , t
Goggles, protective , e20
Gold. see also Direct gold
powdered , e69
principles of compaction in , e70–e72
restorations with , e69–e93
Gold alloys , – , f
hardness value of , e17–e18
types of , , t
Gold casting ,
Gold crowns, success rates of ,
Gold foil , e69
book of , e70f
box of , e70f
in Class I tooth preparation and
restoration , e74
in Class V tooth preparation and
restoration , e79
compacted , e72f
compaction of , e83f
technique for , e72–e73
degassing of , e71f
Gold foil restoration , – , f
Gold pellets , e69
degassing of , e71f
Gold-plus-platinum-metals content , e94
Gold standard, patient diagnosis and ,
Golden proportion , –
Groove
for Class III composite restoration ,
extension , f
in cast metal restoration , e108– e110
gingival retention , , f
palatoradicular ,
Grotthuss-Draper law ,
Group function , 37
Gummy smile , f
Index
Gypsum bonded investments ,
components of
binder ,
modiier ,
refractory ,
expansion associated with ,
Gypsum products , –
classiication of , – , t, f
nature of , , f
selection and manipulation of , –
H
H2 antagonists, xerostomia from , 59t
Hamp classiication ,
Handheld “dental radiometers” , – ,
187f
Handheld shade matching lights , f
Handle, of hand instrument , e1
Handpieces
air-driven , e7
noise from , e21
soft-tissue precautions for , e20
variable control of , e8
description of , e7
electric , e7
soft-tissue precautions for , e20
electric motor-driven , e7
friction-grip contra-angle, shank design for ,
e9f
latch angle, shank design for , e9f
shank design for , e9
sterilization of , e8
straight, shank design for , e9f
Hardness testing, of dental material , ,
460f
Hatchet
bibeveled , e3f, e86, e88f
enamel , e3f, e4
ordinary , e4
Head, design of, for handpiece, in rotary
cutting instruments , e10
Headlamp, in operative dentistry , e24–e25
Health, general, caries risk and , 77, 77 t
Heat
blade cutting and , e18
soft tissue damage and ,
Heat hardening, for cast gold restoration ,
Heat softening, for cast gold restoration ,
Heat treatment, for cast gold restoration ,
High copper amalgam ,
High expansion stone , t,
High-gold alloys , , e94
biocompatibility of , e95
High noble alloys ,
High-strength ceramics ,
Hinge axis , 27
Histology, clinical signiicance of , 1–39
Hoe, in Class V tooth preparation and
restoration , e82f
Hue
as color dimension ,
as element of color , –
Hunter-Schreger bands , 3, 4 f
Hybrid composite resin materials , – ,
472f
Hybrid dental prosthesis , , f
Hydrochloric acid, microabrasion and ,
Hydrocolloid, impression with , 485Hydrodynamic theory , 9,
Hydr oluoric acid , , f
porcelain etching with ,
veneer and , , f
Hydrogen peroxide
bleaching with ,
nonvital bleaching with ,
Hydroxyapatite , 3, 14
bonding and ,
in enamel , –
2-Hydroxyethyl methacrylate , , t
Hygroscopic expansion, gypsum bonded
investments and ,
Hyperemia, overcontoured veneer and ,
Hypnotics, xerostomia from , 59t
Hypocalciication, clinical examination of ,
– , f
Hyposalivation, radiation-induced , 61
I
iBOND Self-Etch ,
ICDAS. see International Caries Detection
and Assessment System
Imaging, esthetic ,
Imbrication lines of Pickerill , 3
Immune system, caries risk and , 77
Immunization, for caries management ,
83–84
Implant prosthodontics ,
Implants, clinical examination of ,
Impression
alginate, for cast metal restoration , e128f
for cast metal restoration , e96f
preoperative , e129
removing and inspecting , e136f
techniques for , e134
Impression material , – , f
alginate , e96
classiication of , – , f
manipulation, principles of
adequate mixing ,
control of bulk , – , f
disinfection ,
polyvinyl siloxane , , f
pouring ,
putty-wash impression techniques , ,
490f
to tray, adhesion of , , f
viscosity control ,
properties of ,
accuracy , –
dimensional stability , – , f,
486t
economic factors ,
elastic recovery ,
low and lexibility ,
hydrophilicity , –
patient comfort ,
workability , , f
Impression plaster , , t
In vitro studies, for adhesion, relevance of ,
Incident irradiance ,
Incisal biting , 26
Incisal reduction index , – , f
Incisor overlap , 18–20, 18 f
Incisor point , 27
Incisor point tracing , 31–32Incisors , 1, 2 f
all-porcelain pontic for , e66
central
composite for diastema of , f
diastema of , f
cervical retainer placement on , e41
embrasure form of ,
embrasure of ,
closing of , f
loss of , , f
fractured, esthetic treatment of ,
irregular edge of , f
mandibular
Class III tooth preparation and
restoration for , e85, e86f
denture tooth pontic for , e58
splint-and-bridge combination for ,
e63–e64
splinting of , e52, e53f
maxillary
bridge for , e60–e61
in Class III tooth preparation and
restoration , e81–e84
denture tooth pontic for , e58
diastema of ,
natural tooth pontic for , e56, e57f
splinting of , e52, e55
maxillary central, veneer for , f
recontouring of , f
reshaping of , f
rubber dam hole size for , e35, e36f
staining of, example of , f
width-to-length ratio of ,
Incremental striae of Retzius , 3
Infection, bacterial, dentin adhesive systems
and,
Infection control, in light curing , – ,
189f
Iniltrants , 85, 86 f
Infrared radiation ,
Inhalation, patient protection from , e21
Inlays , – , f
distolingual , e114– e115
for lingual smooth surfaces afected by
caries , e114– e115
for maxillary molar , e117f
splitting force of , e95
tooth preparation and ,
tooth preparation for , e97–e116
for esthetics , e108
mesioocclusodistal , e108
modiications in , e108– e116
Instruments. see also Equipment
abrasive , e17–e18
classiication of , e17
cutting action of , e19, e19f
materials used in , e17–e18
for Class V tooth preparation and
restoration , e79, e80f–e81f
coated abrasive , e17
coolants for , e19–e20
cutting
formulas for , e2
hazards with , e19–e21
diamond abrasive , e15–e17
classiication of , e16
diamond particle factors and , e17
head shape of , e16–e17
Index
size of , e16–e17
terminology for , e15, e16f
diamond cutting , e16f, e16t
diamond inishing ,
for direct gold restorations , e74, e74f
discoid-cleoid , e5, e5f
double-ended , e2f
exchange of, between operator and
assistant , e24
ine-grit diamond, for cast metal
restoration , e101, e107– e108
hand
applications of , e4–e5
bevels of , e2–e4
categories of , e1
for Class V tooth preparation and
restoration , e82f
classiication for , e1–e4
for cutting , e1–e22
design of , e1, e2f
formulas for , e2
grasps for , e5–e6
guards for , e7
names of , e2
rests for , e6–e7
techniques for , e5–e7
terminology for , e1–e4
molded abrasive , e17
rotary cutting , e9–e18
design characteristics of , e9–e10, e9f
for rubber dam , e27–e30
with three-number and four-number
instrument formulas, examples of , e3f
for tooth preparation , e1–e22
Integrating sphere , , f
Interactions, of restorative materials , ,
205f
Interarch tooth relationships , 18–20, 18 f
Intercuspal contact , 2f, 16
Interdental gingiva ,
Interdental papilla , 15
Intermetallic compound ,
Internal line angle ,
Internal wall , , f
International Caries Detection and
Assessment System (ICDAS) , 97–99,
98f
International Standards Organization (ISO),
bur numbering system from , e13
Interocclusal record
cast metal restoration and , e113– e114,
e126– e130
maximum intercuspation , e126– e127,
e127f
inal impression and , e139
use of , e139
wax, cast metal restoration and , e113– e114
Iodine, for dental caries , 84t
Ion,
Ionomer, glass. see Glass ionomer
IPS e.max , , f
IPS Empress ,
IPS EmpressCAD (Ivoclar) restoration , ,
445f
Iridescence, optical properties and ,
Irreversible pulpitis , 10
Irrigation device , 80, 90Ishihara test , , f
ISO. see International Standards
Organization
Isolation
amalgam restorations and ,
in Class V amalgam restoration ,
goals of , e26
of operating site, of amalgam restorations ,
rubber dam , e26–e45
application of , e31b–e35b
removal of , e39b–e40b
Isolite , e26
Ivocerin, spectral absorption proile of , ,
174f
J
Jaw closure , 22–26
Jaw opening , 22
Journal of the American Medical Association ,
K
Kanamycin, for dental caries , 84t
Keyes-Jordan diagram , 40, 41 f
Knife
amalgam , e5
application of , e5
inishing, example of , e5f
gold, e5
Knoop hardness value , e18t
L
Labial frenum, diastema and ,
Lactobacilli
analysis of , 75
bioilm and , 48
chemical agents for , 84
occlusal caries and , 66f
oral hygiene and , 79–80
Lactoferrin, in saliva , 58
Lactoperoxidase, in saliva , 58
Lambertian r electance ,
Lamina propria , 14
Laser equipment , e8
eye precautions and , e20
Lasers
argon-ion , – , f– f
deined ,
Lateral motion, mandibular , 24f, 27–28
Lava Ultimate (3M) , , f
LED. see Light emitting diode
Left front position , e23
Left position , e23
Left rear position , e23
Leucite-reinforced glass ceramic ,
Leucite-reinforced IPS Empress system , ,
506t
glass ceramic crowns , , f
Light, delivery of, factors afecting ,
Light and observer method, setting of , ,
213f
Light beam uniformity , – , f
Light cure composite resin , , f
Light curing , –
blue light blocking protection in , – ,
194f
blue light hazard and , – , fof dental resins in the mouth, practical
considerations of , –
depth of ,
electromagnetic risk from ,
evaluation of light output in , –
exposure time for ,
general recommendations for ,
hands-on training for , –
health-related issues in , –
how to, teaching for , – ,
194f– f
infection control in , f– f, –
intrapulpal temperature and, considerations
for, – , f– f
polymerization and
methacrylate-based free radical , ,
171f
of resin-based composite, factors
afecting , –
strategies for, development of ,
–
radiometric terminology in , –
of restorative resins , –
soft tissue damage and , , f– f
target of
distance to , – , f
light delivery to, factors afecting ,
Light-curing units, eye precautions and , e20
Light emitting diode (LED)
blue spectral range of , , f
deined ,
dental curing lights and , – ,
180f
irst-generation , – , f
second-generation , , f– f
third-generation , – , f– f
Line angle , , f
Liners ,
in adhesive dentistry , , f
calcium hydroxide
in cast metal restoration , e101, e103f
in Class III composite restoration ,
–
cavity , – , , f
Lingual crossbite , 20
Lingual surface groove extension , e108– e110
Linguoincisal line angle ,
Linguoversion
augmentation for ,
example of , f
Lips
precautions for, cutting and , e20
wiping, after rubber dam removal , e39,
e39f
Lithium disilicate reinforced ceramic ,
– , t
Load-to-failure testing , – , f
Local anesthesia
for amalgam restorations ,
for composite restoration ,
Loupes , –
Low shrinkage composite resin materials ,
–
Lucirin, spectral absorption proile of , ,
174f
Lysine, in saliva , 59
Lysozyme, in saliva , 58Instruments (Continued) Light curing (Continued)
Index
M
Macroabrasion , –
example of , f
intrinsic discoloration treated with ,
microabrasion versus , –
Macr oilled composite resin materials ,
– , f– f
Macro-mini-micro shade matching technique ,
, f
Magniication
in operative dentistry , e24–e25
surgical telescope for , e26f
“Making the turn,” in direct gold restoration ,
e90
Mallet, in compaction, of direct gold , e70,
e71f
Mandible , 14
movement of , 22–26
anterior tooth contacts during , 37
articulators and , 32, 33 f–36f
capacity of , 25f, 27–32
frontal view of , 31f
horizontal view of , 29f, 30
limits of , 27–30
mechanics of , 22–27
sagittal view of , 28f, 30
tooth contacts during , 36–37, 36 f
types of , 26–27
muscle function of , 22–26
temporomandibular joints and , 22, 24 f
Mandibular central fossa occlusal line , 17f
Mandibular condyle , 22
Mandibular motion, mechanics of , 22–27
Mandibular subperiosteal implant , ,
500f
MARC-Patient Simulator , – , f
Margin
beveling of, in cast metal restoration ,
e117f, e119
butt-joint , – , f
cavosurface, in Class I tooth preparation
and restoration , e74–e75
counterbeveling of, in cast metal onlay ,
e114f, e120f
it,
gingival
beveling of , e105, e105f, e109f
in Class III tooth preparation and
restoration , e81
porcelain veneer and ,
veneer and , –
incisal, in Class III tooth preparation and
restoration , e81
lingual, in Class III tooth preparation and
restoration , e85f
occlusal
beveling of , e107– e108, e107f
for Class V tooth preparation and
restoration , e76
for direct gold restoration , e74f
extension of , e113, e115f
proximal, laring and beveling of , e106
restorative , – , f
Marginal gap formation , , f
Marginal ridges , 20
in amalgam restoration ,
issures in, cast metal restoration and ,
e110– e113Maryland bridge , – , f, e60,
e60f–e61f, e64–e66, e65f–e66f
Mastication
control of, neurologic correlates and , 38
muscles involved in , 26
Materials
of commercial shade guides ,
manipulation ,
qualities of, for cast metal restoration ,
e94
selection ,
Matrix
application , – , –
custom lingual , f
deinition of , –
Mylar strip , f– f
substitution of retainer with , e42–e43,
e44f
Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) , 40,
dentin ,
Maxilla , 14
Maxillary arch, bleaching of ,
Maxillary lingual occlusal line , 16, 17 f
Maximum closure , 16
Maximum habitual intercuspation (MHI) ,
16
Maximum intercuspation (MI) , 16, 17 f
Mechanical adhesion ,
Mechanical bonding, of porcelain ,
Medical history. see also Dental history
of patient , 96
Medications
caries risk assessment and , 71, 77 t
dry mouth and , 59t, 89
Mercury
in amalgam ,
silver amalgam and , –
anti-, research in, critique of , – ,
466f
classical research of ,
continued use of, research supporting ,
–
environmental impact of ,
historical review of ,
safety of, research questioning ,
–
toxicity ,
Mesial cusp ridges , 20
Mesioocclusal preparation ,
Mesioocclusodistal preparation ,
4-META, bridges and , e60
Metal restorations
indirect
clinical examination of ,
treatment with ,
veneers for , –
Metamerism ,
illuminant ,
Methacrylate-based, free radical
polymerization , , f
activation and initiation of ,
propagation of ,
termination of ,
2-(Methacryloxy) ethyl phenyl hydrogen
phosphate , t
4-Methacryloxyethyl trimellitate anhydride ,
143t10-Methacryloyloxy decyl dihydrogen
phosphate , , t,
MHI. see Maximum habitual intercuspation
MI. see Maximum intercuspation
Microabrasion ,
example of , f
intrinsic discoloration treated with ,
macroabrasion versus , –
Microetching, veneer repair and , –
Microilled composite resin materials ,
Micr olora, modiication of, caries treatment
and, 78t
Microleakage , –
amalgam restoration and ,
Microscopes, dental , –
Microtensile test , , f
Miller classiication , – , f
Mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA) ,
Mineralization-demineralization cycle , 64f
Mirror, retraction with , e48, e49f
MMPs. see Matrix metalloproteinases
Model plaster , t,
Modulus of elasticity , e18
of composite , –
Mohs hardness value , e18t
Moist bonding technique ,
Moisture, control of, in operative dentistry ,
e26
Molar point , 27
Molars , 1, 2 f
mandibular
fractured cusps in , e121, e121f
groove extension in , e121
rubber dam retainer for , e28t
tooth preparations for class II cast metal
restorations for , e97
mandibular second, arrested caries on ,
65f
maxillary
cast metal restoration for , e110, e111f
cusp reduction for , e115
inlays for , e117f
lingual collar on , e124f
modiications for esthetics on , e125
rubber dam retainer for , e28t
sealant applied to , 86f
rubber dam hole size for , e36
rubber dam retainer for , e28t
tilted , e126f
Monochromacy ,
Monolithic full contour zirconia restoration ,
, f
Monomers, phosphate, bonding and ,
Mouth props , e48–e49, e50f
MS. see Mutans streptococci
Mucogingival junction , 15
Mucogingival surgery
considerations in ,
noncarious cervical lesions , –
Mucosa
alveolar , 15
bacteria in , 50t
masticatory , 14–15
oral, 14–15, 14 f
relective , 15
Munsell color system , f
Muscarinic receptor antagonists, xerostomia
from , 59t
Index
Mutans streptococci (MS)
analysis of , 75
bioilm and , 48
chemical agents for , 84
occlusal caries and , 66f
oral hygiene and , 80
Mylar strip matrix , f– f
N
Nanoleakage , – , f
Napkin, for rubber dam , e29–e30, e30f, e32,
e32f
Nasmyth membrane , 3–4,
Neck
design of, for handpiece, in rotary cutting
instruments , e10
in diamond instruments , e15
Nib, of hand instrument , e1
Nickel-cadmium (NiCad) batteries ,
Nickel-chromium alloy , –
Nightguard, plastic , f
Nightguard vital bleaching , , , f
Noncarious cervical lesions (NCCLs) , ,
– , f,
Noncentric cusps , 26
Nonworking interferences , 32
N-phenylglycine glycidyl methacrylate , ,
143t
O
Occlusal caries , 43b, 56f, 66f
Occlusal contact , 16
improper, in amalgam restoration ,
Occlusal plane
correction of, cast metal restoration for ,
e94
restoration of, for tilted molar , e126, e126f
Occlusion , 15–38
amalgam restorations and ,
evaluation of , , f
centric , 26
clinical signiicance of , 1–39
complex amalgam restoration and ,
description of , 16–22
esthetic restoration and ,
evaluation for, for cast metal restoration ,
e95, e96f
examination of , 97
periodontal health and , –
reduction of, for cast metal onlay ,
e116– e119
static , 16
Odontoblastic process , f
Odontoblasts , 6, 6 f
dentin formation and , 66f
secondary , 10
Older adults, root caries in , 89
Omnicam , – , f
One Coat Bond , –
One-Step Plus , –
One-step self-etch adhesives , t, t,
Onlays , – , f
cast metal
resistance form for , e121– e122
retention form for , e121– e122
tooth preparation for , e116– e126
crown and , e116
cusp-capping partial , e113– e114, e114ffor fractured cusps , e121, e121f
partial , e113
slot for , e125f
Opalescence, optical properties and ,
Opalustre, microabrasion and ,
Open contact , e139
Open proximal contacts, periodontal health
and, –
Operating area, isolation problems in ,
Operating ield, isolation of , e25–e49
Operating positions , e23–e24
Operative dentistry
CAD/CAM systems
chairside , – , f, t
research relative to , –
restorations, tooth preparation principles
for,
digital dentistry in , –
clinical application of ,
crowns , – , f– f
digital impressions, accuracy of ,
–
inlays and onlays , – , f– f
magniication in , –
photography in ,
preliminary considerations for , e23–e51
rubber dam and eiciency of , e27
Operator
ability of, in amalgam restoration ,
composite restoration and ,
instrument exchange with assistant by , e24
position of , e23–e24
rubber dam for protection of , e27
seated work position for , e24
Opioids, xerostomia from , 59t
OptiBond ,
OptiBond All-in-One ,
OptiBond FL ,
OptiBond SOLO Plus , –
Optical geometry ,
Optical properties , –
of dental materials , , f
Oral cavity, as bacterial habitat , 48f, 50t
Oral lora, caries and , 40
Oral hygiene
dental caries and , 50, 58
treatment of , 79–80
poor, teeth stained by ,
Oral irrigation device , 80
Oral surgery ,
Orthodontic extrusion, crown lengthening
and, , f
Orthodontic treatment
for large diastema ,
for malposed teeth ,
Orthodontic wire , e55–e56
Orthodontics ,
Outline form
for cast metal restorations , e97f, e110– e112
for Class V tooth preparation and
restoration , e76
for direct gold restorations , e73
for inlay tooth preparations , e108– e116
for porcelain veneer ,
in tooth preparation ,
veneer placement and , f– f
Overmilling , 435P
Packable (condensable) composite resin
materials ,
Pain
dentin hypersensitivity and ,
dentine caries and , 65
Palatoradicular grooves, periodontal health
and,
Palladium-silver alloys ,
Palm-and-thumb grasp , e5–e6, e6f
modiied , e6, e6f
planing and , e102f
rest for , e6–e7
Paradigm MZ100 (3M) ,
Parasagittal plane , 26
Paste, bite registration , e126, e140f
Patient
adult, risk-based interventions for , 75t
age of, rubber dam and , e43
assessment of , 95–
concern of , 96
dental history of , 96
diagnosis of , 95–
examination of , 95–
esthetic appearance , 96–97
occlusion , 97
teeth and restorations , 97–
examination of, caries risk and , 77t
medical history of , 96
medically compromised , 77
position of , e23–e24, e24f
prognosis for , –
protection of, rubber dam for , e27
response of, cutting procedures and
awareness of , e20
young, cast metal restoration for,
contraindications to , e95
Patient history, caries risk and , 71, 77 t
Patterns
proximal contour and contact in , e139
wax, e139– e142, e141f
spruing, investing, and casting of , e142
Pellicle , 3–4
enamel, caries formation and , 48
Pen grasp , e6f
inverted , e5, e6f
modiied , e5
rest for , e6–e7
Percolation, deinition of , , , f,
455t
Periimplantitis ,
Perikymata
plaque bioilm and , 44f–46f
scanning electron microscope view of , 46f
Periodontal disease , –
diastema associated with ,
in older adults ,
Periodontal ligament (PDL) , – , f
functions of , 15
Periodontics , –
Periodontitis , –
periodontics for , –
Periodontium , 15, –
disease of , –
restorative treatment on
efect of , –
importance of maintenance therapy ,
procedures , –427Onlays (Continued)
Index
Peritubular dentin , 8,
pH
acid afect on dentin and ,
caries and , 40
Phasealloy , t
1-phenyl-1,2-propanedione, spectral
absorption proile of , , f
Phosphate bonded investments , –
Phosphate ions, saliva saturated with , 59–60,
63–64
Phosphoric acid
denaturation of collagen by ,
enamel etched with , , f
etching with , –
Phosphoric acid gel , – , f
Photoinitiator molecule , –
spectral absorption proiles of , , f
type I ,
type II ,
Photons , –
interaction of, with electrons of
photoinitiator atom , – ,
173f– f
in ultraviolet range ,
Physiologic dentin sclerosis , 8
Physiology, clinical signiicance of , 1–39
Pin-retained amalgam restorations , –
factors afecting ,
placement factors and techniques in ,
–
number of pins ,
pin design , – , f
pin insertion , – , f– f
pin size , – , f
pinhole location , – , f– f
pinhole preparation , – , t,
398f– f
problems with , –
broken drills, and pins ,
failure of , – , f
loose pins ,
penetration in pulp, and perforation of
external tooth surface , – ,
404f
types of , – , f– f, t
Pindex drilling machine , e136
Pindex system , e136
Pit, 2–3
Pit and issure
caries in , 43b, 51f, 60
initiation of , 60
progression of , 52f–54f
cariogenic bioilm in , 49, 50 f
sealants for , 85,
clinical technique for , – , f
Planck-Einstein relation ,
Plaque
caries treatment and , 78t
ilamentous bacteria in , 47f
formation of , 44f–47f
on posterior teeth , 51f
photomicrograph of , 44f–46f
Plasma-arc lights , f, – , f, f
Plaster cast , e128f
PMMA. see Polymethyl methacrylate
Point angle , , f
Polishing paste , f
Polishing wheel , e145Polyacid modiied composites (compomers) ,
Polycrystalline ceramics , –
Polycrystalline restorative materials , , f
Polyether, impression with ,
Polymer resin based, of commercial shade
guides ,
Polymeric restorative materials ,
Polymerization
composites and , –
free radical, methacrylate-based , , f
inhibition of ,
light-cured, reactions to ,
rapid ,
of resin-based composite, factors afecting ,
–
strategies for, development of , –
stress development during ,
of veneer ,
Polymerization shrinkage stress
of composite ,
reduction of , –
Polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) , ,
469f
Polysulide, impression with ,
Polyvinyl siloxane impression , –
techniques for , e134
Polyvinyl siloxane impression material , ,
489f
in cast metal restoration , e96, e134, e134f
dispenser for , e134, e135f
veneer and , –
Polywave curing lights , , f
Pontic
all-metal , e56, e59–e66, e60f–e61f
all-porcelain , e66–e68
light-cured composite for , e68
technique for , e66–e68, e67f
denture tooth , e56, e58–e59, e59f
technique for , e58–e59
metal , e66
metal-and-porcelain , e64–e65, e64f–e65f
natural tooth , e56–e58
technique for , e56–e58, e57f–e58f
porcelain-fused-to-metal , e56, e59–66,
e60f–e61f, e65f
tip design of , e57f
types of , e56
Porcelain
discolored teeth treated with , –
etched, veneer with , –
feldspathic, indirect veneer and ,
fractured, etching with ,
hardness value of , e17–e18
opaque, veneer with ,
success rates of ,
veneer with , , –
clinical procedures for , –
example of , f
fractured , , f
intraenamel preparation for ,
293f– f
Porcelain bonding alloys , –
alterations for ,
biocompatibility of ,
classiication of , , f, t
composition of , –
economic considerations for , , tstrength of , –
bonding to , –
it of castings , –
Porcelain-fused-to-metal ixed prosthesis , ,
501f
Porcelain-fused-to-metal pontic , e56, e59–66,
e60f–e61f, e65f
Porcelain jacket crown (PJC) ,
Posselt diagram , 25f, 27
Posterior bite collapse, diastema associated
with,
Posterior guidance , 32
Powdered gold , e69
Power bleaching ,
Power sensor, laboratory-grade ,
PowerMax-Pro 150HD , , f
Predentin , 6–7
Prema compound , , f
microabrasion and ,
Premolars , 1, 2 f
mandibular
inlay for , e108f
tooth preparations for class II cast metal
restorations for , e97
maxillary, cast metal restoration for,
modiications for esthetics on ,
e125
rubber dam hole size for , e36
rubber dam retainer for , e28t
Preparation extensions, for tooth preparation ,
Preparation loor ,
Primary cutting edge, hand instruments and ,
e2–e4
Primary enamel cuticle , 3–4
Primary resistance form, in tooth preparation ,
– , f
Primary retention form, in tooth preparation ,
, f
Prime & Bond NT , – ,
Principal ibers of ligament , 15
Prisma Universal Bond ,
Probiotics, for dental caries , 85
Prophy Jet , e8
Prophy paste ,
Prophylactic odontotomy , b
Proportionality, dental , –
Prosthodontics ,
Protanomaly ,
Protease inhibitors, xerostomia from , 59t
Protective glasses ,
Proton pump inhibitors, xerostomia from ,
59t
Protrusion , 26–27
mandibular movement during , 27
muscles involved in , 26
Proximal caries , 43b
Proximal contact
in cast metal restoration , e139, e141f–
e142f, e145– e152
improper, in amalgam restoration ,
open, in class II amalgam restoration , ,
463f
Proximal contact area , 12, 12 f–13f
Proximal margins, laring and beveling ,
e106
Proximal overhangs , , fPorcelain bonding alloys (Continued)
Index
Proximal retention grooves, in Class II
amalgam restorations , – ,
347f– f
Proximal walls, in Class II amalgam
restorations , , f
Public water system, luoride level for , 80–81
Pulp
anatomy of , 6
composition of , 6
exposed, in cast metal restoration , e101
function of , 6
inlammation of ,
precautions for, cutting procedures and ,
e19–e20
protection of
in cast metal restoration , e101– e104
Class V composite restoration and ,
during tooth preparation ,
Pulp capping , 89
Pulp cavity , 6, 6 f
Pulp-dentin complex , 6–10, 66
pathologic challenge to , 10
Pulp stones , 69
Pulpal loor ,
in cast metal restoration , e110
Pulpal wall ,
Pulse delay ,
Pumice
abrasion with , e17–e18
hardness value of , e17–e18
microabrasion and ,
operating site prepared with ,
Punch, for rubber dam , e29, e30f
Punch cut, for cast metal restoration , e97,
e98f
Q
Quartz
abrasion with , e17–e18
hardness value of , e17–e18, e18t
Quartz-tungsten-halogen (QTH) lights , ,
– , f– f
“turbo” light guides in ,
tip design for , , f
R
Radiant exitance ,
Radiant power
collected ,
measurement of ,
spectral , –
temperature and , , f– f
Radiation, caries risk and , 77
Radicular pulp , 6
Radiography, for restoration examination ,
– , t– t
Radiometers, dental, handheld , – ,
187f
Rake angle, bur design and , e15
Rake face, bur design and , e15
Rampant caries , 41f, 43b, 67f–68f
diet and , 77–79
Rayleigh scattering , –
Reactive dentin sclerosis , 10
Relective shields, example of , e46f
Refractive indices, of r esin and iller ,
Reinforced glass ionomers ,
RelyX Unicem , 159Remineralization
for caries ,
caries and , 40
demineralization and, balance in , 40, 42 f
of dentin , 66–69
saliva and , 59–60, 84
Removable partial dentures (RPD) ,
Removable prosthodontics ,
Residual caries , 43b
Resilient ceramics , –
Resin-bonded splints and bridges , e52–e68
Resin cement
adhesive , –
light-cured ,
shade of , –
veneer application and , f– f
Resin-dentin bonding , – , f
Resin-dentin interdifusion zone ,
Resin-dentin interface , f, – ,
146f– f
marginal gaps at ,
micrograph of , f
Resin-enamel adhesion ,
Resin-matrix ceramic ,
Resin-modiied glass ionomer (RMGI) , ,
cement , – , f
nonvital bleaching and ,
in composite restoration ,
materials , 90
Resins
adhesion to dentin of , t
composite , f, –
bases and cavity liners in ,
history of ,
light curing of ,
practical considerations for , –
matrix , , f
refractive indices of ,
restorative, light curing of , –
Resistance form
for cast metal onlay , e121– e122
for cast metal restoration , e110
for distofacial defect , e115– e116
collar and , e124
of direct gold restorations , e73
Restoration margins , –
Restorations
amalgam. see Amalgam restorations
caries-control , 87, 88 f, 89, 89 t
cast, veneer for , , f
cast metal. see Cast metal restorations
composite. see Composite restoration
defects of , 85–87
for dental caries , 85–87
direct gold , e69–e93
burnishing in , e75
Class I , e73–e75, e74f–e76f
Class II , e73
Class III , e73, e81–e92, e84f–e92f
Class V , e73, e75–e81, e77f–e83f
Class VI , e73
contraindications to , e73
inishing of , e75, e76f, e80–e81, e83f
indications for , e73
for maxillary incisors , e81–e84
polishing of , e81
replacement , e79fseparation of teeth and , e85–e86
tooth preparation for , e73–e92
direct temporary , e130, e131f
examination of , 97–
adjunctive aids for , –
radiographic , – , t– t
with glass-matrix ceramics , –
indirect adhesive , –
indirect temporary , e128– e130,
e128f–e130f
large, cast metal restoration for , e94
onlay , e116
recontour of ,
repair of ,
replacement of ,
small, cast metal restoration for , e95
temporary, cast metal restoration for , e95,
e127– e128
Restorative dentistry
color and
appearance of teeth and dental materials ,
–
perception in , –
color matching in , –
tools, dental shade guides , –
improving shade matching skills of ,
shade matching in , –
trends in , –
visual shade matching method of , –
Restorative materials ,
color-related properties of , –
margins and , –
Restorative products
direct, self-curing , – , f
thickness of, efect of , , f
Retainer
application of rubber dam before , e41, e41f
cervical , e41
application of , e42f
jaws of , e41
stabilization of , e41
in Class V tooth preparation and
restoration , e75–e76, e77f, e81
dental loss tying for , e29f
inappropriate , e44
metal, pontic with , e59–e66
removable, stabilization with , e54
rubber dam , e27–e29, e28f–e29f
positioning of , e32, e32f
removal of , e39, e39f
selection of , e31, e31f
testing of , e32, e32f
types of , e28f
substitution with matrix , e42–e43, e44f
tissue trauma from , e44
types of , e28t
winged , e28–e29
wingless , e28–e29
Retention
with class I restorations ,
form for foundations , f
inadequate, gingivectomy for , –
Retention form
for cast metal onlay , e121– e122
for cast metal restoration , e110
for Class III tooth preparation and
restoration , e84, e89fRestorations (Continued)
Index
for Class V tooth preparation and
restoration , e76
collar and , e124
for direct gold restorations , e73
dovetail, for cast metal restorations , e98,
e99f
extension of , e108
skirting and , e122
slot in , e124
Retention grooves
in cast metal restoration , e101, e102f,
e119– e121
in maxillary molar, cast metal restoration
for, e110, e111f
proximal, in Class II amalgam restorations ,
– , f– f
for tooth preparation ,
Retraction, operative dentistry and , e26
Retraction cord , e48, e49f
in cast metal restoration , e101, e103f,
e105f
composite restoration and use of ,
diastema treatment and , , f
impressions and ,
insertion of, in cast metal restoration ,
e133f
in polyvinyl siloxane impression , e135f
veneer application and , f– f,
veneer procedure and , –
Retrusion, mandibular, muscles involved in ,
26–27
Reversible pulpitis , 10
Ribbond , e52, e53f
Right front position , e23, e25f
Right position , e23, e25f
Right rear position , e23–e24, e25f
Rigid-material supported sectional matrix, for
Class II amalgam restorations , – ,
364f– f
Rinsing
after rubber dam removal , e39–e40, e40f
caries risk and , 82
Risk assessment
of dental caries , 40–94
for children , 75
dental clinical analysis for , 75
form for , 72f–74f
risk categories in , 70
patient examination and ,
Risk factor , deined , 69–70
Risk indicators, deined , 69–70
Risk markers, deined , 69–70
Risk proile ,
Rochette bridge , e60, e60f–e63f, e62–66
Rods, in color vision ,
Root
caries in , 43b, 50
bacteria in , 50t
management of , 89–90
preventive protocol for , 89–90
risk factors for , 89
surface lesions on, cast metal restoration
and, e110, e110f
surfaces of
bioilm on , 50
caries development at , 51f, 61
Root canal dentin, adhesion to , –157Root canal therapy
cast metal restoration and , e104
tooth discoloration and ,
Root-surface caries , 50
Root-surface sensitivity, treatment of ,
Rotary instrument axis alignment, in tooth
preparation , , f
Rotation
mandibular , 24f, 26–27
minor, correction of , , f
Royal Mineral Succedaneum ,
Rubber dam
advantages of , e26–e27
in amalgam restorations ,
anchors for , e30, e30f, e33, e33f
application of , e35, e35f
before retainer , e41, e41f
and retainer simultaneously , e38–e41,
e40f–e41f
testing before , e31, e31f
in cast metal restoration , e101
for Class I amalgam restoration , ,
for Class II amalgam restoration ,
for Class V amalgam restoration , – ,
378f
disadvantages of , e27f
errors in application and removal of ,
e44–e45
examination of , e40, e40f
frame for , e27, e27f, e32, e32f
hole size and position in , e30–e38, e36f
instruments for , e27–e30
inversion of, during application , e34,
e34f
isolation with , e26–e45
lubricant for , e29–e30
lubrication of , e31, e31f
materials for , e27–e30
moisture control and , e26
moisture prevention with , e26–e27
napkin for , e29–e30, e30f, e32, e32f
neck strap for , e33, e33f
of-center arch form and , e44, e46f
operator protection with , e27
passing through posterior contact , e33,
e33f
patient age and , e43
patient protection with , e27
placement of , e38
punch for , e29, e30f
punching holes in , e31, e31f
errors in , e44
removal of , e39, e39f
retainer for , e27–e29, e28f
positioning of , e32, e32f
removal of , e39, e39f
selection of , e31, e31f
testing of , e32, e32f
types of , e28f
retainer forceps for , e29
rigid supporting material for , e33,
e33f
stamp for , e38f
template for , e38f
wedge insertion and , e35, e35f
Rubber wheel abrasive , e147S
Saliva
analysis of, caries risk assessment and ,
71–75
antibacterial activity of , 58–59
as anticaries agent , 58–60, 58 t
bacterial clearance by , 58
bufer capacity of , 59
calcium ions in , 59–60, 63–64
drugs for control of , e49
luoride ions in , 63–64
function of , 84
phosphate ions in , 59–60, 63–64
remineralization and , 59–60
stimulation of, caries treatment and , 78t
Saliva ejectors , e46–e48, e48f
rubber dam application and , e35, e35f
Scotchbond ,
Scotchbond 2 ,
Scotchbond Universal Adhesive , –
Sealants
for dental caries , 85, 86 f
pit-and-issure , 85
Sealing cement, nonvital bleaching and ,
Secondary cutting edge, hand instruments
and, e2–e4
Self-adhesive resin cements , , f
Self-cure composite , –
Self-curing direct restorative products ,
– , f
Self-etch adhesives
one-step , t,
role of water in ,
two-step , t, –
Self-etching primer , , f,
Sensitivity
Class V composite restoration and ,
postoperative ,
Separating disk , e17
Separator, for direct gold restoration , e85–86,
e86f
Septa
cutting of, rubber dam removal and , e39,
e39f
incorrect cutting of , e45
rubber dam application and , e33–34,
e34f
Setting expansion, gypsum bonded
investments and ,
Sevriton Cavity Seal , –
Shade matching duration , , f
Shade matching skills, improving ,
Shade selection, procedure for ,
Shade tab positioning , – , f– f
Shanks
angles of , e2
in diamond instruments , e15
example of , e2f
of hand instrument , e1
in rotary cutting instrument , e9–e10, e9f
Sharpey ibers , 10, 11 f
Shelf life, of impression materials ,
Sialin, in saliva , 59
Silane agent, veneer application and ,
Silane coupling agents , , –
Silicate cement ,
Silicoating, bridges and , e60Retention form (Continued)
Index
Silicon carbide
hardness value of , e17–e18
microabrasion and ,
Silicone, impression with ,
Silorane technology ,
Silver amalgam , –
advantages of , –
composition of , – , t– t, f
evaluation of , –
manipulation of ,
mercury and , –
anti-, research in, critique of , – ,
466f
classical research of ,
continued use of, research supporting ,
–
environmental impact of ,
historical review of ,
safety of, research questioning , –
removal of, unwarranted, impact of ,
–
Silver diamine luoride, for caries
management , 83, 83 f
Silver-tin-copper alloy ,
Simultaneous color contrast , , f
Skeletal muscle relaxants, xerostomia from ,
59t
Skirt
disadvantages of , e122
extension of , e115– e116, e117f, e121,
e122f–e123f
preparation of , e122– e124
for tooth preparation ,
Slot
distal, for onlay , e125f
preparation of , e124– e125
Slot-retained amalgam restorations , – ,
391f– f
Small Class II direct composite restorations ,
Smear layer
acidic primer for ,
cutting procedures and , e20
demineralization of , , f
dentin surface and ,
removal of, by acid etching and , –
Smear plug , , f
Smile
esthetic appearance of ,
harmony and balance of ,
Smoking, caries risk and , 71, 77 t
Smooth-surface caries , 43b
Social status, caries risk assessment and , 71
Sodium perborate, bleaching with ,
“Soft-start” curing mode ,
Soft-start exposures ,
“Soft-start” polymerization ,
Soft tissue, precautions for, cutting
procedures and , e20, e20f
Solubility , – , f
Spectral radiant power, measurement of ,
–
Spectrometer, optical , – , f
Spectrophotometer , –
Speed of light, wavelength and ,
Spherical alloys ,
Splint-and-bridge combination, mandibular
anterior , e63–e64Splinting material, polyethylene-coated woven
fabric for , e52–e54
Splints
for anterior teeth , e52–e54, e53f
for avulsed teeth , e55–e56, e55f
ixed wire , e54–e55
orthodontic treatment and , e54–e55, e55f
resin-bonded , e52–e68
Split cast , e136
Split-tooth syndrome , e122
Spoon
Bin-angle , e3f
triple-angle , e3f
Spoon excavators
application of , e4
examples of , e3f
Squamous epithelium, mucosa and , 14
Stability, of restorative materials ,
Stabilization, after orthodontic treatment ,
e54–e55, e55f
Stain. see Discoloration
Stark-Einstein law ,
Sterilization, of handpiece , e8
Stools, operating , e24
Streptococcus sanguis , pits and issures and ,
49
Striae of Retzius
plaque bioilm and , 44f–46f
Strip, splinting and , e52–e54
Study cast , –
Subgingival caries, gingivectomy for , ,
424f
Submucosa , 14
Sucrose
caries formation and , 60
caries risk assessment and , 71
Sugar, intake of, caries risk assessment and ,
71
Supporting alveolar bone , 15
Surgeon’s knot , e43, e45f
Surround/viewing conditions method, control
of, , f
Symmetry, dental , –
Syringe, composite inserted with ,
T
Tarnish , , f
Tear, cemental , , f
Technique sensitivity ,
Teeth , 1–15
abutment, in cast metal restoration ,
e110
alignment of , , f
anterior
embrasure of ,
multiple diastemas among ,
proportionality of , –
reshaping of , f
restoration of , –
splinting of , e52–e54, e53f
width-to-length ratio ,
apparent length of ,
apparent size of , , f
attachment apparatus of , 15
avulsed, splinting of , e55–e56, e55f
bacteria in , 50t
cariogenic bioilm habitats on , 48–50
classes of , 1, 2 fcolor of , , –
aging and ,
appearance and , –
contacts
anterior , 37
conservative alteration of , –
posterior , 37
contours of , 11–12, 12 f,
conservative alteration of , –
normal , 11
discolored
extrinsic , –
intrinsic , –
porcelain veneer for , , f
treatments for , –
endodontically treated, cast metal
restoration for , e94, e125– e126
examination of , 97–
adjunctive aids for , –
radiographic , – , t– t
form of , 1
conservative esthetic procedures and ,
–
function of , 1, 11
hole position for receiving cervical retainer ,
e41, e43f
malformed, porcelain veneer for , , f
malposed, treatment of ,
mandibular, rubber dam hole size for , e36,
e37f
maxillary, rubber dam hole size for , e36,
e37f–e38f
maxillary anterior, veneer for , –
mobile, splinting and recontouring of , e53f
mobility of, stabilization of , e52
normal, bitewing radiograph of , 56f
periodontally involved , e52–e54
physiology of , 11–14
position of , , f
posterior
bioilm formation on , 51f
cervical retainer placement on , e41
endodontically treated , e125– e126
rubber dam hole size for , e35–e36
proportionality of , – , f
proximal contact area of , 12, 12 f–13f
reshaping of , f
restored, interfacial gaps and ,
at risk for fracture , e94
sensitive, bleaching as cause of ,
separation of, direct gold restoration and ,
e85–e86
shape of
alteration of , –
conservative esthetic procedures and ,
–
illusion of , , f
treatment for ,
stabilization of, after orthodontic
treatment , e54–e55, e55f
stained, tetracycline as cause of ,
structures of , 1–11
surface of
modiication of, caries treatment and ,
78t
texture of ,
symmetry of , –268Teeth (Continued)
Index
tetracycline-stained , , f
veneer for , f
translucency of , , f
width-to-length ratio , , f
Telescopes, surgical , e26f
Telio CAD (Ivoclar) ,
Temperature, intrapulpal, considerations for ,
– , f– f
Temporary threshold shift , e21
Temporomandibular joints (TMJs)
lexibility in , 28–30
lateral shift , 32, 35 f
mandible and , 22, 24 f
muscle function of , 22–26
Tensile strength, of dental materials , –
Terminal hinge (TH)
closure , 30
movement , 26
Test sensitivity ,
Test speciicity ,
Tetracycline
intrinsic discoloration caused by , , f
teeth stained by ,
bleaching of , , f
crown for , –
veneer for , – , f
hermal coeicient of expansion (COE) ,
– , f, t
hermal conductivity, through dental
material , – , t
hermal expansion, gypsum bonded
investments and ,
hermocatalytic efect, bleaching and ,
hermopile , , f
hread Mate System (TMS) , , t
hree-step etch-and-rinse , t, –
hreshold limit value (TLV) , –
hroat screen , e47f
hroat shields , e46, e47f
Tin-mercury phase (gamma-2), amalgam
restoration and ,
Tint, translucency and ,
Tissue massage, after rubber dam removal ,
e39–e40, e40f
Tissues
retraction of, in cast metal restoration ,
e132– e134, e132f–e133f
supporting , 1–15
Titanium alloys ,
TMJs. see Temporomandibular joints
Tobacco, teeth stained by ,
Tolemire retainer and band, for complex
amalgam restoration , , f
Tolemire-type matrix band , , f
Tomes ibers , 6, 6 f
Tongue
bacteria in , 50t
precautions for, cutting and , e20
Tongue thrusting, diastema associated with ,
Tooth color
clinical examination of , 96–97
treatment of ,
Tooth dehydration ,
Tooth fracture, gingivectomy for ,
Tooth grinding ,
Tooth position, periodontal health and , 421Tooth preparation , –
adhesive amalgam restorations for ,
for amalgam restorations
Class I , – , f– f, –
Class II , , –
Class III , – , f– f
Class V , – , f– f
inal, –
initial , – , f
outline form in , – , f
principles for ,
box-only
for amalgam restoration , , f
for Class II amalgam restoration , ,
351f
for cast metal inlays , e97–e116
for cast metal onlays , e116– e126
for cast metal restoration , e96–e126
distoocclusolingual , e110
Class I ,
Class II ,
Class III ,
Class IV ,
Class V ,
cervical retainer used in , e41
Class VI ,
classiication of ,
complex ,
for complex amalgam restoration ,
– , f– f
slot-retained , – , f
for composite restoration
Class I , – , f– f
Class II , f, – , f– f
Class III facial approach , – ,
240f– f, f
Class IV , – , f– f
Class V , – , f– f
compound ,
consideration to , , b
convenience form in , –
conventional, for amalgam restoration ,
, f
debridement in , , f
defective restorative material and/or soft
dentin in, removal of , –
deinition of , –
desensitization of , –
design of, for Class I amalgam restoration ,
331f
for direct gold restorations , e73
Class I , e73–e75, e74f–e76f
Class III , e81–e92, e84f–e92f
Class V , e75–e81, e77f–e79f
disinfection of , –
distoocclusal, for maxillary irst molar ,
equipment for , e1–e22
for esthetics , e108
external wall inishing in , – , f
extracoronal , – , f
inal stage of , –
initial depth in ,
initial stage of , f, –
inspection of ,
instruments for , e1–e22
intracoronal , – , f
mesioocclusal, for maxillary irst molar ,
, fmesioocclusodistal , e108
mesioocclusolingual, for maxillary irst
molar , f
objectives of ,
occlusal, amalgam restoration and , f
occlusal contact identiication in , ,
126f
outline form in ,
for pin-retained complex amalgam
restoration , –
for porcelain veneer , –
primary resistance form in , – , f
primary retention form in , , f
proximal box , f
pulp protection during ,
for quadrant dentistry ,
rotary instrument axis alignment in , ,
126f
secondary retention and resistance forms
in, –
simple ,
for slot-retained complex amalgam
restoration , – , f
stabilization of , –
stages of , –
steps of , – , b
terminology in ,
treatments to enhance restoration ,
–
tunnel ,
Tooth strength, Class V composite restoration
and, – , f– f
Tooth-to-tooth relationship , 20
Tooth-to-two-tooth contact , 20
Toothbrush
electric , 80
powered , 90
wear from , 79f–80f
Toothbrushing, caries and, prevention of , 79
T ransformation toughening phenomenon ,
, f
T ransillumination, for caries ,
T ranslation, mandibular , 24f, 26–27
T ranslucency
illusion of ,
optical properties and ,
tooth restoration and , , f
T reatment planning , 95–
approval of ,
control phase of ,
deinitive phase of ,
general considerations to ,
maintenance phase of ,
for older patients , –
operative, interdisciplinary considerations
in, –
reevaluation phase of ,
sequencing/phasing of , –
urgent phase of ,
T rial-it, of casting , e142– e143
T riangular ridges, cusp , 20
T riangular wood wedge , f
T ricyclic antidepressants, xerostomia from ,
59t
T rimmer, gingival margin , e3f, e4–e5
T ritanomaly ,
T rituration , 464Teeth (Continued) Tooth preparation (Continued)
Index
T rue negative, patient diagnosis and ,
T rue positives, patient diagnosis and ,
T ry-in, veneer ,
T wo-step etch-and-rinse adhesives , t,
– , t
T wo-step self-etch adhesives , t, t,
–
Tytin , t
U
Ultracapacitors ,
Ultraviolet light ,
Undermilling ,
Uniformity, light beam , – , f
Universal adhesives , – , –
interfacial bonding degradation in ,
–
moist dentin and ,
Universal matrix
for Class II amalgam restorations ,
– , f– f
for complex amalgam restoration , ,
406f– f
Urethane dimethacrylate , t
V
Vaccine, anticaries , 83–84
Valiant , t
Value
color dimension of ,
as element of color , –
Vancomycin, for dental caries , 84t
Vapor, cutting as cause of , e21
Varney foot condenser , e70, e80, e90–e92
Varnish, cavity ,
Velocity, cutting and , e7
Velvalloy , t
Veneer bridges , e66
Veneers , –
bonding of ,
butt-joint design preparation ,
butt-joint incisal design , , f– f
ceramic for ,
example of , f
pressed ,
composite for , –
defective composite , –
direct , –
direct composite, repairing , f
direct full , –
example of , f
direct partial , f,
discolored teeth treated with , –
etched porcelain , –
it of ,
full, – , f
preparation for ,
window preparation for ,
gingival margin of , –
incisal-lapping approach for ,
indirect , – , –
intraenamel preparation for , ,
290f– fintrinsic discoloration treated with ,
lapping preparation for ,
margins of ,
for maxillary anterior teeth , –
for metal restoration , –
no-prep , , –
example of , f– f
overcontoured ,
partial , , f
polymerization of ,
porcelain for ,
clinical procedures for , –
for discolored teeth , f
example of , f– f, f
incisal-lapping design , f
incisal lapping preparation , f
indirectly fabricated ,
intraenamel preparation for , f– f
repair of ,
temporization of , f– f
tooth preparation for , –
provisionalization of , –
repairs of , – , f
shade of ,
temporary ,
try-in of ,
types of , f
Visibility, rubber dam application and , e35,
e35f
Visual shade matching method , –
ive pre-shade matching steps of , –
communicate ,
perform at beginning ,
set light and observer ,
use appropriate technique , –
verify , –
three pre-shade matching steps of ,
–
Vita Bleachedguide 3D-Master , – ,
206f
Vita Linearguide 3D-Master , f
Vita Mark I blocks ,
Vita Mark II blocks , , f
Voids ,
W
Wall
axial
in cast metal restoration , e99–e100
for Class V tooth preparation and
restoration , e76–79, e78f
distal, for Class V tooth preparation and
restoration , e78f, e79, e80f–e81f
distofacial, in cast metal restoration , e102f
distolingual, in cast metal restoration ,
e102f
gingival
in cast metal restoration , e100– e101
for Class V tooth preparation and
restoration , e77, e78f
mesial, for Class V tooth preparation and
restoration , e77–79, e78f, e80f–e81focclusal, for Class V tooth preparation and
restoration , e77–79, e80f–e82f
vertical, in cast metal onlay , e115– e116
Wall lesions , 60
Water system, luoridated , 80–81
Water tree, adhesion and , , f
Wavelength
iller particles and, interaction between ,
– , f
speed of light and ,
Wax patterns, in cast metal restoration ,
e139– e142
inishing , e141– e142, e144f
initial withdrawal and reseating of , e142,
e145f
Waxing, forming the occlusal surface and ,
e139– e141, e143f
Wedelstaedt chisels , e4
in direct gold restorations , e79, e82f, e86,
e87f
example of , e3f
Wedge
in amalgam restoration ,
in composite restoration ,
distal , , f
double , , f
gingival, in Class II amalgam restoration ,
–
at gingival margin, matrix and ,
triangular wood , f
types of ,
Wedge insertion, rubber dam application
and, e35, e35f
Wet-bonding, ethanol ,
Wettability , – , f
White spot defect, macroabrasion for ,
White spots
decalciied ,
macroabrasion for ,
Whitening, procedures for , –
Wide opening, mandibular , 26
Work position, seated , e24
Working distance ,
Working side, mandibular pathways , 27
X
Xerostomia. see also Dry mouth
deined , 58
medications causing , 59t
Xylitol gum , 85
Y
Young holder , e27, e27f
Young modulus , –
Y-TZP-based biomaterials ,
Z
Zirconia
bonding , –
ceramics and ,
restorations , , t, fVeneers (Continued) Wall (Continued)
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
Textbook of Conservative and Restorative Dentistry
ARPIT SIKRI1* and JYOTSANA SIKRI2
1Department of Prosthodontics, Crown & Bridge and Oral Implantology, Bhojia Dental College & Hospital,
Budh (Baddi), Teh. Baddi, Distt. Solan, Himachal Pradesh, India.
2Department of Conservative Dentistry & Endodontics, Bhojia Dental College & Hospital, Budh (Baddi),
Teh. Baddi, Distt. Solan, Himachal Pradesh, India.
CONTACT Dr. Arpit Sikri
arpitsikri@gmail.com
Department of Prosthodontics, Santosh Dental College, Santosh Deemed to
be University, Ghaziabad, Delhi NCR, India.
© The Author(s). Published by Enviro Research Publishers.
This is an
Open Access article licensed under a Creative Commons license: Attribution 4.0 International (CC-BY).
1.09
Article History
Published by: 24 February
Enviro Dental Journal
dentaljournal.org Vol. 02, No. (1) , Pg. 42
Textbook of Conservative and Restorative Dentistry authored by “Dr.Vimal K Sikri”, a renowned academician
for over 3 decades, receiving much acclaim and appreciation from the students, teachers and clinicians,
presents the updated version of the current concepts of conservative and restorative dentistry. The book
is based on the valuable suggestions given by the contemporary teachers and students all over the world,
coupled with newer developments in the field of restorative dentistry .
The text, discussed in 34 chapters, covers the syllabi of all the Indian universities. The recent concepts
have been highlighted in all the chapters, especially the chapters on dentin hybridization (bonding),
composites, lasers, diagnosis and diagnostic aids, and minimal invasive dentistry, keeping in mind their
clinical significance in day-to-day practice.
Written in a lucid language, the text is replete with self-explanatory photographs and diagrams, well reinforced
with clinical photographs for easy understanding of the subject. The keynotes are presented in box format
for quick access and easy understanding. The Textbook is a ‘must-read’ for all the dental students, teachers,
as well as the practitioners pursuing restorative dentistry as a career.